






















































Hansard: November 10, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 4A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 77 
 November 10, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:07.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today from people who are concerned about Highway No. 310. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Kuroki, and Fishing Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, today I am presenting a 
petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned of the safety 
with Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Muenster, 
LeRoy, Annaheim, and Bruno. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here that citizens 
want to improve SaskTel cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Strongfield and Loreburn. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present a petition from citizens of Biggar that are opposed to 
reductions of health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least the current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Springwater, Biggar, and district. 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petition has 
been received and pursuant to rule 14(7) is hereby read and 
received as sessional paper no. 12. Previously tabled petitions 
being addendums to sessional paper nos. 2, 4, 7, and 8 also 
received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour 
and privilege this morning to introduce to this House, joined by 
representatives of the Canadian Armed Forces and Veterans 
Affairs Canada, to introduce to our House Saskatchewan 
veterans of the Second World War, the Korean War, and 
numerous peacekeeping missions around the globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning we had the opportunity to honour 
many of these individuals during our annual service of 
remembrance here at the legislature by presenting them with the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. We were also able officially 
to announce the designation of Highway No. 2 from Moose Jaw 
to Prince Albert as Veterans Memorial Highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these gestures of appreciation, while they 
demonstrate, we hope, our profound gratitude, pale beside the 
enormous contributions that our veterans have made to their 
country, to their province, to the world, and to each one of us. 
 
Therefore I ask all members to join me in welcoming some of 
Saskatchewan’s greatest citizens, our veterans. Welcome to the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition I want to join with the Premier in welcoming our 
guests to the Assembly today, members of the Armed Forces, 
members of the Legion, veterans, and others who have joined 
us. It was a wonderful ceremony this morning. And it is the 
perfect day, the day before Remembrance Day, to have been 
able to partake in that service with our guests here today. 
 
We want to join with the Premier in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. In many ways, Mr. Speaker, especially 
the veterans have built this Legislative Assembly and they have 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

paid for this Legislative Assembly. We welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too want to welcome some guests to the Assembly today. 
Earlier today or earlier this morning we held a Remembrance 
Day service in the foyer of the Legislative Assembly, and it was 
sponsored by the Public Service Commission and the 
Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, since the Second World War and 
before, annual Remembrance Day services have been held to 
honour the various public servants throughout our history that 
have served in the Armed Forces. This morning we’re joined in 
the gallery with Bob Bymoen, the president of the 
Saskatchewan government and general services union, along 
with Barry Nowoselsky, the Chair of the Public Service 
Bargaining Council. They are here representing all of the public 
servants in the province, and I would like to welcome them to 
this Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to acknowledge the First Nations and Métis veterans that I 
know we had a chance to see this morning and to thank them 
for what they’ve done for this country in times when they didn’t 
have to go to war. 
 
I especially would like to welcome a constituent of mine — a 
couple of them. Emil Highway is here this morning. He’s a 
member of the Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation. And also with him 
is Frances Highway. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like everyone 
to welcome them to the House. And I hope they have a 
wonderful day and a good trip back home. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
join my colleague from Cumberland in recognizing my uncle 
through marriage. My wife’s uncle is here. He’s also served in 
the Armed Forces. I’d like to recognize John Pedersen from 
Moose Jaw. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Honouring Canadian Veterans 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Across the 
city and across the province, children are learning the poem “In 
Flanders Fields.” In this Chamber we wear the poppy. 
Saskatchewan’s War Memorial carries the names of our 
province’s 10,000 war dead. We remember and pay tribute to 
the thousands of Canadian men and women who sacrificed so 
much on our behalf. 
 
Our country is blessed by peace and plenty. Although we 
sometimes see the terrible images and hear the horrific stories 
of war, here we are far removed from the horrors of those 
stories, Mr. Speaker. Our soldiers who are currently serving see 
war up close, as do our peacekeepers from all areas of service. 
We are mindful of their sacrifice and the price they are paying 
to maintain our peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on November 11 we remember the Canadian men 
and women of all races and of all social classes who left their 
homes and families and the safety of this country and put 
themselves in harm’s way, those who experienced the horrors 
of war and who risked and sometimes sacrificed all so that we 
could enjoy the rights and privileges we have today. 
 
We pay tribute to their courage. We recognize the extraordinary 
challenges and hardships they faced on our behalf. We know 
the high price they willingly paid to ensure our safety and our 
peace. We acknowledge their sacrifice. 
 
To those who served and those who serve today, we thank you 
and are humbled by your service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today during Veterans’ Week and in the Year of the 
Veteran to honour the dedicated men and women who served 
Canada in our military. 
 
At a desperate time of need, they left their farms, their families, 
and their friends. Many thousands gave their lives in armed 
conflict. They fought for liberty, for freedom, for each other, 
and for their country. 
 
These men and women volunteered, Mr. Speaker. Many of 
them were as young as 16. They wanted to go to defend their 
country and extinguish the flame of tyranny that was growing in 
the world. They didn’t have to go; they volunteered. 
 
We remember the stories of valour and bravery. In the First 
World War, four Canadian divisions fought together to take the 
famed Vimy Ridge and in so doing turned the tide of the Great 
War and solidified Canada as a nation in the minds of her 
citizens. 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

We remember in World War II when Canadians liberated much 
of northwest Europe from the oppression of Nazism. We 
remember the Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry 
receiving the United States presidential citation, the only 
Canadian unit to receive the award. This was for heroism on the 
hills of Korea. 
 
We remember the 232,000 killed or wounded in World War I. 
We remember the 96,000 killed or wounded in World War II. 
We remember the 1,558 killed or wounded in the Korean War. 
We remember the veterans of peacekeeping conflicts. 
 
We remember and may we never forget. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Stories of Saskatchewan War Brides 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I had the 
privilege of attending the launch of a book called War Brides — 
Our Sentimental Journey. This book is a collection of stories 
written by Saskatchewan war brides about the experience of 
coming to a new land at the end of the Second World War . The 
launch was made at the Nutana Legion, Branch 362 in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this book had its beginnings with the members of 
the Saskatchewan War Brides Association and their wish to do 
something special for Saskatchewan’s centennial. A request for 
stories was made in the association’s newsletter, and 52 women 
responded, providing first-hand personal accounts of what it 
was like to be part of one the most unusual immigrations in 
Canadian history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some 48,000 young women came to Canada as 
war brides. Along with them came about 22,000 children. This 
book is a true history of what the war brides’ experience was 
like. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took great courage for these young women to 
leave all that was familiar to them, their country, their homes, 
and their families to come to a new land and face an uncertain 
future. Many were unprepared for the conditions they found in 
Canada. But most stayed, adjusted to a new way of life, and 
over the last 60 years have not only come to love Canada but 
have contributed to its development in so many significant 
ways. 
 
I congratulate the Saskatchewan War Brides Association, their 
President Terry England, and particularly the 52 women who 
contributed to this volume for sharing their stories and 
chronicling this important part of Canadian and Saskatchewan 
history. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Honouring Canadian Aboriginal Veterans 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak about a very important trip that concluded last 
week. On October 26 a group of Aboriginal veterans of the 

Second World War travelled to Europe to take part in a 
week-long celebration of remembrance. 
 
Among the stops on the 8-day trip was a ceremony at the 
Beny-sur-Mer Canadian War Cemetery near the spot where 
allied forces landed on D-Day and where at least 33 Aboriginal 
soldiers were laid to rest. 
 
The delegation also took part in the tributes paid at Ypres, 
Belgium, where since 1928 the last post is played nightly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this journey was one of emotion and pride and of 
remembrance for fallen brothers. By all accounts it was also an 
eye-opening trip for 14 Aboriginal youth who took part in the 
week’s events. Through the stories, the tears, and the names on 
the grave markers, their appreciation and respect has grown for 
the sacrifice these veterans have made half a world away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this journey of remembrance and education serves 
to remind us of the ongoing struggle for full recognition. Leo 
Goulet, one veteran who took part in the overseas trip, said, “I 
was just another soldier, fighting for country.” We should not 
forget the thousands of Aboriginal veterans who left their 
homes and families and fought for freedom. In this Year of the 
Veteran we look to the federal government to properly 
acknowledge the contributions of First Nations and Métis 
veterans. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Saskatchewan Geo-Memorial Project Book 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in 1947 Saskatchewan initiated 
the Geo-Memorial Project. The project goal was to ensure that 
every Saskatchewan veteran who gave their life in the service of 
their country during World War II would be honoured and 
commemorated by having a northern geographic feature named 
for them. 
 
Last year that project was completed and now has been 
expanded to include the names of those men and women who 
risked and sacrificed all in Korea and on peacetime operations 
since World War II as well. In all, Mr. Speaker, almost 5,000 
northern lakes, peninsulas, bays, rivers, and islands bear the 
names of Saskatchewan’s fallen. 
 
This year, as part of Saskatchewan’s centennial and the Year of 
the Veteran, that project has been taken a step further. Age Shall 
Not Weary Them: Saskatchewan Remembers its War Dead, a 
book by Saskatchewan authors Bill Barry, Doug Chisholm, and 
Beth Parsons, tells the story of those 5,000 Saskatchewan men 
and women. It provides details about the geographic features 
that have been named in their honour and a brief story of how 
they lived and, unfortunately, how they died, taken together 
with the stories that provide real meaning to the terms horror of 
war and supreme sacrifice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel privileged to be able to say that one of the 
authors, Mr. Bill Barry, is a constituent of mine. And I want to 
commend him along with Mr. Chisholm and Ms. Parsons for 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

this important and timely addition to Saskatchewan’s story that 
we may never forget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Royal Canadian Legion Celebrates 80th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
November marks the 80th year for the organization we know 
today as the Royal Canadian Legion. Founded as the Canadian 
Legion of the British Empire Service League, the Legion was 
formed to represent veterans of the Great War and to advise the 
government on veterans’ issues. 
 
During the Second World War and the Korean War, the Legion 
offered support to troops stationed abroad and at home while 
working to improve support for veterans. Following the Korean 
War, the Legion’s commitment to community service increased. 
That record of service continues to this day. 
 
Today we are over 400,000 members including 58,000 
members of the ladies auxiliary and over 1,600 branches in 
three countries. The Legion continues with the national poppy 
campaign. While most of us see the Legion work at this time of 
year, few realize the ongoing work of the Legion. The Legion’s 
economic impact to Canada is estimated at 350 million per year. 
The Legion employs over 6,000 full- and part-time workers, 
paying over $73 million in wages, and provides millions in 
support of youth activities. 
 
The Legion contributes millions of dollars and hundreds of 
hours in assistance each year to veterans and their communities. 
The men and women we honour did not falter in their duty to 
country and neither has the Legion in their ongoing effort to 
improve the lives of their members and of our community. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 
Awareness Week 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I began the 
week making a statement about the geo-memorials in the North 
for those who have fought for us, I’m breaking from theme 
today to also recognize another group of men and women in 
community who help to bring awareness to issues of importance 
to us all. And that’s the SARC — Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres — Awareness Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARC and our government share some very 
important goals. The work that SARC and its member agencies 
do every day in every corner of this province enhances the lives 
of individuals with disabilities. From residential services to 
employment support and assistance, SARC is there. And 
certainly no one can argue with the success of SARCAN 
Recycling. 

Several months ago SARC presented government with a human 
resources plan outlining what is required to deal with critical 
issues of staff recruitment and retention. And in the Throne 
Speech, we announced there would be $30 million more in 
increased funding over the next three years. This will help to 
address issues of staff wages, recruitment and retention for 
community-based organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government strongly supports the concepts of 
citizenship and inclusion for people with disabilities. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we value the positive working relationship we enjoy 
with the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 
and remain committed to working with them to continue to 
enhance the lives of Saskatchewan people with disabilities. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to seek leave of the 
Assembly to move to a motion of remembrance. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave of the 
Assembly to move to a motion of remembrance. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

MOTION 
 

Remembering Saskatchewan Veterans 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At 
the close of my remarks I will move a formal motion of 
remembrance that will be seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, a motion to recognize the extraordinary 
contribution of Saskatchewan veterans. And if I may say, we 
are pleased as well that Mr. David Karwacki, Leader of the 
Liberal Party, is in the gallery with us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned a few minutes ago when I had the 
privilege to welcome some of Saskatchewan’s veterans to this 
Assembly, our service of remembrance in the rotunda this 
morning afforded us the opportunity to honour some of our 
greatest citizens by renaming Highway 2 from Moose Jaw to 
Prince Albert as the Veterans Memorial Highway, by awarding 
to some of our veterans this morning the Saskatchewan 
Centennial Medal, and these presentations representative of 
course of our honouring of all Saskatchewan veterans. 
 
Our centennial year, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan has been 
one of great celebration. It has also been one of remembrance. 
Canada’s Year of the Veteran in 2005 marked the 60th 
anniversary of the end of the most costly, devastating human 
conflict the world has ever known: the Second World War. 
 
As a nation and as a province we had a number of opportunities 
to remember and honour our veterans in recent months. It was 
last year that we marked in this Chamber. And through a variety 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

of activity around the province, including a royal visit, we were 
able to mark the 60th anniversary of D-Day, the most critical 
operation of World War II. 
 
It was a year ago on this day in Saskatchewan that we unveiled 
the veterans’ licence plate, which has now become for us a daily 
reminder of the extraordinary service of our veterans. We see 
those plates, happily, across the province. 
 
A few weeks ago we dedicated the second phase of the 
Saskatchewan War Memorial here on the grounds of the 
Legislative Assembly building. It’s the only war memorial in 
Canada that bears the names, permanently etched in stone, of 
every one of our province’s war dead — 10,000 names and 
more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s and Saskatchewan’s veterans come from 
and came from every walk of life. Some were professional — 
soldiers, sailors, and air force personnel, members of the 
standing forces — but many, Mr. Speaker, were not. They were 
farmers, carpenters, mechanics, factory workers, truck drivers, 
civil servants. They were doctors and nurses and members of 
the clergy. They were students. They were unemployed. They 
came from every one of Canada’s diverse and Saskatchewan’s 
diverse cultures. 
 
Many of our veterans were immigrants and first generation 
Canadians. Many of our veterans came from our Aboriginal 
communities. Our First Nation veterans, Mr. Speaker, exempted 
by treaty from conscription, were therefore all volunteers. And 
we know today that the contributions of our Aboriginal veterans 
often have gone unrecognized. And those who returned were 
denied too long the freedoms and the dignity they fought to 
secure for others. 
 
Our veterans have represented all of Canada’s faiths. They were 
and are Protestant and Catholic, Jewish and Muslim. From 
every background, from every culture, and from every faith, 
they nonetheless had much in common. They shared a deep 
devotion to duty and unsurpassed commitment to Canada. And 
for the most part, Mr. Speaker, they were very young. The men 
and women who we honour today were overwhelmingly young 
men and women in their time of service. 
 
A few days ago I had the honour of proclaiming November 5 to 
November 11 in Saskatchewan as Veterans’ Week. And the 
theme of this Veterans’ Week is honouring veterans by teaching 
youth. And in our centennial year nothing could be more 
important. 
 
I believe it is important for us today to note that so many critical 
moments during the past century — during so many of those 
moments — the destiny of the world has rested on the shoulders 
of people, many of whom were just out of high school. The 
considerable weight of that great responsibility was born with 
courage and dignity, even in the midst of the horrors of war. 
Many of these young people rest in the earth of the lands they 
fought to liberate. Many did not live to witness the signing of 
the armistice, the armistice on November 11, 1918. Many of 
them did not live to see the success of D-Day, though many saw 
the terrible price. Many did not live to celebrate victory in 
Europe or victory in the Pacific. Many did not live to see the 
end of the Korean conflict. 

Mr. Speaker, for those of us fortunate enough not to have 
fathers, uncles, grandfathers, grandmothers, mothers, and aunts, 
cousins — fortunate enough not to have our family names on 
the memorial in the garden of this Assembly — remember that 
today. Those of us fortunate enough to have been the family of 
a veteran, remember that today. And in remembrance today, 
Mr. Speaker, we remember with great honour those who gave 
their lives, those who are buried in lands far from this great 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Billy Ray Cyrus, the country singer, wrote a little song and he 
put a lyric in there, a lyric which said, remembering veterans, 
some gave all but all gave some. 

 
And today I remember and we remember the veterans who 
returned, having given. And I can’t help but remember my own 
father who went to that conflict a young, young man. And how 
often I have been reminded that while I was busy going off to 
university and playing in a dance band and enjoying my youth, 
my father spent six years in Europe. 
 
I am fortunate he did not give his life but he gave his youth. 
And how many of his generation gave up their youth for the 
service of this country. They were young, Mr. Speaker, and 
they are young today, those who serve our nation in 
Afghanistan, those who are in training at the base in Moose 
Jaw. They are young. So often the course of human history is 
placed on the shoulders of the young. 
 
It is bittersweet each passing Remembrance Day because 
Canada’s veterans, particularly now from the Second World 
War, are fewer and fewer in number. It is therefore only right 
and proper that we remember their service and their sacrifice. 
It’s only right and proper that we bestow our highest honours 
and erect lasting monuments. But there is still more that we can 
and we should do to honour our veterans. In her very acclaimed 
book, A Terrible Beauty, The Art of Canada at War, Heather 
Robertson writes the following: 
 

We must remember. If we do not, the sacrifice of those 
one hundred thousand Canadian lives will be meaningless. 
They died for us, [they died] for their homes and families 
and friends, [they died] for a collection of traditions they 
cherished and a future they believed in; they died for 
Canada. The meaning of their sacrifice rests with our 
collective national consciousness; our future is their 
monument. 
 

And so, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I move, 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 

 
That this Assembly recognize the importance of the 
contributions and sacrifices made by veterans for the 
citizens of our province and country. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Riversdale, the Premier, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

That this Assembly recognize the importance of the 
contributions and sacrifices made by veterans for the 
citizens of our province and country. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to be able to second this motion on this day. Mr. 
Speaker, in the 15th chapter of John, verse 13, Jesus Christ told 
his disciples: 
 

Greater love has no man than this, that he would lay down 
his life for his friends. 
 

And that’s what this morning is all about. That’s what the 
service was about this morning. It was about that measure of 
love — a love of freedom and a love of country and a love of 
friends and comrades. That’s what today is all about. 
 
Canada, and our province Saskatchewan, our people here have 
always answered freedom’s call. Whenever it is threatened, 
whenever there is a conflict that threatens it, Canada is there 
and Saskatchewan is there. We have been there. During World 
War I, 40,000 people including 70 nursing sisters volunteered at 
20 provincial recruiting centres in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In World War II, more than 75,000 
Saskatchewan men and women served in the Armed Forces 
during the conflict that spanned, or at least the span of six years 
over World War II. 
 
And so too has the men and women, the people of this province, 
responded to the conflict in Korea. There are peacekeepers 
today in the world from this province who again are answering 
the call of freedom. 
 
And so there are a number of stories of Canadian valour and 
bravery, of Saskatchewan valour and bravery. We hear them at 
this time of year each year and we’ve heard some today. 
 
I would like to share with you one though, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues in the Assembly, from a place called Kapyong 
during the Korean War. When the second Princess Patricia’s 
Canadian Light Infantry was under heavy shelling from the 
Chinese and Koreans, the soldiers fought on a cold and snowy, 
wet April night. They fought shoulder to shoulder. They saw 
their friends die. They saw others maimed. They saw horrific 
things — things that they will remember forever. Those young 
men — many of whom lied about their age so that they could 
fight for their country — those young men were outnumbered 
eight to one. They fought literally for inches, inches of land. 
They fought for feet. They fought for their brother next to them. 
They held their position, Mr. Speaker, and they prevailed and it 
helped change the direction of that war. 
 
That was in Korea. But there are stories easily as compelling of 
Canadian and Saskatchewan men and women making similar 
kinds of sacrifices and demonstrating similar acts of bravery all 
over the globe in the different conflicts that we have faced. 
 
And so today we do remember the boys of the Big Muddy and 
Buffalo Narrows, and the men and women of every prairie town 
between that have come forward to defend our country, to 

defend our province, to defend freedom, to fight for all of the 
things that we prize here in the province of Saskatchewan and 
in the nation. 
 
The boys of Saskatchewan became the men of Dieppe and 
Sicily, of Dunkirk and Ortano and Juno Beach and of 
Normandy. They knew what they were facing. They knew what 
they were heading into — many of them — but were undeterred 
in their resolve to make a difference in the lives of people that 
they had never met, that they would never meet, and that 
unfortunately and tragically that some would never know. 
 
Every year at this time, Mr. Speaker, I have the great pleasure, 
as do MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], my 
colleagues in the Assembly, of going to our local Legion 
celebrations. And there is of course the service of remembrance. 
But in Swift Current and in Legion branches across the 
province there’s also a banquet where local branch members are 
honoured and where there is a time of remembrance and 
celebration. 
 
And it’s a highlight for me since I got this job of being the 
MLA for Swift Current. It truly is a highlight for me every year 
to participate in that at the Legion branch in Swift Current. 
 
But every Remembrance Day, even before I was elected, I 
always find myself quietly asking myself the question, would I 
have the courage to do these things that I read about, that I just 
read about with respect to the Korean War? Would I have had 
the courage to jump out of a trench when ordered to do so and 
charge across a battle-scarred field knowing that the chances of 
surviving were minimal? Would I have the courage that it 
would take to get out of a landing craft and storm a beach when 
I can see nothing but the bodies of comrades, of brothers who 
have fallen? I don’t know. 
 
I think we all would like to think that we would have that same 
courage that was displayed, as the Premier so aptly pointed out, 
by men not much older than high school students. I don’t know 
if I would have that same courage. But it gives me reason to 
reflect every single year on the amazing stories from the 
conflicts that we’ve been involved with, specifically from the 
two World Wars and the amazing stories of courage from 
Saskatchewan people who have participated in those. 
 
So today, we do pay tribute to the Farmer Johns, our 
Warwickshire Lads, our Devil’s Brigades and the many, many 
individuals who served on land and air and sea. And we pay 
tribute of course to those who never came back. 
 
How shall we remember them, Mr. Speaker? Well we should 
honour these men and women by living by the ideals for which 
many of them died, by honouring and respecting our 
distinguished veterans who sacrificed so much, by 
remembering, by loving freedom, by participating in the 
freedom and enjoying the freedom that they sacrificed to 
provide for us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can, I would like to read a poem that Private 
Patrick William O’Connor, a stretcher-bearer with the Second 
Battalion Royal Canadian Regiment who was killed in action in 
Korea on May 30, 1951, wrote. He said, he wrote: 
 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

There is blood on the hills of Korea 
The blood of the brave and the true 
Where the 25th Brigade battled together 
Under the banner of the Red White and Blue 
As they marched over the hills of Korea 
To the hills where the enemy lay 
They remembered the Brigadier’s order: 
These hills must be taken today 
Forward they marched into battle 
With faces unsmiling and stern 
They knew as they charged the hillside 
There were some that would never return 
Some thought of their wives and mothers 
Some thought of their sweethearts so fair 
And some as they plodded and stumbled 
Were reverently whispering a prayer 
There is blood on the hills of Korea 
It’s the gift of the freedom they love 
May the names live in glory forever 
And their souls rest in Heaven above. 

 
In just a few minutes from now, the tone of this Chamber might 
change considerably. There’s going to be a very sharp exchange 
of words. There’s going to be a debate about ideas, and the 
debate sometimes gets pretty aggressive in this place. But you 
know, the Premier and his party, and for myself and my party, 
we will contest for the right to provide leadership and the right 
to provide government for the province of Saskatchewan, and 
we’ll contest it aggressively. And the debate will be sharp. But 
you know, we’ll be able to do that, Mr. Speaker, to settle the 
matter, to settle the contest with words, with words and ideas 
and not bullets. And we will be able to do that because there is 
Canadian blood on the hills of Korea. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is humbling and it 
is a privilege to be able to participate in today’s debate 
honouring Saskatchewan veterans. I say humbling because what 
else can you feel when reflecting on the contribution and the 
sacrifice made by those who took up arms in defence of Canada 
and of Canadian rights and freedoms and values? As the Leader 
of the Opposition pointed out, there’s no greater sacrifice to be 
made than to lay down your life for your friends, for your 
family, for your country, for what you believe in. 
 
And that is what the individuals who fought for Canada 
undertook to do — to lay down their lives. Many went into 
harm’s way and many did not return. Many did come back, and 
many of those were profoundly wounded in body and mind and 
spirit. And it is to all of those people, all of those Canadians, to 
which we turn our thoughts today in this week, in this year of 
the Canadian veteran. And it is to them that we give our deepest 
thanks. 
 
At the top I had also said that it is a privilege to be able to speak 
in this debate, here in this Chamber of parliamentary 
democracy. And I use the word privilege quite consciously 
because it is a privilege to serve in this democratic process. And 
that privilege was secured for me, the youngest member in this 

Legislative Assembly, and for each one of us in this Chamber. 
For every Canadian, the privilege of living and working in a 
free and democratic society, that privilege was secured for us 
and is secured for us by the men and women who served and do 
serve Canada in the Armed Forces. We stand here on the 
shoulders of those giants and for that we must always give 
thanks and for that we must never forget. 
 
Remembrance Day, Veterans’ Day, veterans’ year are all about 
reminding ourselves what price was paid and by whom, so that 
we can live in the relative freedom, comfort, and prosperity that 
we enjoy. 
 
During the course of the First World War over 40,000 men and 
women from Saskatchewan, including 70 nursing sisters, 
volunteered to serve in the Canadian Expeditionary Force. The 
vast majority of those volunteers were recently arrived British 
immigrants, which makes sense because Canada had 
automatically been involved in the war because of our ties to 
Britain. But they went. They volunteered and they fought for 
Canada and for Crown and for the country. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it is also very important to note 
that another group of volunteers were Saskatchewan’s First 
Nations. According to Professor Bill Waiser in his recently 
published Saskatchewan: A New History: 
 

Those who volunteered generally did so because of their 
continuing affection for their treaty partner, the British 
Crown, although many were also driven overseas by 
reserve poverty or sought escape from residential schools. 

 
He also mentions 15-year-old Moses Lavallee of the File Hills 
colony who seemed to like school all right but wanted a chance 
to use his training in the brass band to become a bugler. He 
enlisted in Yorkton and didn’t tell the Indian agent on the 
reserve what was happening until he got all the way to England. 
I have no idea what he told his parents. 
 
Alex Decoteau was a Canadian Olympian from the Red 
Pheasant reserve and an Edmonton policeman at the time of his 
enlisting. He was killed at Passchendale. Several other First 
Nations soldiers came home with burnt lungs from gas attacks 
or picked up in the trenches, and died within a few years of 
returning to their reserves. And I highlight these First Nations 
soldiers from the First World War because they’re often 
forgotten when we seek to remember the contribution of 
Canadian veterans. There is a debt to be repaid to them and to 
Métis veterans as well. 
 
And when I think about First Nations veterans that I know like 
Florence Wuttunee, Peggy Stonechild, Howard Anderson, 
Victor Daniels, and Tony Cote, that debt carries on to this day 
in many ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of the First World War 
Saskatchewan servicemen fought in the air and on the sea and 
were among the Canadian troops who distinguished themselves 
by achieving victory hard won both at Passchendale and at 
Vimy Ridge. Sergeant Hugh Cairns of Saskatoon was an 
18-year-old plumber’s assistant when the war began. He was 
awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal for conspicuous 
bravery at Vimy Ridge in April 1917. On November 1, 1918, 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

days before the war would end, Sergeant Cairns again 
distinguished himself on the battlefield, though he was 
wounded during the action and died of his wounds the 
following day. Sergeant Cairns was posthumously awarded the 
Victoria Cross and became the sixth Saskatchewan soldier and 
the last Canadian to receive the British Empire’s highest 
military honour during the war. 
 
At the unveiling of the Canadian Vimy Memorial in France in 
1936, the French government awarded him the Legion of 
Honour and the town of Valenciennes renamed a street in his 
memory, the only such tribute ever accorded to a 
non-commissioned officer of a foreign army. 
 
Back home in Saskatoon, Cairns was remembered in the name 
of a new school and the local armouries, and his soccer buddies 
erected a statute of him in Kiwanis Park to help honour local 
athletes killed in action. But the fact remains that despite the 
medals and statues and honours, Sergeant Cairns never got to be 
more than 22 years old. 
 
About 5,000 Saskatchewan citizens never returned from the 
First World War. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, there are some 5,000 
lakes, peninsulas, bays, rivers, and islands bearing the names of 
Saskatchewan men and women who gave their lives for Canada 
in World War II, Korea, and on peacetime operations since the 
Second World War. By far the majority of these died in World 
War II at Hong Kong or during the battle of the Atlantic or the 
battle of Britain or in Italy or in the awful fighting of the Sheldt 
Estuary liberating the Netherlands. 
 
In all — counting both world wars, Korea, and peacetime 
operations — nearly 10,000 men and women from 
Saskatchewan have never come home. Each and every one of 
their names are cast in bronze and are mounted on stone pillars 
just over here in a quiet corner on the legislative grounds. 
 
As my friend and colleague, the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers pointed out a few days ago, it’s great that Saskatchewan 
War Memorial is there as a place we can bring our children and 
tell them the stories about why those names are there — the 
people behind those names. As my colleague said, our debt to 
those named is more permanent even than the bronze and stone. 
What would our world look like today if they hadn’t stepped 
forward to take up arms and defend our way of life? We can’t 
know, any more than we can know what talents, achievements, 
and accomplishments were lost along with those 10,000 lives. 
But we do know we are both richer and at once the poorer for 
their sacrifice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 100 years more than 140,000 men and 
women from Saskatchewan have seen service with the 
Canadian military fighting wars and keeping peace. We already 
know there are some 10,000 names on Saskatchewan’s War 
Memorial and that means that 130,000 made it home. And I 
doubt if there is or was one of them who was not changed 
forever by the experience. And I know that many of those 
families that sent those loved ones into harm’s way have 
members that sit right here in this Assembly today. 
 
In my family, for instance, there was a grand total of two uncles 

and seven great-uncles that served in World War II. Most made 
it home albeit with some close scrapes. My mom’s older 
brother, Sid, was a tail gunner in a Lancaster bomber, and he 
survived an emergency landing in England after the Lancaster’s 
fuel line had been shot out over France. 
 
And there is one McCall, Cpl. Roy Calder McCall, of the Royal 
Canadian Signal Corps that was killed in action in northern 
Italy, and he is still buried there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Word of his death got to the McCall family on the farm near 
Montmartre. They were in the middle of harvest. And my 
grandma she told the story about working together with my 
great-grandpa McCall out there stooking oats that were pretty 
green, and it was hot and heavy work. And when my 
great-grandfather McCall got the message that his eldest son — 
his first born — had been killed in battle, grandma says he went 
down on his knees just like he’d been poleaxed. And they wept 
and they mourned and eventually they got back to stooking the 
oats. And Uncle Roy, he never got to meet the son that he had 
left with his pregnant wife when he was shipped out to Europe. 
And that’s the way it was for so many families, Mr. Speaker. 
That was the cost that was paid in blood and life and love for 
our freedom. 
 
There are those that made it back. I have a constituent named 
Harold Hague who served in the Royal Canadian Navy during 
World War II. He started out as a signalman when he was a 
teenager on a warship escorting cargo ships across the Atlantic, 
but by D-Day he had transferred to minesweepers. The ship Mr. 
Hague was assigned to was attached to the American seventh 
fleet, and he spent D-Day making runs in and out of Omaha 
Beach. 
 
Here are some quotes from Mr. Hague that come from an article 
in the Leader Post of May this year. Quote: 
 

“You were scared as hell . . . going into the fight that first 
night. But once you were into the firefight you seem to go 
numb and just do the things you were supposed to do. 
 
“We arrived the morning of June 6th at Omaha Beach. It 
was a slaughter. It was the most horrible thing (that) I’ve 
ever seen in my life. 
 
“The second time we went in, the hull of our ship was 
pushing dead bodies by. We had boat hooks and we tried 
to grab some of them that were still alive. We just had to 
do it . . . when there are guys floating in the water asking 
for help. We did pull a few out . . . but they died anyway. 
 

Those are the words of Harold Hague, and more to the point, 
that’s one part of his experience of the war. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the life we enjoy here in Saskatchewan and our 
chance to build a future here for everyone, a future free of 
oppression based on the principles of democracy and decency 
and fairness, it has been bought at a hugely high price, and our 
veterans paid it. Some paid with their lives, some with their 
health, and some with their piece of mind, but our veterans paid 
that cost. 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

Mr. Speaker, clearly that means we have a huge responsibility 
to them. And I would say that it is to ensure we never forget 
what they’ve done for us, and that we need to build the bright 
future their sacrifice has given us the chance to do. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, those of us who work on the 
floor of this Assembly are always in danger of having 
overinflated egos. The work that we do here for the people of 
Saskatchewan could allow us to feel quite important at times. 
And some times we need a reality check. 
 
Today we have that rare opportunity to reflect on why we have 
the right to be here, how it came about that we have the 
privilege to serve the people of Saskatchewan. We finally have 
the opportunity to publicly thank the people who were 
responsible for the reality we live today, people who fought to 
preserve our right and privilege to govern to the voice of the 
people. That’s the reason, Mr. Speaker, that through you to my 
colleagues and our guests, I’m honoured to be part of the 
celebrations for the veterans of Canada. 
 
This year we had the opportunity as Canadians to thank the 
veterans for giving us, and the people we represent, the most 
important gift we’ll ever have — and that’s freedom. This year 
2005 marks the 60th anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima. 
The bomb that was dropped by the crew of the Enola Gay 
basically ended the Second World War. Our men and women 
came home, and the world was changed forever. 
 
I’m the daughter of a veteran, and I’m a daughter of an English 
war bride. More importantly I am the mother and grandmother 
of future generations of young people who have unlimited 
opportunities for their future because of all of you, our veterans, 
men and women who individually may becoming faceless to 
too many of our young people because time is passing but who 
in fact are responsible for a way of life in Canada that is 
coveted by most of the world. 
 
As Canadians we live in a democracy that history tells us 
emerged usually without much effort, but its continued survival 
is never guaranteed. It’s been challenged many times in the past 
including the severe challenges of the two world wars, the 
Korean wars, and the conflicts that followed. We must never 
lose sight of how fortunate we are to serve in a free society and 
how very fragile that freedom is. 
 
Too often we take things for granted that are considered free, 
especially those of us who have always known freedom. I feel 
like we who take freedom for granted should beg forgiveness 
for being naive. Our only excuse is that we’ve never known 
another way of life. 
 
Our generation faces a huge responsibility, Mr. Speaker. Most 
of us are only one generation away from knowing the men and 
women we are honouring today. We’ve seen them in uniform. 
We’ve talked to them. They’ve come to our schools, and 
they’re part of our lives. 

But how can we be sure that our children and our grandchildren 
will continue with conscious gratitude to remember those 
whose sacrifice paved the way for our freedoms? That’s one of 
the most important issues and biggest challenges that we must 
deal with as leaders and as parents. 
 
The veterans’ home where my dad lived housed some of the 
most amazing men and women and held stories and memories 
of hundreds of heroes. Every room was home of someone 
whose medals hung on the walls amongst pictures of their 
children and grandchildren. Dusty medals from the past. 
Smiling faces of children today. But how many people make the 
connection? 
 
I made a special friend there. Her name was Peggy, and Peggy 
was a spy. Three times she parachuted into France with her high 
heels hung around her neck. Once right after she landed, she 
just had time to change when she was picked up by the Gestapo. 
They interrogated her about the plane they had seen take off. 
And she told me with a chuckle it was easy for her to fool them 
because she was a woman. She brazenly declared, what do you 
think I did? Jump out of that plane in these shoes? 
 
Too often when we think of wars, whether it’s Remembrance 
Day or not, we firstly think about those who never came home 
— those who died in a foreign country away from everyone 
they loved and everyone who loved them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in this Year of the Veteran we have an 
honour and an opportunity of a lifetime to honour those men 
and women who did come home. They also deserve not only 
our grateful thanks and our respect, but also the salute of the 
country. Calvin Coolidge said, “The nation that forgets its 
defenders will itself be forgotten.” Those men and women who 
knew war close up do not forget. 
 
I remember watching my dad stare out into space, knowing that 
his mind was not with his family or his farm or the conversation 
around him. I remember just once he talked to me about lying in 
a cot one night in an unfamiliar world where he had no family 
and no friends except the men who were nearly strangers that 
marched beside him during the day. He was 18 years old and he 
was scared. As a little girl, I was shocked and frightened 
because I couldn’t comprehend that my dad had ever been 
scared. He said he tried to imagine home, what his brothers and 
sisters were doing across the ocean at that moment. 
 
He was a farm boy, and he joined the army because he saw a 
poster on the wall of the livery stable when he was driving back 
from delivering a load of grain. The poster said, come join the 
army and see the world. So he did — much to my grandma and 
grandpa’s dismay. And that night as he lay in the cot and 
questioned what he was doing in a strange battle with young 
men he didn’t know against young people he was pretty sure 
didn’t want to die, the only hope that he could cling to that 
night seemed pretty simple. If they won this war, then the 
family and friends that he’d left on the other side of the ocean 
would continue to live the happy and carefree lives they took 
for granted but he could scarcely remember. That was the only 
time dad ever talked about that part of the war. 
 
All of us kids, all six of us, would at times watch dad staring off 
into space. He wasn’t part of the conversation around him or the 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

farm he worked on so hard and he loved so much. He was 
having those thoughts and reliving those memories, and it 
would take him a few hours to be dad again. 
 
On Sundays when some of dad’s Legion comrades came over 
and their friends, and they played rummoli, the memories they 
talked about were the fun times. They talked about drinking 
warm beer in an English pub. They talked about dad meeting 
mom in an air-raid shelter. Dad talked about peeling four or 
five-gallon pails of potatoes for some reason that he never 
explained to us. But they never talked about bombs, and he 
never talked about death, and they never talked about fear. 
 
When I was older I read everything I could about the lives of 
our soldiers during combat. I read that soldiers who did try and 
explain what was going on inside of their heads and inside of 
their hearts during war had a feeling like being in suspended 
animation, in limbo away from home, in a surreal world where 
they dreaded the mail for fear of bad news yet wanted so badly 
to hear from home. And I know my grandma and grandpa and 
dad’s brothers and sisters waited with the same anxiousness and 
fear for letters and word from overseas. 
 
Our soldiers were lonely in the midst of other lonely people. 
And I understand that’s part of the alienation of war. It’s been 
said that we only see the best of mankind at times of challenge. 
Well in Canada’s times of challenge, the very best of entire 
generations were there for all of us. They were and they are 
heroes in every sense of the word. They deserve our everlasting 
gratitude. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the veterans that 
were ignored and disrespected by government for far too long. 
Our First Nations and Métis veterans never received the 
recognition or the few benefits given to other veterans for 
nearly five decades after the war. And all of us — the rest of the 
Canadians — never demanded that government reverse that 
abominable mistake. And for that I think we should all publicly 
apologize to our First Nations veterans. 
 
Too many of our veterans are no longer with us. My dad’s been 
gone since 2001. Many of my childhood memories centred 
around the Legion the organization that I believe made it 
possible for my dad and many of his comrades to meld back 
into society when he came home from overseas. 
 
Grandma said her son, the young man that left Canada, was not 
the young man that came home. He left his youth on the other 
side of the ocean. But, Mr. Speaker, he also left his innocence 
on the other side of the ocean. 
 
I know when I was young, his memories were too current and 
too painful and too real to handle alone. And he left every 
Thursday night for years and years to attend a Legion meeting. 
He travelled 4 miles one way to go to town which was 
something we didn’t do very easily in those days. Money was 
scarce, and work was plentiful. But we didn’t question it. We 
just knew that dad was going to town on Thursday night. 
Whether it was seeding or harvest or a blizzard, dad was going 
to go to town. 
 
I understand that the Legion seldom talked about their 
experiences, but the bond they had was real and unexplainable. 

Today our military have professionals to help them deal with 
the traumas of conflict. They have psychologists and 
psychiatrists and counsellors and the list goes on. But my dad 
and the men and women like him just had each other. 
 
When our veterans came home, they brought a vigour to their 
lives that had been interrupted by war. They brought a vitality 
and an enthusiasm to their family and their community and their 
country. 
 
I know how important the Legion was in my home town in 
Spalding. The first memory I have of Legion members going to 
bat for each other was overhearing my mom and dad talk about 
how much money they could put towards the school books of 
one of the other Legion member’s children. No one had money, 
but it was unheard of not to help one of their own. 
 
I remember they hauled grain in when quotas were low to buy 
the first Legion clubhouse. Their weekly bingos paid for the 
insurance on the skating rink and the bowling alley. When we 
were young, the kids of the Legion members — and since I’ve 
been elected, I’ve learned that many of my colleagues could be 
included in that group: the member from Melville-Saltcoats, the 
member from Canora-Pelly, the member from Batoche, the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone, of course the member 
from Wood River, our caucus staff, Iain Harry, as well I’m sure 
members on the other side of the House — can remember 
standing and watching our dads, straight and tall and proud and 
in their uniform. And they would be laughing, and sometimes 
they’d talk seriously and quietly. I think we’d wonder if they 
were talking about their comrades that didn’t come home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember the Christmas card that came from 
Holland to my dad from a family he lived with for a time during 
the war. I wondered with almost jealous curiosity what they 
knew about my dad that I’d never know. My dad became a 
member of a family that I didn’t know, and they loved and 
respected him. 
 
Every once in a while something would be said that made us 
realize how the whole experience was just under his skin, how 
it could never be far from his thoughts. 
 
I’ve been an associate member of the Legion for nearly 20 
years. I can tell you I feel like an impostor when I stand beside 
Legion members as an associate in a uniform I don’t deserve. I 
don’t deserve the respect this uniform is given. I wasn’t there 
and for as much as I care and I want so badly to understand 
what our veterans lived through, it’ll just be stories for me. The 
only real bond associate members of the Legion have is our 
love and our unending respect for each of you as veterans. I 
know that Legion members were not just my dad’s comrades; 
they were his friends. They made it possible for him to come 
home and be my dad. 
 
I spoke earlier about inflated egos. The veterans that we are 
honouring today have never had inflated egos. For 60 years they 
attended Remembrance Day services and talked about the 
comrades that didn’t come home. The rest of the time they put 
the painful memories aside, and they seldom shared them with 
anyone. They returned home and helped to build the Canada we 
love, the Saskatchewan we love. 
 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

We thank you. We thank every one of you honoured here today, 
not only for your commitment and your dedication to our 
country, but to each other when you came home. Our debt of 
gratitude can never be repaid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Riversdale, the Premier, 
seconded by the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the 
Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the importance of the 
contributions and sacrifices made by veterans for the 
citizens of our province and country. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
I would at this . . . Standing vote, call in the members for a 
standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 11:14 until 11:15.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Riversdale, the Premier, 
seconded by the Member for Swift Current: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the importance of the 
contributions and sacrifices made by veterans for the 
citizens of our province and country. 

 
Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 53] 
 

Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Taylor Serby 
Atkinson Cline Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hagel 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson Wall Toth 
Heppner D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Wakefield 
Chisholm McMorris Harpauer 
Gantefoer Eagles Bakken Lackey 
Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert Allchurch 
Brkich Weekes Kerpan 
Merriman Morgan Dearborn 
Hart Kirsch  
 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 53; those 
opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried unanimously. 
 
At this time I would like to thank all of our special guests . . . 
[inaudible] . . . this Assembly to visit today. I know there are 
people that may be waiting for you outside and they’ve been 
waiting. I believe there are some refreshments . . . [inaudible] 
. . . So I would ask the Assembly for leave if we would possibly 
pause for a moment to allow those guests who wish to leave at 
this time to leave. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Resumption of routine 
proceedings. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Closure of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have another quote from 
the Premier. Here’s a quote from March 25, 1988 when he was 
hopping mad at the government of the day. He said this. He 
said: 
 

They monitor, they watch, they task force until the 
problem is a crisis, and then they fumble around trying to 
find a solution. 
 

Mr. Speaker, last month Weyerhaeuser announced it was 
cutting ties, unfortunately, with Prince Albert; announced that it 
was leaving 690 people out of work as a result of a decision to 
close the pulp and paper mill. And on that very day the Premier 
of Saskatchewan expressed surprise and shock. More 
significantly the MLA for Prince Albert Northcote, recently 
back in the cabinet, also expressed surprise and shock. Twenty 
years as the MLA in that city, former cabinet minister, former 
minister of Industry, and he was completely surprised and 
shocked by this announcement. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: why was he surprised by 
Weyerhaeuser’s announcement? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the Leader of the Opposition for the question. And quite 
obviously he is inferring that the members on that side knew 
more about Weyerhaeuser’s internal business and their internal 
operations than anyone else in the province, including the 
manager of the Prince Albert pulp and paper mill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re all well aware of the pressures that the pulp 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

and paper industry — that commodity, those commodities — 
are under across North America. I don’t think it’s a secret that 
anyone understood that there were a dozen mills closed in 
North America in the last while and that the cost of operations 
is an important factor. There are many other factors in terms of 
the operations. I think we’re also well aware that Weyerhaeuser 
just injected $300 million in the operations of that mill. 
 
So if the member of the opposition knew beforehand, perhaps 
he could have given us a wake-up call. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that former minister responsible for 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] and that government, they’re going to get a wake-up 
call all right. It won’t necessarily be from the opposition. It’s 
going to be from the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 26 in that member’s own newspaper, the 
Prince Albert Daily Herald, there was a message telegraphed to 
anybody that was listening. Others have met with those at 
Weyerhaeuser who highlighted significant concerns they had — 
not just international concerns but concerns with respect to the 
provincial investment climate. 
 
But on that particular day and in that article, Bob Williams, the 
manager of the Prince Albert mill, made a speech to the local 
chamber of commerce. And in it he said this, and the media 
reported this as well. He said simply in terms of the future of 
the mill and of that industry, “change or die.” I think that was 
even part of the headline. He was pretty clear about how serious 
things were there and that there needed to be change or 
something drastic would happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I assume that the member read that newspaper. I 
hope he would; it’s from his own constituency. And if he did, 
what did he do about it? Did he talk to the Premier? Did he talk 
to the Minister of Industry? Did they contact Weyerhaeuser 
about what he meant by that and find out what the province 
could do differently? What did he do in the wake of May 26, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, members of this 
government meet on a regular basis with industry players, 
whether it’s the forest sector, whether it’s our resources, 
whether it’s mining. Those are meetings that take place on an 
ongoing basis. I think that member, if he’s going to be sincere 
about this, that he would be helping us to find and work towards 
a solution to find a new owner for those assets. And I’m certain 
that we will over some time. I think he’s well aware of the 
release that was put out by Weyerhaeuser, that it was a 
market-based decision — the fact that the Canadian dollar has 
strengthened against the American dollar to put the 
commodities at a less advantageous market circumstance. He’s 

aware of that. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition 
can play politics with this if he chooses to. It’s nothing new for 
the Saskatchewan Party as it relates to the forest sector. But 
what I want to say is the community of Prince Albert has 
banded together. We’re going to work as a community to find a 
solution in the best interests of the city and of the province, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, did you notice the minister 
didn’t come anywhere near the question? The article appeared 
in the P.A. [Prince Albert] Daily Herald on May 26. He is the 
MLA for that area. It was referencing a plant that employs 700 
— many of them are his constituents — and he didn’t answer 
the simple question: what did he do about it, Mr. Speaker? 
What did the Premier do about it? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we were doing in the province of 
Saskatchewan is we were gathering information from the 
forestry industry about what they need changed in this province 
and passing it on to the government. 
 
And the minister says, well what could we do differently? How 
about cogeneration? How about that for large forestry plants? 
How about reducing the capital tax, Mr. Speaker? How about 
competitive dues and royalty surcharges in the forestry 
industry? 
 
These are all things that the forestry industry will tell him and 
have told him. They’ve told the Premier. They’ve told that 
minister. Why aren’t they listening? Why did they do nothing 
after May 26? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, there he goes again. I 
can tell you that the Premier acted as soon as this province was 
made aware of Weyerhaeuser’s decision. As soon as the mill 
manager was made aware of this decision, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister, the Premier of this province acted immediately. 
 
We put together a task force that represents a cross-section of 
Prince Albert and Saskatchewan people who will act in the best 
interests of the community and of the province. And I want to 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we are confident that a private 
sector investor will be found to match with those assets. 
 
We’ve got a first-class pulp and paper mill in that area. We’ve 
got a forest that’s healthy under the stewardship of the Minister 
of Environment and Resource Management. It’s a great asset, 
and we’ve got a good workforce. So, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, 
the member of the opposition can help by putting a positive 
attitude toward finding a new owner. That would be helpful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, the people of Prince Albert seem to 
tell us from time to time that they think that that particular 
member has lost interest in the community. I’m not sure if he 
has read . . . We know he didn’t apparently read the P.A. Daily 
Herald from May, and if he did, he did nothing about it. How 
about The StarPhoenix from today, Mr. Speaker, dated today? 
 
I want to quote from the article. It indicates of course that the 
Minister Responsible for Highways and this task force Chair 
has been having these discussions with the industry about the 
future of the mill. But here’s what Craig Fisher, CEO [chief 
executive officer] of a software development company, had to 
say. He asked several times, what is the province “ . . . doing to 
make the mill and the business climate in Saskatchewan more 
attractive for investment.” 

 
Here’s what Mr. Fisher said of the answer he got. He said: 
 

“The question was skirted” . . . [That’s a quote.] 
 
At the least, he said, he wanted to hear details on actions 
the government is considering to find a buyer . . . 

 
And of course he wants the business climate to improve. 
 
The government can do some things with respect to 
cogeneration. The government could do something on capital 
tax, on dues that they pay, on roads. What are they going to do, 
and more to the point — one more time for that minister — 
what did he do when he read that article in May? Did he sit on 
his hands and do nothing about that announcement about the 
plant in May? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, there he goes again. 
The Leader of the Opposition is so famous now for quoting part 
of the story in this legislature in an attempt to make a story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell that member and every one of his 
colleagues that this government is working hard and diligently 
with the private sector across this country to find a new owner. 
And I can tell you this, sir, we’re going to be somewhat 
successful. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order, order. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the member for Estevan. 
 

Funding for Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres Community-Based Organizations 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
session the Saskatchewan Party raised the plight of more than 
70 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres CBOs 
[community-based organization]. After years of underfunding 

they were raising the alarm that without action many of them 
faced either a significant reduction in services to people with 
disabilities in Saskatchewan communities or, at worst, closure. 
 
Underfunding and neglect on the part of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government meant these CBOs could not 
pay workers competitive wages and faced a turnover rate of 
almost 80 per cent in some cases. Many of these workers are 
women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us today how many people 
have lost their jobs and how many of these group homes have 
closed or face closure? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been 
very pleased over the years to add considerable additional 
resources into this sector in every budget year. Even when 
things were very tight, there was percentages added in that were 
higher than those percentages that went to other areas of the 
public sector. As well we’ve built a number of additional group 
homes across the province and funded the operation of these 
homes. 
 
So I could say overall that we’ve had a very close relationship 
with SARC. We’ve greatly expanded the work, working 
together. And that certainly people did write with concerns 
about this matter but we acted together and a human resource 
plan was developed and is being acted on as we speak, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was a 
sad day in my constituency when Estevan Diversified Services 
suspended program admissions in September and announced 
the impending closure of the group home. Representatives of 
the group home said years of underfunding from the current 
government meant that service to Estevan’s most vulnerable 
citizens was suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a letter dated October 31, 2005 to Community 
Resources and Employment, EDS [Estevan Diversified 
Services] president, Cathy Morrell, says the wages they can pay 
their staff are 40 per cent below average annual employment 
income in Estevan, and that is why the group home is closing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Estevan’s not the only organization in crisis. How 
much of the $30 million announced in the Throne Speech will 
be directed specifically to SARC CBOs? Mr. Speaker, can the 
minister tell us if Estevan Diversified Services will be able to 
stay open? Will the government be increasing wages by 40 per 
cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated previously, 
we’ve worked together with SARC on the development of the 
human resource plan. It did include matters not just related to 
money. There was a whole range of things that they felt that 
they as an organization could do and that we could do as 
government to strengthen the working relationship. 
 
I have also had representation for unions concerned that the 
money we’ve provided to put to wages has not always ended up 
where they hoped it would, and so one of the things we’re going 
to do when we deliver the money this time is to be very specific 
about the allocation of those resources to wages. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the commitment we are making 
today to those agencies will exceed the expectation that they put 
before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Consultations on Locating Missing Persons 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a terrible 
report card when it comes to consultation before legislation. For 
some reason they don’t think stakeholders have a say. We’ve 
seen them fail with First Nations and the smoking ban. We’ve 
seen them fail with the job-killing monster, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Premier: did he consult with all stakeholders before he wrote 
the Speech from the Throne? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I count every citizen 
in the province of Saskatchewan a stakeholder. I count every 
. . . Not specific groups. Yes, they’re important but I count 
every citizen of the province of Saskatchewan a stakeholder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this House rose from its spring session I 
have travelled extensively in the province. I have spoken to 
thousands of people. We go on the road every summer. Have I 
spoken to every, every citizen? No I have not, Mr. Speaker; I 
have not spoken to every citizen of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there was no consultation with 
Child Find before the Premier decided to bring in a missing 
persons task force. Child Find has been doing this for 21 years. 
You’d think that the Premier might give them a call to see what 
they had to say. Unfortunately that’s not the case. He seemed to 
know better. 
 
Marg Reid of Child Find told the CBC yesterday morning she 
had “no idea if Premier Calvert intends on having us involved 
in the task force or not,” but she wants Child Find to be part of 
it. In their 21 years of being in operation they have never asked 
the government for any money ever. They need $100,000 just to 
start and they don’t need to see a copy of the task force plan 

from the minister. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he commit 
to fund Child Find here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 
members opposite are calling across to the government not to 
continue to consult. I didn’t understand that that was their 
position when the member started his question. I thought he was 
asking when the Government of Saskatchewan would consult 
with every stakeholder, every person in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to dealing with the 
issue of missing persons, of dealing with the issue of unresolved 
homicides, of dealing with the issue of unsolved deaths in the 
province of Saskatchewan. This government is committed and 
committed through the Throne Speech with ensuring that no 
perpetrator of violence against the citizens of Saskatchewan 
escapes justice because of the mere passage of time. And this 
government is going to provide the resources to ensure that is 
the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

New Facility at Regina Airport 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this Premier has no plans to create jobs in the 
province. He’s no plans to cut property taxes; no plan to deal 
with equalization; no plan for agriculture; no plan for anything 
that matters to the people of Saskatchewan but, Mr. Speaker, he 
does have one plan. His plan is to build himself a million dollar 
airport. In fact, he has a very detailed plan, Mr. Speaker. He has 
20 pages of detailed blueprints for his new million dollar airport 
right down to the parking spots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are the Premier’s priorities so screwed up? 
Why is he more interested in building his million dollar airport 
than he is helping the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan takes its responsibility of applying balanced and 
appropriate programs right across the province. Mr. Speaker, 
occupational health and safety is one of those. And when you’re 
dealing with a hangar that was built in 1920, there needs to be 
updates done to the building for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The member must be heard. 
Order. The Minister for Property Management. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition . . . big 
laugh — that providing appropriate work space for the 
employees of the Government of Saskatchewan that provide 
service to the people of Saskatchewan is a big joke. They talk 
about this being a waste of money. Well, Mr. Speaker, they 
should take a look at the cost of air travel. Their members that 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

travel quite frequently through this facility . . . People who live 
in glass houses should not throw stones. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I don’t think the minister should go the 
route she’s going, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas 
had a little story he used to tell about black cats and white cats. 
Sometimes the black cats ran the province; sometimes the white 
cats run the province. I think now he’d be pretty disgusted, Mr. 
Speaker, because today the fat cats are running the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — More money for travel, more money for 
advertising, half a million more for the Premier’s own political 
staff, and now a million dollar airport. This Premier needs to 
come down from his stack of money and find out what the real 
priorities in this province are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can table the plans for the Premier’s million 
dollar airport . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask the member for 
Wood River not to be using props. And I would ask one of the 
Pages if they would mind picking the prop up and taking it out 
to the caucus room where it should properly remain. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Property Management. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess that’s a trick 
that any circus person or huckster would know. If you don’t 
have substance to your question, use a prop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this government believes in 
providing appropriate, healthy, safe workplaces for the 
employees that provide good services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, do these members think that 
public servants don’t provide good services? They ridicule. 
They point the finger. They take cheap shots. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this government will stand behind its employees, and we will 
continue to provide good services for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s kind of 
humorous about a prop because all that government over there 
is doing is trying to be propped up by their own advertising 
campaign. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s a private aero centre over by 
the Regina airport. The private aero centre is good enough for 
the Prime Minister when he comes to Regina. It’s good enough 
. . . 

The Speaker: — Order. Order members. Order please, 
members — members on both sides. The member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I think I touched a nerve, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the aero centre is good enough for the Prime 
Minister of Canada when he visits. It’s good enough for the 
Queen when she comes to visit, but apparently it’s not good 
enough for the Premier and his cabinet. He needs to build 
himself a new million dollar airport. 
 
By the way, this is the same Premier who closed White Spruce, 
the Premier who shut down SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol 
and Drug Abuse Commission], the same Premier that’s making 
us wait till 2007 for new addiction treatment beds. But he gets 
an airport right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is a new airport for this Premier more 
important than an addiction treatment facility for Saskatchewan 
children? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for the 
Property Management Corporation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, in case the members of the 
opposition in their frequent trips on government aircraft haven’t 
noticed, that the employees at that facility have been working 
out of portable trailers since about 2001, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, providing appropriate spaces for employees that work 
on a consistent basis at that facility . . . also provides services to 
air ambulance which also uses that hangar, Mr. Speaker. There 
are many other things that are run out of this hangar. It’s not 
just government members flying around the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the numbers, in April ’05 to July 
’05, Saskatchewan Party MLAs took 29 trips while NDP MLAs 
flew out of that airport 11 times, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
provides many services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, that tells you all you need 
to know about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Members 
will come to order. Order. Only — and only — the member for 
Wood River. The Chair recognizes him. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think that tells you all you need to know about NDP 
priorities. They have elaborate detailed blueprints drawn up for 
their million dollar airport for NDP ministers, but ask them to 
table the blueprints for new addiction beds and they can’t. And 
they can’t because they don’t exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote. I’d like to read a quote. 
Quote: 
 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

. . . maybe it’s a disease of old governments . . . [so] you 
can grow so completely out of touch with where people 
are at. Maybe it’s a disease of old governments that you 
become sort of like an island of arrogance here in the 
marble palace . . . so that they sit there in this island of 
arrogance and they won’t listen. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Premier said back in 1991 and 
now, and now he is the king of the island of arrogance. He 
would rather build a million dollar airport for himself than build 
addiction beds for our children. Mr. Speaker, how can this 
Premier be so out of touch? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Property Management. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a real 
disappointment when members opposite place no priority on 
health and safety and other services provided to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they like to point fingers. They like 
to ridicule. They like to pay a real disservice to public servants 
in the province of Saskatchewan and point a finger at everyone 
else. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, look at the time between April 4 to March 31 
of ’05. MLAs from the Saskatchewan Party logged a total of 56 
trips. NDP MLAs flew a total of 28. Mr. Speaker, they should 
look at their own books first. 
 
The Speaker: — The Assembly will come to order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, 
The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 1, The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, The 
Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d ask all members to . . . I’d ask all 
members to come to order so that we can transact the business 
of the House. I’d ask . . . Once again I’d ask . . . 
 
It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation that Bill No. 2, The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, 
The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 3, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 4, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

2005 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 4, The Assessment 
Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 5, The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 5, The Cities Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 6, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 6, The Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, at the next sitting of the 
House. 
 

Bill No. 201 — The Protection of Children 
Abusing Drugs Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 201, the 
protection of children abusing drugs now be introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena that Bill No. 201, The Protection of 
Children Abusing Drugs Act be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Order returns no. 1 through 5. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
motions no. 1 to 5 inclusive. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to recognize the fine people of 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

Athabasca who have given me the duty and the privilege and 
certainly the honour of representing the fine constituents of 
Athabasca. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Athabasca 
probably covers one-quarter of the land mass of the province, 
and I would probably challenge the member from Cumberland 
in terms of who’s got the largest riding geographically. But, Mr. 
Speaker, both of our ridings cover half of the province of 
Saskatchewan known as the northern administration district, 
northern Saskatchewan, and of course a quarter of that land 
mass is covered by myself, and the other quarter of the North of 
course is covered by the hon. member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency runs all the way from the far 
north of Camsell Portage, Uranium City, Black Lake, 
Fond-du-Lac, and Stony Rapids, and it goes of course as far 
south as Green Lake and Sled Lake and Dore Lake, as far east 
as Pinehouse, and all the way to the Alberta border. So, Mr. 
Speaker, it is a fairly large constituency. And from my home, 
my steps to the Assembly steps here is exactly 806 kilometres 
in terms of the mileage that we have to travel. And so it shows 
you how far we are from Regina. It certainly indicates the 
amount of space and the geography that we have to cover, and 
in those communities of course, or in the region that I represent 
there’s probably 25 communities overall. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, the people have to 
understand the vastness of Saskatchewan in general. And I 
would point out that we all think that Prince Albert is 
considered north. Well of course it’s north of this particular 
city, but if you were to travel another 45 minutes perhaps north 
of Prince Albert, that is where the geographical centre of 
Saskatchewan is. So it really shows you exactly how large and 
how vast our province is. 
 
And again as the member from Cumberland would understand, 
representing half of the province and having two members from 
the northern half of the province is certainly a challenge, and it 
certainly is time consuming, whether you’re travelling by 
aircraft or whether you’re travelling by vehicle. And I want to 
point out that all the travelling that we do certainly gives us a 
lot of time to reflect and gives us a lot of time to contact 
constituencies, our constituents, and to really think what’s 
important for your constituency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are able to do some of the connect with 
the people now because SaskTel has expanded its cell coverage 
north. At one time La Ronge was the only community that had 
cellphone coverage, and now we have cellphone coverage in La 
Loche. We have cellphone coverage in Ile-a-la-Crosse, in 
Buffalo Narrows and in Beauval. 
 
And obviously there’s other places that the fine Minister of 
SaskTel is looking at expanding cellphone coverage. I know 
that Cumberland House and Green Lake were slated for 
coverage, and I believe they’ve received that already. And the 
list and the amount of communities receiving cellphone 
coverage is always growing. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of 
the reasons why I stand in proud support of the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
And what I’d like to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to point out 

that I want to bring up some of the points and I also want to 
reserve five minutes, if I may, to have a bit of reflection on 
what we spoke about today — people that we recognize and 
honour today and that of course are our veterans. And I want to 
save that for a bit later on in my address and save a few minutes 
to respect and honour the veterans whom I hope a few are 
listening whether they’re in La Ronge, whether they’re in 
Buffalo Narrows or whether they’re in the Far North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now I want to reflect carefully on the Speech 
from the Throne and take a bit of offence in terms of what I’d 
like to do with the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. This Speech 
from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, talks about a wide variety of 
issues that are very near and dear to the northern part of our 
province and of course to the province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne was delivered by a 
government that has balanced budgets 11 consecutive times, 
Mr. Speaker, 11 consecutive times. Mr. Speaker, this Speech 
from the Throne comes from a government that is paying down 
debt, a debt racked up by the Conservatives across the way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This Throne Speech is indicative of the government that is 
responding to the Saskatchewan people’s needs, Mr. Speaker, 
not the Sask Party needs, Mr. Speaker. This Speech from the 
Throne is from a government that is sharing the wealth with the 
people of Saskatchewan. This Speech from the Throne is from a 
government that is building our future, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is from a 
government that are fighting the right fights, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, fighting the right fights. And those fights include 
agriculture support from the federal government, the 
equalization fight and the equalization file and the list goes on 
and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is from a government 
that has had tax reform, that has looked at low-income support, 
and is now looking at corporate capital tax reform, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we have is a government that has 
delivered a Speech from the Throne that’s going to add on that 
success, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
And when I look across the way, Mr. Speaker, I look across the 
way — and we often talk about it in our end and on this side — 
and the most important point that I make to a lot of people in 
my riding is that across the way from the government of the day 
is we have what I would call the cranky Conservatives, the 
whiny Reformers, and the confused Liberals, Mr. Speaker. That 
makes up the Saskatchewan Party MLAs. 
 
And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that across the way that they’re 
going to lose it and lose it big time. They are so frustrated with 
the four or five different directions that they want to go, 
between their four or five factions, that they can’t put together a 
coherent plan as to what they wish to do in terms of planning 
for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
And let’s look at what the Leader of the Opposition, a so-called 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party said when we’re talking 
about the fight for equalization. What did he say? Well if I was 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

there I would write a tersely worded letter. Oh my goodness, 
I’m sure Prime Minister Martin is shaking in his boots 
expecting a tersely written letter from the leader of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party. 
 
And we listen to another example, the member from 
Cannington yesterday talking about, are you guys going to build 
a dam in the North on the Churchill, Mr. Speaker? That’s what 
the speech throne talked about. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
government would build a hydroelectric dam on a legacy river? 
Now what kind of a thought process does that member have, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Then he goes on to talk about, well the wind generation thing. 
Well I don’t think you say 100 kilowatts when . . . 100 per cent 
in terms of energy on some of the efficiencies of some of the 
wind turbines. It’s actually 60 per cent. So he’s blaming us if 
the wind doesn’t blow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I look across the way and we can’t even get a meaningful 
debate, Mr. Speaker, on the Speech from the Throne. What you 
have is a bunch of innuendo. You have a paste-it and post-it 
opposition. You have a response of a tersely worded letter in 
case we don’t get equalization. You’ve got this logic over there, 
Mr. Speaker, that defies logic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out, and I would point out if we can’t have a 
meaningful debate, you don’t have a plan. We don’t know 
whether you’re cranky Conservatives or whiny Reformers or 
confused Liberals over there. Imagine how the people of 
Saskatchewan feel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Imagine how they feel, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would point out, I would point out that they sit across the 
way, and they make up every story that they can find. They 
twist the facts, and they never ever let facts get in the way of a 
good story — never, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I stand here again today across the way from this 
government that is doing the best that they can given the 
resources and the start that we had when they left office. All 
you have over there again are cranky Conservatives, whiny 
Reformers, and confused Liberals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what’s going to happen is there’s going to be a shift. There’s 
going to be a shift in the people’s opinion about the Sask Party. 
And I predict that the Leader of the Opposition is going to lose 
it, Mr. Speaker, because you can’t hold that band together. He’s 
going to lose it. 
 
And at the end of the day, the people of Saskatchewan are going 
to look at a steadfast government that despite all the challenges 
that we have to face are making good progress. Not as much as 
we would like, but we’re a stable, common-sense government 
that’s trying to meet all of Saskatchewan’s needs. And there is 
good success and history to prove that. And this Speech from 
the Throne is going to build on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I challenge those guys across the way. Last session, Mr. 
Speaker, they had a list of 100 ideas. And they said, oh that’s a 
list no. 69; that’s a list no. 113 — whatever the list is. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they kept on adding and adding and adding. And what 
I’ll say on behalf of the northern people is, we’re not going to 
try outbid you on your silly list. Half the things that are on your 
list this government has accomplished already. The other half 
are on their way. So when you come along and provide a silly 
list like that in terms of trying to play politics with it, much of 
the work this government has undertaken already. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I look at the North. I look at the North, Mr. 
Speaker, in general. And I would say this. I would say this is 
that whether it’s cellphone coverage by a provincially owned 
utility, or whether it’s the Northern Development Agreement, or 
whether it’s $36 million in water and sewer, or whether it’s the 
band and mines cleanup, or whether it’s re-emphasizing Buffalo 
Narrows as a government centre, or whether it’s talking about 
the Fort McMurray road — this government has delivered in 
spades when it comes to northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why when you look at the Speech from the Throne, 
it adds to it. It adds to it. And the whole theme, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the whole theme of no one left behind, no one left 
behind, this government, this Premier, and certainly the Speech 
from the Throne reflects that no one is left behind, including 
northerners, the children of northern Saskatchewan. Not the 
single parents are left behind. Not the struggling farm families 
are left behind. Not the business community is left behind, Mr. 
Speaker. Nobody is left behind in this Speech from the Throne. 
 
And as a northern representative I sit here and sincerely tell 
people of the North that we are included. Our dreams and our 
ideals are part of the solution here. And this government is 
certainly responding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would point out again as I look across the way there is no 
question in my mind, there is no question in my mind that the 
confused Conservatives across the way or the cranky Reformers 
or the disaffected Liberals, they don’t have a plan, Ms. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This Speech from the Throne lays out what exactly we have 
done and what we’re about to do to make Saskatchewan one of 
the most exciting places to live, and one of the best places to 
live, right across this whole world, Ms. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would point out as well, Ms. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s 
important that as I look at some of the announcements attached 
to the Speech from the Throne, and it talks about the safe 
neighbourhoods Act, Ms. Deputy Speaker. And I would point 
out that the safe neighbourhoods Act is something that a lot of 
northern communities want. And this Act is really an Act where 
we begin to shut down some of the drug-dealing houses in 
northern Saskatchewan, and the province as a whole, for up to 
90 days once evidence has been confirmed there’s been some 
illegal activities happening in that particular house. And many 
northern communities have taken advantage of that, Ms. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Secondly, we also talk about the seniors’ gold card in the 
Speech from the Throne. And that talks about a health focus in 
recognizing seniors do have some specific challenges. 
 
Another part of the Speech from the Throne was the important 
agroforestry development. Now many people in the Assembly 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

will say, well what does agroforestry have to do with the North? 
Well what agroforestry is, where we’re talking about 10 per 
cent of the lands in the agricultural area would be used for 
agroforestry over the next 20 years, what that means to me, Ms. 
Deputy Speaker, is the fact that there’s less pressure on the 
northern forestry if we’re getting farmers to actually grow trees 
to meet some of the needs for some of the mills and some of the 
sawmills throughout the province. So the agroforestry 
development file is pretty darn important for us in the North, 
knowing that there will be less pressure on our forestry in terms 
of meeting the need for trees in general to feed some of our mill 
industries in the province. 
 
The other thing I think that was also very important is the wind 
power announcement. And it pointed out — the wind power 
announcement — we can certainly increase the value of wind 
power which can heat 73,000 homes or light 73,000 homes. 
And I think that’s important as well for the North because they 
really are concerned about the environment in general. 
 
So I think it’s important that people know that the agroforestry 
announcement within the Speech from the Throne is really 
important for the North. The wind power announcement is also 
really important for the North because all that talks about a safe 
and sustainable economy And that’s something this government 
and this Speech from the Throne re-emphasizes to the North. 
 
I think it’s important to also point out, Deputy Speaker, the fact 
that, in terms of some of the initiatives in conservation as 
indicated by a number of my colleagues, some of the value of 
our conservation methods, and some of the ideas that we have 
in our package of conservation, that has some significant 
benefits to the North as well. 
 
So I would point out the safe neighbourhoods Act, the health 
focus, the seniors’ goal card, the agroforestry development, the 
wind power, the Children First themes, the conservation 
initiatives — all those wonderful things in the Throne Speech 
— is something that the North is saying, right on; that’s 
something that we need and something that we want to certainly 
support in terms of being a northern representative. So I think 
it’s important, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we stand here — as 
an MLA for Athabasca — saying that we are in proud support 
of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important that we 
point out one of the biggest and most significant parts of the 
Speech from the Throne was the reference made to the northern 
roads infrastructure strategy, where the Speech from the Throne 
talks about the challenges of northern roads. And I would point 
out to the people of the North, when the Premier travelled 
northern Saskatchewan, he travelled in my riding. He travelled 
into the member from Cumberland’s riding. 
 
And one of the reoccurring themes was the whole issue of 
roads. Whether it was in Canoe Lake with the Canoe Lake First 
Nations, or whether it was with the Buffalo River which is 
Dillon Buffalo River First Nations, or whether it’s with the 
English River First Nations which is of course Patuanak, or 
whether it’s the Far North, or whether it’s Deschambault Lake, 
or whether it’s Cumberland House, many of the leaders 
expressed their concern about northern roads. 
 

And the three issues that were raised was Fort McMurray road 
— pretty darn important. The Far North road is pretty darn 
important. The community access roads is pretty darn 
important. And all those messages, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
was delivered to the Premier with respect. And northerners 
certainly held the Premier in high regard. And they had a lot of 
hopes pinned on the Premier’s visit, and they treated the 
Premier with great respect. But they were also very pointed 
with the Premier in terms of what challenges the North has. 
And certainly highways was one of the issues that was raised. 
 
And I will point out, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the fact of the 
matter is that because the Premier went out there and this road 
issue is announced in the Throne Speech, I am much more 
excited. I am confident. And I think it’s very, very significant in 
terms of this government’s seriousness of dealing with northern 
road strategies. And again I would point out, I would point out, 
I would point out that this was a direct result of some of the 
Premier’s tour to the North and some of our continual lobbying 
by both MLAs from both constituencies in trying to make a big 
difference when it comes to the issues of highways in the North. 
 
Now I looked at the confused Conservatives across the way or 
the cranky Reformers — I’m not sure what I want to call them 
— and their leader came out to our area. Well he had a one 
night visit. And he stopped in Beauval and he stopped in 
Buffalo and that was it. He headed out again. 
 
He didn’t stop and see Ile-a-la-Crosse. He didn’t stop to visit La 
Loche, the largest community in our riding. Didn’t stop to visit 
La Loche — didn’t think La Loche was very important. He 
didn’t stop at English River. Didn’t stop at Turner Lake. Didn’t 
stop at Michel Village. Didn’t stop at any of the smaller 
settlements that dot the whole west side. Didn’t seem to care 
about those communities. 
 
And when the leader is out there in our area, he went and 
visited seven or eight locations in Buffalo Narrows. And the 
response was probably just polite, polite response — hi, how 
are you, and we’ll see you later. And then he goes back and 
says, oh my goodness, everything’s wrong. These guys aren’t 
doing anything right — blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And you 
know what, Madam Deputy Speaker? Not one solution 
delivered to his one-night visit to the Northwest. Not one 
solution. 
 
So I point out to the people of the North . . . You know, again 
that’s one of the reasons why I don’t trust and I don’t believe 
the people of the North trust the Conservatives across the way. 
They simply do not trust them. They have a track record with 
the North and they have had no assurance from the 
Conservative Party across the way. And you can call yourselves 
anything you want, but the people of the North know that you 
are Conservatives. And you can change your name, change your 
leader like you change your suits every day, but that ain’t going 
to have the net effect that you want in terms of confusing the 
North. The North knows exactly who you are and they do not 
trust you one bit. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would point out that challenge 
in terms of trusting the opposition as to who they are, what they 
would do, and what they stand for, because that never comes 
out, never comes out clear. It is now starting to grow in 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

southern Saskatchewan. And we are seeing a swinging of the 
support coming back to the NDP, coming back to the 
government in general, because we have been able to support 
what I think is a common-sense move here in terms of 
continuing to build on the success that we’ve had over the past 
number of years. 
 
And I think it’s important to also recognize a number of other 
people that have been working very hard in our region to bring 
forth that particular message. And I would point out that it is the 
constituents of Athabasca that constantly call us and give us a 
play-by-play as to what these guys are saying and what these 
guys across the way are doing to try and confuse people. 
 
[12:15] 
 
So I’d point out in the Speech from the Throne it talks about a 
number of issues that are near and dear to the people of 
Athabasca’s heart. And again I go all the way from things like 
the Fort McMurray road to the Primrose bombing range to the 
forestry plans to the abandoned mines cleanup — all those are 
wonderful things that are on their way. 
 
And now we are adding more through this Throne Speech such 
as the safe neighbourhoods Act, agroforestry, wind power, 
Children First, housing initiatives, and the northern road 
strategies. All these are very, very exciting. 
 
And you know across the way I look at the opposition and they 
are determined, determined to spread doom and gloom and fear. 
They are selling fear. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, on this side 
along with many northerners and southerners, we are selling 
hope. Hope that we can build a stronger and better 
Saskatchewan through good planning, through being fiscally 
prepared, and certainly being innovative in our approaches. And 
all the way, and through all this that we’re trying to rebuild, all 
we hear is nattering and whining and crying from the other side. 
Nothing seems to be good for them. And every time we have 
good news, every time we have good news, it just seems to 
depress the opposition. And you know when you have good 
news in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan, everybody else is 
happy. The only ones that aren’t happy are the Conservative 
Party across the way. 
 
I would point out that, while I have been fairly significant in 
terms of my attack on the opposition, I think it’s important that 
we also, we emphasize what we have done and what we are 
prepared to do. And that’s why I think it’s important that I 
re-emphasize that I stand in proud support of the Speech from 
the Throne as a member for Athabasca. 
 
And I would also want to take a few minutes to reflect on what 
I think is very important, a very important time and a very good 
opportunity to talk about what we’re going to celebrate in terms 
of the week that has passed and certainly tomorrow. And that of 
course is the Veterans’ Day. 
 
And in the Assembly today we had a number of guests that 
were from the Aboriginal community. And I recognize my 
uncle, John Pedersen, who served in the Korean war and he’s a 
Saskatchewan Métis vet. And I also recognize Mr. Fosseneuve 
who is from Cumberland House, and Mr. Aubichon who is 
from Green Lake originally. And both Mr. Aubichon and Mr. 

Fosseneuve and Mr. Pedersen were in the Assembly today and I 
know they appreciate the fact that there is a lot of people 
working to right some of the wrongs when it came to 
Aboriginal vets, whether it’s First Nations or Métis. But they’re 
also very proud of their country. We find many Aboriginal 
veterans that are very, very proud of their country and they’re 
very proud of their service. 
 
And the most important thing that we need to point out is that 
we must be constant and vigilant in terms of thanking those 
veterans and pointing out to them that we can name rivers and 
parks and lakes and buildings and monuments, we can build all 
these tributes to them, but what I think is the most important 
thing to point out to them — and I want to say this in this 
Assembly — is that we are very thankful. We are very thankful 
for your support. We are very thankful for your sacrifice and we 
are very appreciative of some of the efforts that you’ve made to 
provide us with a free country. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, while I’m on my feet in terms of 
recognizing some of the veterans, I want to point out some of 
them have passed. Every year in Ile-a-la-Crosse we have a 
march, we have a ceremony, and we have a supper honouring 
the veterans. And some of the people that have passed are 
people like F.X. Burnouf, Vital Morin, Alphonse Kenny, 
Prosper LaRiviere, Magloire Laliberte, and many others. Those 
are just to name a few. They have since passed on. 
 
And one of the veterans that I have had the pleasure of joining 
on numerous occasions on Veterans’ Day was my father, Leo 
Belanger. And Leo passed away three years ago this January. 
And he was a veteran that was involved with the tanker corps 
and he was wounded overseas. And we actually had . . . the 
family actually had the opportunity to send my father back to 
Germany. 
 
And he was back in Germany visiting my younger brother who 
was also in the army and he took him to the beach that they 
landed. And he let my father walk down the beach on his own. 
And of course he took pictures of my father from a distance and 
what would I give to hear what was going through my dad’s 
mind as he walked down the beach that he landed on many, 
many years as a young man. 
 
And when he got back to Canada, of course I asked him a 
question. The beach that you landed on, did the landscape 
change at all. And he said I don’t know. I wasn’t on a 
sightseeing tour the first time. I was busy trying to head for 
cover so I couldn’t give you an answer to that one is what he 
told me. 
 
But it’s important to know that I’ve had two older brothers and 
an older sister and a younger brother that joined the Armed 
Forces and one is still active and is still serving. That’s my 
younger brother, John. He’s going to be in Ile-a-la-Crosse 
tomorrow, as well as my older brother, Wally. Wally retired as 
a warrant officer a couple years ago. And my younger brother is 
still very active in the army. He’s also a warrant officer. 
 
And between my two older brothers . . . One actually didn’t 
make the army. He tried for the army but couldn’t make it in 
because of some flat feet or something — couldn’t march. But 
my two older brothers and my father and my younger brother 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

and my older sister being all part of the Armed Forces, my dad 
looked at me one day and said, you’re the only hippy I have in 
the family. But I’ll point out I wasn’t a hippy. I was a good guy 
too. And I had really debated whether it . . . I really thought of 
joining the Armed Forces, but I wouldn’t have this much fun 
poking the Conservatives as I do today if I had done that. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I also want to recognize that we’ve 
lost many veterans overseas, and they were young. We’ve lost 
many veterans since. 
 
And I want to recognize some of the ones that are still alive and 
with us, people like Gilbert McCallum in Ile-a-la-Crosse. Mr. 
McCallum has been attending these functions for years and 
years. And his nickname is Mr. Sarge and that’s what everyone 
calls him — him and his wife — Mr. and Mrs. Sarge. And 
Gilbert has joined people like Vital and Leo and many others at 
many of the ceremonies over the years that I was a witness to. 
And they had such a wonderful time celebrating peace but 
recognizing that they certainly contributed to the whole effort of 
trying to keep Canada and the world as democratic as possible. 
 
I also want to recognize Peter “Chummy” Raymond. Peter 
Raymond served in the Korean War as Mr. Pedersen did. And 
he also has stories of many of his travels overseas. And he’s 
probably one of the most well-travelled vets that I’ve met over 
the years. He’s been all over the world. And Peter is still with 
us. And he is certainly very, very active with the marches and 
paying respects to his fallen comrades and the ones that have 
fell since, and certainly paying tribute to those that are still with 
us. 
 
People like Louis Roy, outside of . . . from Beauval, who has 
worked very, very diligently over the years to build his family 
up and certainly to keep the respect alive for the veterans. And 
Mr. Roy of course is still very active with celebrating Veterans 
Day and is still relatively very healthy. And he needs to be 
recognized in terms of his contribution. 
 
I also want to point out that an old friend of mine from Buffalo 
Narrows who has since moved to La Ronge, Mr. Chartier — 
Thomas Chartier — Tom has also served in Germany and also 
served in England. 
 
And if you can imagine, Madam Deputy Speaker, over the 
years you look at some of these young guys like Mr. Chartier 
travelling overseas, leaving their home, the comforts of their 
home — and in those days Buffalo Narrows was a long ways 
away from Regina given today’s mode of transportation 
available to us — and leaving the comforts of their home and 
going overseas to a strange land to fight for democracy and for 
freedom. 
 
And there is some very good stories here today about some of 
the challenges that people had. And I know if Gilbert 
McCallum is listening or Peter “Chummy” Raymond is 
listening — which I’m not sure they are — or Louis Roy or 
Thomas Chartier, it’s important that people out there know that 
these veterans are still with us, that they’re still in our 
communities, and we still have to come up to them and thank 
them. 
 
So I want to in a very public forum and very publicly thank 

these folks that are still with us and to also give them a message 
that while we say thanks to you and we’re grateful to be able to 
say thanks to you in person, when and if — and perhaps I may 
go ahead of them — but when and if they go ahead of us, I want 
you to pass the word to some of your other fallen comrades and 
to some of the many other people that have left us in war or just 
of old age, that we recognize them. We remember them and we 
thank them as well. I think that message is very important to 
deliver. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important that we point 
out, today we have a democratic society. We can joust with the 
people across the way on which is the better government. And 
of course in my view and many peoples in the North’s view, 
this is the better government by far. 
 
And secondly that we must realize that the democracy that we 
enjoy today was afforded to us by the veterans that fought for 
freedom. And many of those veterans, like I mentioned, are our 
fathers, our grandfathers, our uncles, aunts, sisters, and 
brothers. And some are buried overseas and some have been 
buried since, but many remain. And it’s important to show that 
respect and admiration to people like Thomas, people like 
Louis, to people like Peter and Gilbert. And to say thank you, 
thank you, thank you, and thank you. 
 
In closing I think it’s important that people recognize that 
Saskatchewan is a great, great province to live. And I spoke 
briefly about some of my brothers that served in the army. And 
one of the points my older brother raised was that he was part of 
the relief plan to deliver food and supplies to Africa when the 
famine was on, and some of the challenges that he’s seen with 
many of the people that were starving and some of the 
challenges that he’s seen with children and people in general, 
that I’m sure it had a dramatic effect on his mind. 
 
And my younger brother, who is two years younger than I am, 
also done a couple of tours in Bosnia. And his idea that when he 
came to Canada and seen what we had and all the complaining 
that we do sometimes, as he says, you should see some of the 
kids playing out in bombed-out areas with a tire and a board, 
and that was their entertainment when there wasn’t any kind of 
war going on. 
 
And that sometimes I think we need to learn that this freedom 
that we have and the democracy that we enjoy, that we bloody 
well better respect that because a lot of people paid a huge 
price, a huge price for us to enjoy that. And I think that message 
goes from all the young people that are serving today to the 
veterans that are buried overseas and the veterans that are still 
with us and the veterans that we have buried since. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in closing I want to point out — and 
it’s important that the tone of the Throne Speech be emphasized 
again — that no one is left behind. And I believe that from the 
northern perspective that many people believe no one should be 
left behind as there is no time for racism. There is no time for 
self-doubt. There is no time for self-pity. As all there is time for 
is to challenge life in every arena that it has to offer whether it 
is in sport, business, politics, spirituality, or the arts. 
 
However the greatest challenge that we all face is the arena of 
family. We all need to protect and to afford our children a sense 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

of peace, a sense of purpose, a sense of progress, a sense of 
gratitude, and above all else a sense of humanity. 
 
And I think the Throne Speech and this government’s direction 
in general certainly complements what I believe was many of 
the lessons that my father taught me, as a veteran, that we need 
to make those two ideas meld together to build that great 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s no question in my mind. I 
stand in proud and full support of the Throne Speech. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Speaker, I thank you for the 
opportunity to respond to the Speech from the Throne. I would 
first like to take this opportunity as well, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to congratulate you on your acclamation as Deputy 
Speaker. I look forward to working with you in the upcoming 
months and years. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we are now approximately halfway 
through what is ordinarily a four-year term, and I’d like to 
thank some of the people who have been very important to me 
during the last year or two. 
 
I want to thank in particular my wife, Sandy, who has had the 
double misfortune of being married to me at the same time as 
being the secretary for the member for Saskatoon Meewasin 
who has now become the Minister of Justice. A double 
misfortune in her life that’s been rectified by both of us being 
elected and both of us being in Regina. And I’m sure her life is 
somewhat more sane and pleasant with both of us being gone. 
 
It’s also appropriate, Madam Speaker, to recognize my 
constituency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett, who not only works 
extremely hard but she has dealt with many constituents in my 
absence and has won their respect and admiration. And I 
thoroughly enjoy working with her and regard her as an 
invaluable part of my role as a member of the legislature. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, during this last year, we had many 
centennial celebrations. And I had the opportunity to travel 
throughout the province and participate in several of those on 
behalf of fellow colleagues from this side of the House, as well 
as some that I just chose to attend that were in or near my area. 
And they were a pleasure to go to and it was a pleasure to see 
part of the Saskatchewan attitude and part of Saskatchewan 
history being relived and being celebrated. 
 
The depressing part of the entire celebration in all of the small 
towns was the fact that almost all of the vehicles that had come 
to those celebrations had Alberta plates. And it was people that 
had left the province and had come back home for what, for 
many of those small towns, may well be their last hurrah. 
 
I attended the one in Ruthilda. Ruthilda is a very small town 

past Biggar. The paved road goes up to but not past that town, 
so it literally is at the end of the paved road. They had a 
celebration that I would anticipate had between 8 or 900 people. 
They decorated the front of all of the buildings that . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Estimate. I’m sorry. 
 
They had done up the fronts of all the buildings. They’d 
repainted all of the storefronts — many of them had been closed 
for decades — and put plaques and markers on them indicating 
who had lived there, what kind of businesses had been there. 
And it was interesting to see people of many generations going 
through, looking at that. 
 
They had a ball tournament and a large supper. They had to set 
up tents and portable accommodation facilities. And I was 
proud and pleased to be part of that. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I listened to the Throne Speech with 
hope and anticipation that unfortunately quickly turned to 
disappointment. It was unfortunately a very sad collection of 
hollow NDP announcements, pronouncements, and 
re-announcements. A sad collection of promises and 
commitments made months and years earlier with no 
follow-through. It was unfortunately a sad collection of NDP 
hot air. Perhaps the best you can say about it is it might be a 
source of wind generation for electricity in the future because it 
served no . . . little other useless purpose for anything else. 
 
I did notice, Madam Deputy Speaker, some borrowed ideas. I 
was surprised that there was a reference to no person left 
behind. And I’m wondering whether that was something that 
they borrowed from President George Bush’s No Child Left 
Behind program. And I thought, well they’re looking far afield 
for ideas. So it was interesting and strange, and I’m wondering 
what other ideas they might borrow from that same US[United 
States] president about the economy or about health care. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they also borrowed the notion of an 
Asia Pacific office, something from no one other than former 
Premier Grant Devine. And I thought, strange, but then I went 
on and listened. They also borrowed the idea of a seniors’ gold 
card from the same person, Grant Devine, who introduced a 
health card with a magnetic strip with information on it in the 
1980s. So I’m wondering what kind of benefits there’s going to 
be on that gold card. Perhaps maybe a complimentary NDP 
membership. I’m wondering what they’re going to do with that 
gold card. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some things that I’m going to 
be watching for with some significant degree of interest. There 
was a commitment made in the Speech from the Throne for 
pre-kindergarten and early childhood intervention. We have 
heard this government make promises in that area many times 
before. Let’s hope that this time they do something different 
and they have some follow-through and make a real 
commitment. 
 
It’s long been known that early intervention is of great benefit 
to parents with children with disability, and in particular autistic 
children. We know that autistic child programming have been 
greatly lacking in this province and autistic children are hugely 
problematic for their parents. We know that early intervention, 
early treatment, and assistance for those children can often turn 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

them into valuable members of society that will make a great 
contribution. 
 
I have constituents, Madam Speaker, who are leaving the 
province because they’re seeking better programs and better 
benefits to deal with their autistic children. We know that 
spending money on our youngest citizens who are most in need 
is not merely spending money, but it is actually an investment 
in our future and in the next generation. It is an investment that 
we cannot afford not to make. Let’s hope that this promise is 
one of the very few that will actually be acted upon. 
 
I was also pleased to see, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
Highway 2 is being renamed in honour of the veterans. I hope, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that this highway is well maintained 
and is not an embarrassment to our veterans after whom the 
highway is going to be named. 
 
I hope that all highways in this province will be well maintained 
and safe. They aren’t now and they should be. It has become a 
joke that we hold contests for the worst highways and the worst 
potholes. We now have a new Highways minister that probably 
could win a joke contest for being the worst Highways minister 
and perhaps the worst minister that this government has ever 
seen. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have more announcements about 
immigration. The record of the government on immigration is 
one of the very worst in Canada — not just worse than Alberta, 
not just worse than BC [British Columbia] or Ontario, but 
worse than Manitoba and worse than most of the Maritime 
provinces. Between 2000 and 2002, just over 5,000 people 
immigrated into Saskatchewan. During that same period of 
time, Madam Deputy Speaker, 14,000 people came to 
Manitoba; 45,000 to Alberta. 
 
With the resources that this province have we should be double 
or triple the numbers that Manitoba has. Instead we have 
roughly a third of their number. We should be embarrassed. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I thought as well that this government 
would make a commitment to creating jobs and promoting First 
Nations. It’s one thing to welcome new Canadians to come into 
this province, but we should focus on those that are already here 
and try and create jobs, employment, and educational 
opportunities for them. That did not happen, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I thought, Madam Deputy Speaker, as well that we might reach 
out to First Nations during this Speech from the Throne and try 
and include a provision in our upcoming legislative session 
where we would mandate the treaties and treaty rights would be 
part of the curriculum in our K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
education. I did not see that in there. It would be a positive idea. 
And I’m wondering if the reason that that didn’t happen, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is because that was one of the ideas 
that was put forward earlier by the Saskatchewan Party and they 
didn’t want to admit that they were taking advantage of even 
more of the Saskatchewan Party’s platform and agenda. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I was pleased to see a commitment to 
deal with missing children and women. Unfortunately this 
appears to be mere huff and puff as was noted in question 

period. They go ahead, make an announcement like this with no 
consultation with Child Find, an agency that has led the charge 
for missing children for 21 years. No public funding has gone 
into this program, no consultation with Aboriginal, no 
consultation with First Nations. We know that there is a 
disproportionately high number of Aboriginal women have 
gone missing in the last years, and we have no idea what this 
government is going to do or how they intend to deal with it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are 2,000 children that have been 
missing in this province that have not yet been located, and we 
have a government that is not willing to phone or consult with 
Child Find to see what resources they might need. I might give 
the Premier some free advice and suggest to him rather than try 
and recreate something on his own, he might want to just offer 
some funding to an agency that’s already there, already doing a 
good job, and has already demonstrated a fairly significant level 
of competence and capability. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a government that’s known for 
window dressing, announcements, pronouncements. It has no 
plan, no vision, and no agenda. What I would recommend, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is that this Premier should sit down, 
read some existing reports, talk to some of the people who are 
already doing things that are productive, listen to those people 
and take their advice, and do it, and commit some resources, not 
just stand here and stand in front of the cameras and media 
looking for photo ops that are not going to produce anything 
positive. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what is missing from this speech is an 
entire lack of and little or no comment on an economic vision, a 
plan for growth, a plan for education, and a plan to retain young 
people in this province. What we have over on the other side, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is ministers that say, well if they 
leave, there’s more left for the rest of us. 
 
I know the members on this side have repeated that and 
repeated that often. But Madam Deputy Speaker, I cannot think 
of anything more telling about a government than a government 
that has a minister that will make a statement like that. And they 
will leave the minister in the same place in the House so that 
they can repeat statements like that. It is clearly an indication of 
a government that has completely lost touch with the people 
that it was elected to represent. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a government that has during its 
tenure lost 6,200 jobs. This is at a time when our resources have 
incredibly high global demand. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
government that does not understand the necessity of job 
creation or growing our tax base or growing our population 
base. 
 
I grew up in Saskatoon. I grew up in Saskatchewan. I love this 
province, but I hate what this NDP government is doing to the 
economy. They have an unfortunate attitude. If you can’t own 
it, compete with it. Cripple it. Kill it. Do anything to put the 
private sector out of business. They have put a chill on the 
business environment in this province that is going to last 
through the rest of our lives. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as angry as this economy makes us, I 
have to express some significant concerns as well with what 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

this government is doing in the Department of Justice. We have 
a Minister of Justice who is incapable of leading and unwilling 
to take advice from anyone outside the bureaucracy. 
 
At least I can give him credit for reading some of the 
Saskatchewan Party policy books. During the last session he 
introduced a Bill requiring mandatory blood testing for people 
that are accused of having bit or spit upon a health care worker 
or police officer. Madam Speaker, that is something that was 
taken right from the policy paper of the Saskatchewan Party at 
its last convention. And I commend the minister for having read 
it and for having acted on it. 
 
One thing that we had intended to do as a Saskatchewan Party, 
as an opposition party, was introduce the Bill. The government 
learned we were going to introduce the Bill. They had read our 
policy paper and quickly introduced a Bill on their own. And 
frankly, Madam Speaker, we were pleased that they chose to do 
that. And we indicated immediately to the government that we 
would support that Bill as it went through the House. When we 
were closing at the end of the last session, much to our chagrin, 
we found that the Bill was not going to be proclaimed because 
they hadn’t got around to drafting regulations. 
 
During the course of the summer and the fall, the government 
learned that we were talking to police officers that were going 
through testing for HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and a 
variety of other diseases. The officers were troubled. They were 
concerned that their health was put at risk. They didn’t know 
whether people were going to voluntarily provide samples for 
testing. As soon as they learned we were talking about these 
people, they were concerned about the publicity. 
 
What did they do? Quickly ran out, drafted some regulations, 
and brought the Bill into force. Well once again, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I commend them for having taken some 
initiative and for following what was going to happen in any 
event. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if that’s what it takes to govern from 
this side of the House, we’re going to do it because we’re going 
to stick up for police officers and health care workers. Even if 
the government doesn’t want to and is unwilling to, we have 
every intention of doing it from this side of the House. 
 
Then, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s the case of Rick Watson, 
a Regina police officer who was subject to disciplinary action. 
The Saskatchewan Police Commission for many years drags its 
heels and waits until Rick Watson retires. Rick Watson wants to 
have the opportunity to clear his name. The whole process took 
so long; it lasted longer than the remaining portion of his career. 
 
He has no alternative, Madam Deputy Speaker, but to go the 
Court of Queen’s Bench. He applies for, and the Court of 
Queen’s Bench gives him, the only thing that they can give him. 
They quashed the whole proceeding, declare it a nullity, throw 
it out; and it’s finished. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the public has not been served by this 
process. The Regina Police Service has not been served. Rick 
Watson has not been served, and there was a cloud over that 
officer’s career. There’s a cloud over the Regina Police Service 
that will never be cleared as a result of the bungling by the 

Saskatchewan Police Commission and by this government. 
 
[12:45] 
 
The government is now embarrassed, and what we’re hoping to 
see is some significant amendments to that legislation. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if this government does not introduce 
some amendments to that, we have every intention of 
introducing amendments to The Police Act to ensure that police 
officers have a timely, appropriate, and fair system of discipline 
so that they can deal with it. And I hope that they come out with 
something original, that they find somebody other than 
plagiarizing, as they’ve done in the past. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government introduced a number 
of pieces of legislation in the past session, and I’d like to 
comment on some of the Bills. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is always the intention of the 
Saskatchewan Party to support any Bill that is going to work to 
reduce crime and to give police officers another tool in their 
ability to fight crime. 
 
Two of the Bills that were introduced and passed in the last 
session were The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act and The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Act. Although these Bills were 
strange, we thought . . . they’re actually strange enough we 
actually thought maybe the NDP drafted them themselves. They 
serve laudable purposes, both of them, seizing criminal property 
and stopping criminal business. And as odd as they are, we’re 
going to support them and will continue to support them for the 
reasons I mentioned — that we want to give our police officers 
every possible tool to fight crime. We found out that they were 
Bills that they had borrowed from Manitoba. 
 
The bizarre thing about these Bills, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 
that they allowed the police chiefs to bring applications to Court 
of Queen’s Bench to seize property or shut down a business. 
But, Madam Speaker, my question is: why a police chief? 
Throughout the Commonwealth, prosecutions are brought in the 
name of the Queen. Civil actions are brought by the Attorney 
General. Nothing against our police chiefs . . . we’ve got some 
of the finest in Canada, but where is the Minister of Justice? 
Once again hiding on the sidelines so that if something goes 
awry with one of those applications, he can say, oh well that’s 
the police of chief’s application; that’s something else. 
 
Where is the responsibility on the Minister of Justice? The 
Minister of Justice in this province is the highest ranking justice 
official. The buck should stop at his desk. But no, what does he 
do? He introduces and passes a piece of legislation that will 
have the effect of passing this power and this authority to 
somebody else. 
 
And what we will have, Madam Deputy Speaker, is another 
situation, the same as we had with Jack Hillson, a former 
member of this Legislative Assembly. A former member who 
served the Assembly well, and after his term was up, tries to go 
back into his previous employment with the government, tries 
to go back to the Legal Aid Commission, finds out that he is 
being summarily terminated. And we asked the Justice minister 
in this House, what are you going to do to help Jack Hillson? 
What are you going to do to protect his job? What are you 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

going to do to enforce the law? What are you going to do to 
respect workers that are in this province? And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, what did the minister do? Oh it’s an independent 
entity, and I don’t want to interfere with how they work. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I can find nothing more 
offensive than when the most senior Justice official in this 
province has the nerve to stand up here and say, I don’t care 
who else breaks the law. They’re independent. I’m not going to 
be responsible. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s high time that this 
government was accountable for some of the things that they’re 
doing. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they can pass all the legislation that 
they want to fight crime. And if it is even marginally beneficial, 
the opposition is going to support it. But, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, talk is cheap. So is plagiarizing from Manitoba. It’s 
time, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this government chose to 
put its money where its mouth is. If they want to fight crime, 
put in some resources, put in some dollars, and do it. You can 
do the legislation as well as providing funding, but you can’t do 
it instead of. 
 
In 1999 the NDP promised 200 police officers. By their 
numbers and two elections later, this promise is broken. It’s a 
myth. And it’s a myth, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s busted. 
They never intended to fulfill it. They might as well, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, promised to pave the streets of this province 
with gold. It had about as much credibility and as much reality 
as what they’ve had done with that promise. 
 
By their numbers, they’re about 30 or 40 or 50 less. By the 
Federation of Police Officers, Madam Deputy Speaker, they 
haven’t fulfilled half the commitment. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
this was a promise for 200 officers, and what have they done? 
About 90 or so. At what point does the public have a right to 
stand up and say, you cheated us. You betrayed us. You did 
wrong to us. Madam Deputy Speaker, the public was betrayed. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to read a quote from the 
member who is now the Premier: 
 

But they do expect, and they have the right . . . [of 
expectation of] honesty. They have the right to expect to 
be able to trust . . . [this] government, to be able to trust 
the men and women they elect. They have the right to 
expect that commitments . . . ought to be binding. 

 
“People, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will forgive mistakes; they may 
even forgive incompetence; but they will [never] forgive 
betrayal.” And that’s exactly what has happened, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. I cannot imagine something more offensive 
than to go through two complete election cycles, a half a dozen 
Justice ministers and leave a promise unfulfilled. They haven’t 
even had the courage to stand up and say we can’t fulfill it; 
we’re backing away from it. They flounder around as if it’s still 
something they’re still fulfilling. They should be embarrassed, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if they truly want to fight crime, 
front-line police officers are one of the most effective ways to 
reduce crime. In the city of Regina, the police chief chose to 
commit a large number of police officers to reduce theft of 

vehicles. During the time that those officers were on the street 
dealing with vehicle theft, vehicle theft statistics dropped and 
dropped substantially. 
 
They pulled those police officers off that task to deal with the 
Tamra Keepness absence. Madam Deputy Speaker, during the 
time that those officers were dealing with Tamra Keepness, as 
they should, vehicle thefts spiked again. So we know full well 
that training those police officers, putting them on the task is 
going to be one of the most beneficial things we can do. 
 
In Saskatoon a similar experience — the police chief and mayor 
in that city chose to target break and enters on property. 
They’ve made a dramatic reduction where they’ve chosen to 
target break and enters in dwellings and in businesses, and 
they’ve been very successful at that. Unfortunately the 
downside, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that violent crime and 
other crimes have shot up elsewhere. We have violent crime 
statistics in this province as being the worst in Canada. Our 
mayors and our police forces are trying, but they get absolutely 
no help from this government. 
 
I’d like to read some 2004 statistics. In 2004 Saskatchewan had 
15,159 crimes per 100,000 people. Violent crime is the highest 
in the country and double the Ontario rate. We have the 
second-highest rate of property crime. We have the highest 
homicide rate in the ten . . . [inaudible] . . . province. We have 
the highest youth crime rate — 19,185 per 100,000 young 
people. Almost 20 per cent of the young people are in trouble in 
some fashion. Violent crime is 25 per cent higher than any other 
province and nearly double the national average. We have an 
unacceptable level of youth crime and violence in this province. 
Children are recruited into youth gangs between age 11 and 13 
years old. Mr. Speaker, these people are children. 
 
We have a rapidly growing problem with crystal meth 
addiction, a drug that becomes addictive on its first usage with 
many people. What has the government done to deal with this? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have a Learning minister across 
the way that has the nerve to call crystal meth the flavour of the 
week. That has to be the stupid statement of the year. 
 
What does the Premier do? He closes the 60-bed Whitespruce 
facility, a facility that was opened by a previous government. 
And I’d like to read some of the things that the Premier said 
about Whitespruce, the only facility that would deal with this. 
And I’m going to read those in, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is 
a quote, September 8, 1987: 
 

So Mr. Speaker, clearly we do have a problem, and clearly 
this is an important program, and particularly the youth 
treatment centre at Whitespruce because we know that 
young people in Saskatchewan have had to leave the 
province. 

 
Another quote, October 5, 1987: 
 

. . . Whitespruce being the youth alcohol and drug 
treatment centre announced a year ago now . . . . 
announcement I think that welcomed by . . . I don’t know 
if there’s a person in the province . . . who didn’t welcome 
that announcement that we were to have a youth treatment 



November 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

centre right here in the province. 
 
My fundamental question . . . is: the announcement was 
made a year ago . . . 12 months ago. The centre is not yet 
open, functioning, and receiving Saskatchewan young 
people. 

 
That is the Premier — the person who is now the Premier — 
pushing to get that facility open. Another quote, October 5, 
1987 on potential for 60 beds at Whitespruce. 
 

Mr. Minister, I don’t think there’s any question that 60 
spaces can be utilized . . . in our province. 

 
June 6, 1988: 
 

There are few things that this government has done that I 
would congratulate them for, one of the exceptions being 
the Whitespruce treatment centre. 

 
Well now that he’s closed it, I wonder what he’s got to say 
about it now. Madam Deputy Speaker, this goes on to May 19, 
1993. We’ve got a different government in power, and he’s 
talking about SADAC, and he’s talking about Whitespruce. 
And that same member says: 
 

SADAC, Mr. Speaker, was established in 1968 for two 
fundamental . . . . One was to focus public attention on the 
need to develop adequate addiction treatment . . . we 
believe that . . . these goals have been achieved. 
 

Well I have some sad news for that member. Those goals have 
not been achieved. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a minister and this is a Premier 
that has done nothing to deal with drug addiction, apart from 
creating another cabinet minister and project hype, project nope 
— whatever you want to call it. They haven’t created a facility. 
They haven’t developed a plan. They’ve developed blueprints 
for their airport, but they’ve done nothing — they haven’t even 
done so much as done anything by way of education, public 
knowledge, anything else. 
 
Meanwhile these children are still on the streets of Riversdale 
and still on the streets of Saskatoon and on the streets of 
Regina. The best estimates are that there are 2,000 truant 
children in the streets of Saskatoon that are not enrolled in a 
school, that are on the streets. They are out there committing 
crimes, getting involved with drugs and this government is 
doing nothing. 
 
We made an announcement in Riversdale that we were going to 
set up a task force to look at crime. The member from Nutana 
has got the incredible nerve to stand up and say, you’re playing 
politics there is no problem. I can’t imagine anything more 
outrageous than for her to stand up and say there is no problem. 
The member from Nutana denies there’s a problem. Well a few 
days later the Justice minister gets up and at least he know what 
the statistics are, and he says they are at least willing to look at 
the problem. Thankfully somebody at least knows what the 
statistics are. The ultimate embarrassment is that this problem, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is in the Premier’s constituency. It is 
in his own very backyard and he wants to accuse us of playing 

politics. Why doesn’t he look after his own backyard? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a caring, 
concerned candidate in Fred Ozirney. Fred Ozirney may very 
well be the next MLA from Riversdale. The good citizens from 
Riversdale have a history of turning out NDP members that 
have not served them very well, and it may well happen to that 
Premier. 
 
People in Riversdale live in fear. They can’t go out for an 
evening stroll. Their homes aren’t safe from break-ins, and 
worse yet they’ve got violent home invasions increasing 
rapidly. Mr. Speaker, the Premier in his own constituency has 
failed and failed miserably to make people safe. 
 
And worse yet and more tragically, he has failed these young 
people. He has failed to supply social supports. He has failed to 
supply family supports. He has failed to supply the necessary 
educational supports. He hasn’t supplied long-term facilities to 
deal with drug treatment. He has failed these children. He has 
failed these lost and troubled souls, and he’s done it in a 
miserable, tragic manner. Shame on him, shame on his cabinet, 
shame on his entire caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I move to adjourn debate, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety, the member from Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, it’s my pleasure to enter into the Throne 
Speech debate, and I do it being mindful of the time. I want to, 
Madam Speaker, first of all express appreciation to my 
constituents of Saskatoon Greystone for the support that they 
have given to me sending me to this Assembly now, Mr. 
Speaker, for four terms. And I want to express appreciation to 
my family for the support that they have given me in this work. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, seeing that it is almost 1:00, I would ask 
to adjourn debate, Madam Speaker, and resume on our next 
sitting day. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member moved to adjourn 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. The debate having been adjourned for the day, I move 
adjournment of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly 
do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................77 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................77 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Beatty ...........................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................78 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Honouring Canadian Veterans 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................78 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................78 
 Stories of Saskatchewan War Brides 
  Junor ............................................................................................................................................................................................79 
 Honouring Canadian Aboriginal Veterans 
  Toth ..............................................................................................................................................................................................79 
 Saskatchewan Geo-Memorial Project Book 
  McCall .........................................................................................................................................................................................79 
 Royal Canadian Legion Celebrates 80th Anniversary 
  Kirsch...........................................................................................................................................................................................80 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres Awareness Week 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................80 
MOTION 
 Remembering Saskatchewan Veterans 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................80 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................82 
  McCall .........................................................................................................................................................................................83 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................85 
 Recorded Division ..........................................................................................................................................................................87 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Closure of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................87 
  Lautermilch .................................................................................................................................................................................87 
 Funding for Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres Community-Based Organizations 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................89 
  Crofford .......................................................................................................................................................................................89 
 Consultations on Locating Missing Persons 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................90 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................90 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................90 
 New Facility at Regina Airport 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................90 
  Higgins .........................................................................................................................................................................................90 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................92 
 Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty ...........................................................................................................................................................................................92 
 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.......................................................................................................................................................................................92 
 Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................92 
 Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................93 
 Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................93 
 



 

 Bill No. 201 — The Protection of Children Abusing Drugs Act 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................93 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................93 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................93 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................93 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................99 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................103 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


