

















































Hansard: April 12, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 90A  TUESDAY, APRIL 12, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2471 
 April 12, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition today on behalf of constituents from the 
communities of Pennant, Cabri, Webb, and Success. Now the 
petition concerns the cost of SAMA [Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency]. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse charges 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA, as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too do rise today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about the devastation that 
crystal meth is bringing to their community. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine, its education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington 
and Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and to 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition are from the community 

of Eston, and I am pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise on behalf 
of constituents of mine who are concerned about the lack of 
residential support offered to people who have long-term 
disabilities in my constituency. The prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional spaces for Swift Current residents with lifelong 
disabilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the great city 
of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the Claybank Brick Plant. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider a decision to reduce funding of the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from people from Regina, 
Saskatoon; Calgary, Alberta; Toronto, Ontario; a number more 
from Alberta; Milestone, Briercrest, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I stand to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Midale and Steelman. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents who are very concerned about the 
inadequate CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 
program. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Bengough. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from concerned parents in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much 
needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Wright Crescent, Guenter 
Crescent, and Kutz Crescent, and Kenderdine Road in the 
northeast part of Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that are concerned about SaskTel cellular service 
in rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected for reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Jansen and Drake. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition opposed to reductions of the health care 
services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 72, 106, 637, 670, 715, and 720. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 95 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Rural Development: will 
the Department of Rural Development be setting up any 
offices around the province in 2005? If so, where will they 
be located and what are the lease arrangements? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have a series of questions. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 95 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: how 
many grievances were filed by SGEU employees at the 
correctional centre in Saskatoon in 2004, and how many of 
those grievances remain outstanding? 
 

I have the same question for the year 2003, Mr. Speaker, and 
2002. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 95 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: how many grievances were filed by all 
SGEU employees in 2004, and how many of those 
grievances remain outstanding? 
 

I have the same question for the year 2003 and the year 2002, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 95 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many decisions have been 
reserved by the Labour Relations Board, and the decisions 
not yet rendered for the year 2004? 
 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

And I have the same questions for the years 2003, 2002, 2001, 
2000, and the year 1999, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 95 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture and Youth: will the minister 
provide a list of all the applicants who have applied to the 
homecoming 2005 program, indicating the amount of 
funding requested by each applicant, and whether each 
grant recipient was successful or unsuccessful in their 
application? 
 

I give notice on day no. 95: 
 

To the Minister of Culture and Youth: will the minister 
provide a list of all the applicants who have applied to the 
centennial heritage commemoration program, indicating 
the amount of funding requested by each applicant, the 
nature of the project proposed by the applicant, and 
whether each grant recipient was successful or 
unsuccessful? 
 

And the last question: 
 

Will the minister provide a list of all the applicants that 
have applied to the Celebrating Community centennial 
grant program from 2003 through 2005, indicating the 
amount of funding requested by each applicant, the nature 
of each applicant’s proposed project programming event, 
and whether each grant applicant was successful or 
unsuccessful in their application? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my pleasure today to introduce to you a number of people 
who are joining us in the west gallery. They are members of the 
Canadian Information Processing Society, and are here today to 
take witness to a piece of work that they’ve spent a great deal of 
time on, and that I’m particularly pleased to be able to speak to 
later on today. 
 
I want to specifically introduce members of their board to 
members of this Assembly. And I would just ask that they rise 
as I call their name. Grant Kerr, who is the president; Daryle 
Niedermayer, who’s the vice-president; Poyee Hung is the 
treasurer; Donna Lindskog, who is a member; Bev Gooding, 
who is the registrar; Jan Ali, who is the Chair of the discipline 
committee; and Dorothy Josephson, who is the national 
Canadian Information Processing Society liaison. 
 
If I could ask members to join me in welcoming these people 
here today. They have worked very hard on a piece of 
legislation that we’ll be debating later on today in the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
today to introduce, seated in your gallery, Mr. Adrian Janssens 
of Milden. Mr. Janssens was recently in the employ of the 
Heartland Health District. He served as a communication 
director there for a year and a half. He’s come to our legislature 
today to view the proceedings, and was involved this morning 
out front as well. And I’d ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to, if you get a chance to speak to him afterwards, 
please take that opportunity and welcome him to his legislature 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, though I can’t see her, I know that my friend is 
here. And she is up in your gallery, in the far corner, a friend of 
many years who happens to be the mother of one of our Pages, 
Glenna Coleman, and her mother’s name is Jean. Jean is a 
dietitian with the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 
 
And today is a very special day for her. It’s her birthday and I 
know she’s much younger than what I am. And I’d ask 
members to please join me in welcoming her and we hope that 
you have a wonderful day celebrating with us here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

25th Anniversary of Terry Fox’s Marathon of Hope 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks the 25th 
anniversary of the beginning of one of the great Canadian 
stories of courage, strength, and perseverance — Terry Fox and 
his marathon of hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Terry Fox was clearly an extraordinary individual. 
Diagnosed with bone cancer at age 18, he had his right leg 
amputated above the knee and was fitted with a prosthesis. 
Following his surgery he became involved in wheelchair sports 
and despite significant pain and discomfort caused by his 
artificial leg, became a long-distance runner. A short time later, 
remembering the suffering of the children he saw undergoing 
cancer treatment, he came up with the idea of running across 
Canada in the hope of raising $1 million for cancer research. 
The marathon of hope was born. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the image of Terry Fox making his determined 
way along the edge of the highway as he ran the marathon of 
hope is unforgettable. He covered more than 5,700 kilometres 
and raised over $11 million before the cancer returned, forcing 
him to stop. 
 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, Terry Fox died in June 1981. By that time he had 
raised almost $25 million for cancer research. In September of 
that year, the first Terry Fox run was held to honour his 
memory and continue his work. Terry Fox runs are now held 
yearly in 60 countries around the world and more than $350 
million have been raised for cancer research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Terry Fox continues to capture our hearts and our 
imaginations. This year Canada issued a special 
commemorative coin in recognition of his courage and his 
contributions. Twenty-five years after he began it, the legacy of 
Terry Fox and his marathon of hope continues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When Terry Fox 
dipped his prosthetic leg in the St. John’s harbour 25 years ago, 
announced that he was going to be running across Canada, few 
people paid attention. But Canadians were soon captivated by 
the courage, passion, and grit of this 21-year-old BC [British 
Columbia] university student, who had lost his right leg to 
cancer as a teenager and was determined to find a cure for this 
disease. By the time he had reached Ontario, people were lining 
the streets cheering him on. For over 4,300 kilometres and 143 
days, Terry Fox battled the wind and snow, then the stifling 
heat and pain before having to stop just outside of Thunder Bay, 
Ontario. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Terry’s hope was to raise $1 from every Canadian but, Mr. 
Speaker, he has far exceeded that. More than $360 million has 
been raised for cancer research through the Terry Fox run, 
which is held every year in towns and cities across Canada and 
around the world. Today, exactly 25 years after Terry Fox set 
out down a lonely highway, he has inspired a nation and a 
world. People around the world are making his miracle come 
true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Kawacatoose First Nation to Host Summer Games 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, the Premier and I had 
the pleasure of visiting Kawacatoose First Nation, a thriving 
community of about 1,200 located a couple of hours north of 
Regina. It was a thoroughly enjoyable and interesting visit and I 
want to thank Chief Dennis Dustyhorn, the band council, and 
band members for their kindness and hospitality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kawacatoose First Nation will be hosting one of 
our province’s big events this summer. From July 2 to 8, 
Saskatchewan First Nations athletes, coaches, officials, and 
supporters will be gathering at Kawacatoose for the 2005 
Saskatchewan First Nation Summer Games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these games are held every two years and while 

there are events for a variety of age groups, the games put a 
special emphasis on youth. Chief Dustyhorn is also the games 
coordinator and makes the point that the games are good for 
First Nations youth because they promote healthy choices, and 
they also benefit the community because of the infrastructure 
development legacy associated with hosting the event. 
 
Some 5,000 athletes are expected to participate in the games in 
a variety of sports including softball, soccer, golf, and track and 
field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the good work of Chief 
Dennis Dustyhorn, the games Chair, Lyle Worm, and the 
volunteers from across Kawacatoose First Nation, from 
throughout the Touchwood Tribal Council territory, and all 
across the province, people who are working to ensure that the 
2005 Saskatchewan First Nations Games are a huge success. 
 
I encourage everyone to take the opportunity to visit 
Kawacatoose First Nation this July and take part in a premier 
sports and culture event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Watrous Winterhawks — 2005 Senior “B” 
Provincial Champs 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
opportunity to talk to you about Ervin Gross, the 2004 Watrous 
Citizen of the Year, who played goal for 25 years with the 
Watrous Winterhawks. Today I’m pleased to inform the House 
on Friday, March 25 the Watrous Winterhawks won the 2005 
Senior “B” provincial championship. 
 
The Winterhawks rolled through the provincial playoffs, 
defeating the Outlook Ice Hawks, Lumsden Monarchs, 
Esterhazy Flyers, and finally the Redwings from Rosetown — 
an incredible playoff run that finished with the Winterhawks 
capturing the Saskatchewan Hockey Association title at home 
in Watrous against the Rosetown Redwings. It was definitely a 
good Friday for team members, management, fans alike when 
the clock counted down a 6-2 final score. 
 
Not only did the Watrous squad sweep provincials, but also 
came back from a two-game deficit in the league finals to take 
the series to a fifth and deciding game against Leroy. Individual 
winner plaques were presented to all the Winterhawks. Captain 
Scott Collins and assistant captains Craig Collins, Dale 
Miettinen, and Grahame Potts accepted the provincial banner 
and winner’s cup on the team’s behalf. This team played very 
well this year and are most deserving of this championship. I 
would ask all the members to join me congratulating the 
Watrous Winterhawks hockey club in their successful season 
this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

National Wildlife Week 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is National Wildlife Week, a time to celebrate nature and 
educate the public about wildlife conservation. Each year, Mr. 
Speaker, National Wildlife Week is celebrated around the 
birthday of Jack Miner, one of the founders of Canada’s 
conservation movement. Mr. Speaker, by learning about 
wildlife and conservation efforts in our communities, we also 
learn how all of us can have a positive influence on our 
environment. 
 
National Wildlife Week is one of the many ways that we can 
educate, inspire, and assist individuals and organizations to 
protect our natural resources in order to achieve a sustainable 
future. This year’s theme is Explore and Embrace a Special 
Wild Place. Mr. Speaker, Canada and Saskatchewan are both 
home to many special wild places including national, 
provincial, and local parks, nature trails, canoe routes, and 
migratory bird sanctuaries, wetlands, and vast expanses of 
protected wilderness areas. Mr. Speaker, these places are as 
important to our well-being as they are to the plants and animals 
that live there. 
 
In order to have a healthy environment, it takes co-operation 
from many committed individuals, volunteers, and 
organizations. Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me 
in acknowledging the commitment of all the conservation 
groups in our province for uniting people from all walks of life 
to protect nature, wildlife, and the earth on which we live. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort and District Mel-Bex Awards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my wife Carole and I had the 
pleasure of attending the Melfort and district 2004 Mel-Bex 
Awards last weekend. This of course is the awards ceremony 
where excellence is recognized in the Melfort community and 
also where Vera Kruger was recognized as the Citizen of the 
Year. 
 
Craig Neely was presented with the Minor Sports Builder of the 
Year Award, while Ken Singer, business manager of Radio 
CJVR Ltd. accepted Business of the Year for the category of 11 
employees and over. Ken’s Cresting and Apparel owned by 
Ken and Novelle Trach was awarded the Business of the Year 
category for 10 employees or less. 
 
The Property Appearance Award went to Sunshine Chrysler 
owned by Kevin Phillips and Kevin Moulds. The Customer 
Service Award was earned by Fouillard Carpet Sales Ltd., 
owners Donna and Roger Fouillard. 
 
Grant Hodgins accepted the Heritage Award for his late father, 
Bill Hodgins of Hodgins Auctioneering Ltd. Entrepreneur of the 
Year was awarded to Denise Moskal for The Coffee Mill. The 
Advantage Credit Union was acknowledged with the 
Community Involvement Award, and Community Recognition 
Awards were given to the Melfort Communities in Bloom 

committee, the Melfort Canada Day committee 2004, and the 
Melfort Kinsmen and Kinettes playground project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members, I am sure everyone here will want 
to join with me in congratulating all the award recipients and all 
the nominees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Lac La Ronge Indian Band Elects First Woman Chief 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the La Ronge Cree Nation 
recently elected a new chief and now that she has been 
officially been sworn in, I wanted to congratulate Tammy 
Cook-Searson on her election and on being the first woman 
elected as chief of the La Ronge Band. They have made a very 
good choice. 
 
Chief Cook-Searson has clearly stated her belief in 
inclusiveness and ensuring that all members have a voice in the 
decision-making process. She believes in education and 
balancing economic and social development. And I know she 
believes strongly in keeping the Cree language, culture, and 
traditions vibrant and alive. For example, she consults with 
elders in all major decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2005 is the Year of the First Nations and Métis 
Women. It’s important to note that three-quarters of First 
Nations university graduates are women and First Nations are 
electing more and more women as chiefs and councillors in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m very proud of the leadership role that women are playing in 
our First Nations communities. There are currently 10 chiefs 
and about 100 councillors in the province who are women. This 
is important in terms of moving towards more equal gender 
representation and therefore ensuring that women’s voices are 
heard regarding the political, social, and economic issues faced 
by our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Chief Cook-Searson on her election 
and I look forward to working with her and the members of the 
La Ronge Cree Nation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower’s Wholesale Electrical Rates 
for Swift Current’s Electrical Utility 

 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
you will know there are two cities in Saskatchewan that own 
their own electrical utility. They chose not to sell the utility to 
the government some decades ago and have invested in 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

infrastructure, invested in the resources it takes to deliver 
electricity to their citizens. Now these two communities, 
Saskatoon and Swift Current, then must negotiate with the 
provincial government, hopefully in good faith, about the bulk 
supply of electricity to these distribution utilities. 
 
Legal documents filed this morning, Mr. Speaker, in the 
province of Saskatchewan make some disturbing, very 
disturbing accusations about the negotiating tactics of this NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government when it comes to the 
Swift Current electrical utility. They say that when the city of 
Swift Current refused to sell its electrical utility to this NDP 
government, SaskPower said that it would increase the rates to 
the city of Swift Current, to the electrical utility, until that 
utility was worthless, and then they would buy it for nothing. 
The question is simple: is this true, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is also simple. 
No, that is not true. SaskPower sells electricity at a wholesale 
bulk rate to the city utility owned by the city of Swift Current. 
The city of Swift Current utility resells that electricity at a retail 
rate matching SaskPower’s rate across the province. And the 
money that the utility makes — the city utility — is on the 
margin between what they buy the electricity for and what they 
sell it for. 
 
The result of the last increases in the wholesale rate to the city 
of Swift Current utility has been greater revenue to the city of 
Swift Current. The result of the last rate increase is an increase 
to the city of Swift Current of approximately $50,000 a year. 
The claim of the city of Swift Current is without merit, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the mayor of the city of Swift 
Current, the city council in Swift Current, the people of Swift 
Current have made a claim that this government, in negotiating 
with them, said if you won’t sell us the utility, we’ll raise your 
rates so much the utility will be worthless, and then we’ll buy it 
for nothing. 
 
The minister has just stood up and gave a response to the 
question on that account which the question was simple. Is this 
true? The minister says it is not true, so I’d ask the minister 
very directly, is his position today in the Legislative Assembly 
that the mayor and council of the city of Swift Current are 
lying? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Members, there are ways of phrasing 
things without . . . and using parliamentary language. The 
language that’s just been used is unparliamentary. I would ask 
the Leader of the Opposition to rise in his place, withdraw the 
remark, and apologize to the House. 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I was not accusing any member of 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The language that was used 
was unparliamentary. I simply ask the member to withdraw the 
remark, apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I withdraw the remark and apologize. Mr. 
Speaker, the question then to the minister is this: is he saying 
that what the mayor of the city of Swift Current and the city 
council have said today publicly, is the minister’s claim that 
what they have said is not true, that they are not telling the 
truth? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, most recently — last year 
and previously, I believe, in 2002 — the SaskPower 
Corporation made an application to increase rates and a 
different application in respect to various classes. In respect to 
the class to which the city of Swift Current utility belongs, the 
reseller class, the rate review panel recommended a different 
increase, a rollback of the increase that SaskPower was 
requesting. The Government of Saskatchewan set the rate 
suggested by the rate review panel. In effect, the rate that the 
city of Swift Current’s paying or its utility’s paying has been set 
by the rate review panel, not by SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the statement of claim, I hope the 
minister has read the statement of claim. It is not simply about 
the most current disagreement between the city of Swift 
Current, the taxpayers there, and this government. It goes back 
years. It deals with how this government has dealt with the 
citizens of Swift Current through their duly elected city council. 
 
The tactics that are being referenced today in the media, that 
have been highlighted by the mayor of Swift Current and their 
council is something from a bad movie, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
behaviour of thugs. It’s, sell us your utility, or we’ll drive down 
the value so that it’s worthless. 
 
I want to know from the Minister of SaskPower today or from 
the Premier if this is exactly what happened, and will he 
apologize to the citizens of the city of Swift Current today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the rates charged by 
SaskPower to a customer in the class to which the city utility 
belongs have been set by application, by rate review, and by, 
and in this case, an acceptance of the rate review 
recommendations. They had not been set — and let me be clear, 
they had not been set — so as to either increase or lower the 
profitability of the city of Swift Current utility. That’s not been 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

the purpose of the applications, Mr. Speaker. They have had the 
effect of actually increasing the profitability of the utility, and 
again the claim is without merit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately there is a 
pattern of behaviour here. You remember during the SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] scandal, 
Mr. Speaker, what this government did to a company called 
Microgro when they owed that company money, Mr. Speaker. 
And instead of paying the bill, they decided to drive that 
company out of business so the bill would disappear. Do you 
remember that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The minister responsible for that was the member for P.A. 
[Prince Albert] Northcote. Guess who was the minister 
responsible for SaskPower when the allegation of this kind of 
negotiating tactic happened in this case. It was good old 
SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. It was the member for P.A. Northcote. 
 
Now I want the minister, since he wants to, since he’s willing to 
discuss the merits of the statement of claim, to clearly state for 
the record that he completely rejects, he completely rejects what 
the mayor of the city of Swift Current, what the current council 
for the city of Swift Current, and apparently what four other 
witnesses say were the negotiating tactics of this NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the claim is without 
merit. The Government of Saskatchewan and SaskPower 
Corporation, Crown Investments Corporation will defend the 
claim, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well now the minister is just standing up and 
saying, well we’ll defend the claim; we’ll let it play out in 
court. But he can’t have it both ways. He was more than happy 
at the beginning of question period to weigh in on the merits of 
what the city of Swift Current, what their representatives are 
saying in court. He can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the people of Swift Current deserve better. They deserve 
an answer from this minister and this Premier. Is this the kind of 
negotiating tactics the NDP government uses, the kind of tactics 
you wouldn’t even see on an episode of The Sopranos, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I am a watcher of The 
Sopranos, and I am deeply offended, deeply offended at the 
analogy coming from a member of the legislature who worked, 
who worked for a government in which members of the Crown 
were convicted of fraud. I am offended by that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 

Tobacco Control Act Litigation 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, as the member from Regina 
Dewdney says, well, well, well, how is all this allowed to 
happen? The minister who said that all his ducks were in a row 
is now eating crow. The same minister who assured the 
members of this House that all the homework was done now 
has to come back and explain himself to the teacher. 
 
Today a statement of claim has been filed saying that The 
Tobacco Control Act creates an uneven playing field. Mr. 
Speaker, without hiding behind that it’s 
before-the-courts-conversation rules, can this government tell 
us what is the extent of the taxpayers’ liability as a result of this 
long and offensive string of errors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a tobacco reduction 
strategy that includes many aspects. And I have to admit 
frankly, being sued by people is one of the important parts 
because it creates a lot of public interest, and it also points out 
some of the challenges. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to defend the legislation that 
we brought forward, which is a law of general application in the 
province. There are certain provisions and certain jurisdictional 
issues that arise under our Constitution and we will abide by 
those. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the 
House voted in favour of The Tobacco Control Act based on 
that minister giving his word. We believed this sound piece of 
public policy would be competently shepherded through the 
implementation process. 
 
Now we find out the First Nations are justifiably angry and the 
Hotels Association is suing. Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
Justice, what action did he take to assure the Minister of Health 
was limiting the exposure of Saskatchewan taxpayers to a 



2478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

horrific potential liability, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as a long-time student of 
history, one of the things that you always have to watch for is 
revisionist historians. And, Mr. Speaker, we have one of those 
across the way there because, if we all recall what happened last 
spring, we were ready to go forward and have the legislation 
introduced and then deal with it in fall, but somebody asked me 
if we were ready to proceed. I said, fine, as long as the 
opposition agreed. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition stood up in this House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, order. 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Leader of the Opposition stood up in 
this House and said that he had never received more phone calls 
about an issue than any other issue that had been there. I think 
it’s probably similar to what’s happening in Alberta this week. 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we will continue to do is make sure we 
reduce the amount of tobacco use in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve never heard of anything so 
ridiculous. The members opposite last year wanted to ram this 
through. They rammed it through so that they didn’t have a 
chance to do their consultation. They didn’t have a chance to do 
their homework. The simple answer is they did nothing, and 
now we’re being sued and the taxpayer is on the hook for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we trusted them to give us correct information on 
the consultation. The consultation, Mr. Speaker, didn’t happen. 
Mr. Speaker, what are they going to do to repair the damage 
that’s now going to be done to this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I recollect it last spring, 
the Leader of the Opposition couldn’t take the pressure. And so 
they said, let’s go ahead. And we said fine; we’re ready to go. 
And so we did. Mr. Speaker, this is a very curious issue to be 
raising on this day that the Canadian Cancer Society brings 
forth information showing that more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I must be able to hear 
what is being said. Order, please. Order. The Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a curious day to raise 
this particular issue in the House because the Canadian Cancer 
Society has come forward today and say the amount of cancer is 
increasing across the country, especially lung cancer among 

women, and that relates to smoking, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to continue working to make sure we 
reduce the use of tobacco in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we can tell the members 
opposite what they did. They covered their own losses. They set 
aside tens of millions of dollars to recover their losses because 
of The Tobacco Control Act. They covered their own butts, but 
they left the Saskatchewan hotel operators twisting in the wind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Justice and to the Minister of 
Health: what action did they take to affirm the province’s own 
decision to cover its smoking losses was not going to be used as 
an admission of liability against them so that others could sue 
this province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that tobacco kills 
through many different ways. I ask the members opposite, what 
is their position on tobacco? Are they changing their mind 
again? 
 
I think in this province people have overwhelmingly said they 
support the reduction of the use of tobacco in the province, and 
we’re going to use all methods to make sure that that happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company Litigation 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, Swift Current is suing the 
government. Hotel owners are suing the government. The NDP 
says it expects to win those lawsuits. But of course that’s what 
they said about the SPUDCO lawsuit, and look how that tuned 
out. This government lost another $9 million taxpayers’ dollars 
last year on SPUDCO lawsuits and legal fees, and they’re not 
done yet. SaskWater’s annual report says, and I quote: 
 

The Corporation is party to a number of lawsuits and has 
provided for these claims . . . in accordance with 
management’s best estimates and the advice received from 
legal counsel. 

 
The problem is the SaskWater report doesn’t tell us what the 
amount is. Mr. Speaker, how much more money does the NDP 
expect to lose in SPUDCO lawsuits and legal fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition had one of 
their staff present yesterday at the news conference on the 
SaskWater annual report. And I made it very clear at that point 
in time — and the member should know this already — that 
there is one remaining lawsuit, Mr. Speaker, related to 
SPUDCO that has not been settled yet, and that is a lawsuit that 
has been filed by the Dolman family. Members of the 
opposition are very familiar with that suit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at this point in time . . . Initially that lawsuit was for 
$800,000, but the lawyer for the Dolmans has indicated now to 
government that that’s being reduced to $300,000. We have 
said, Mr. Speaker, that we are willing to discuss an out-of-court 
settlement, and I’ll have more to say about that with the next 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, for years the NDP told us that 
SPUDCO would make us money. Then it all went bankrupt and 
lost $26 million. Then the NDP told us that they would win the 
lawsuits against them, and they lost 9 million more. Now they 
expect to lose even more money. If the NDP has an estimate of 
how much more they expect to lose, why didn’t the annual 
report tell us how much it was? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well just very simply, Mr. Speaker, the reason why the annual 
report doesn’t speak directly to that is because this is going to 
be a negotiation process. 
 
I just want to point out to the member opposite that the 
Dolmans, in the view of the Crown, the Dolmans also owe the 
Crown money, Mr. Speaker. And so it’s a two-way process 
here. The Dolmans believe that they have allegations against 
government that are the basis for their lawsuit. And, Mr. 
Speaker, on the other side, government, Mr. Speaker, believes 
that the Dolmans also owe them money that wasn’t paid to 
SaskWater at that time. 
 
So we’re waiting for the Dolmans’ lawyer to present us with a 
statement of claim, a detailed statement of claim. And as soon 
as we get that, Mr. Speaker, our government lawyer is very 
prepared to sit down with their lawyer and discuss all the details 
of this settlement, but there’s no point in outlining this in the 
annual report. But I was very candid yesterday with the media 
in the media conference. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday reporters asked the Minister of Learning if the NDP’s 

0, 1, and 1 wage mandate applied to the contract negotiations 
underway with the province’s teachers. Minister refused to 
answer. I’m prepared to give him another opportunity in this 
Assembly. Will teachers be subject to the 0, 1, and 1 wage 
mandate, yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let me remind all members of this 
Assembly that negotiations on this particular contract will 
happen between the teachers, the trustees, and the provincial 
government at a bargaining table. 
 
The teachers do not want that negotiation on the floor at the 
legislature, and they certainly do not want that member back in 
those negotiations, so I thank them very much for their interest 
in this, but we will resolve this contract at the negotiating table. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
great to see that the minister remembers that I must have played 
some kind of a role back in 1989 as far as negotiations. 
 
Let me ask the minister — to repeat — yesterday the Learning 
minister was asked whether or not the NDP’s 0, 1, and 1 wage 
mandate was still in effect. It’s a simple question that should 
garner a simple yes or no. The minister told reporters, and I 
quote: “At this point it would be inappropriate to comment 
about what’s going on.” 
 
So here we have a government that is given a mandate, and now 
the minister says no comment. Again to the minister: is he 
sticking to it or not? Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sticking to the point 
that we have continued to make in this House, that agreements 
are going to be negotiated between the appropriate parties and 
not on the floor of this Assembly. That is our approach. The 
Premier said it’ll be free collective bargaining. That is what we 
are undertaking today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister of Public Sector Compensation told 
reporters the definition of mandate according to the NDP’s 
dictionary. And here’s what she said, and I quote, “just another 
word for how much money you have to spend.” According to 
the Oxford English Dictionary, mandate is, and I quote, “an 
official command or instruction by an authority.” In other 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

words, the minister thinks that the province’s employees are 
worth zero. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Last time I checked, the government made a choice to impose a 
0, 1, and 1 wage mandate on all public sector worker by issuing 
an official command or instruction — a mandate. Now it 
appears the government has more money to spend. Now does 
that mean that the mandate has increased, or is it still 0, 1, and 
1? Will the minister please answer the question, yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I appreciated that lecture from 
the member opposite. That was very, very enlightening in terms 
of what the dictionary says. Now let me tell him how collective 
bargaining works. You get different parties together who have a 
role in the negotiations. They sit down. They negotiate an 
agreement, at which point they will sign that agreement, at 
which point it will go out for ratification. That is the process 
that we use to negotiate collective agreements, the 11 we’ve 
negotiated to date. As the teachers’ agreement comes along, it’ll 
be that approach. That’s what this government believes in. That 
is the approach we’ll be using. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister responsible for public sector bargaining 
said this about 0, 1, and 1, quote, “In this past year we have 
adopted 0, 1, and 1 with flexibility.” The minister went on to 
say, and I quote again, “I’d be happy to explain more about 
what this is.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m willing to give her that opportunity right 
now. Let me remind her that zero according to the Oxford 
dictionary means, “no quantity or number; nil.” Not any, no, 
nothing, zilch, nada, and for my Ukrainian friends . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Which one of these definitions does the minister not 
understand? I think zero means the same thing in almost any 
language, except of course NDP language. What specifically 
did this minister . . . has she done to make zero more flexible? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I certainly appreciate again the 
ongoing lecture from the member for Canora-Pelly. It is 
certainly interesting to hear his expertise of finding synonyms, 
and I appreciate that. 
 
But the fact is as we come to negotiate an agreement, it will be 
negotiated. That is what we are doing, and the member opposite 
should understand that. I am hopeful that we are going to come 
soon to a negotiated, collective agreement with the teachers. 

And that is something parents want. That is something 
taxpayers want. That is something this NDP government wants, 
and that is something the teachers want. And I would encourage 
the member opposite to simply allow that process to move 
forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that this 
minister stood in this House and clarified what he means by the 
definition of zero. Zero in a wage mandate, as this minister has 
implied, is that — zero per cent increase. Now if the minister 
has brought to the table . . . And I understand he implied that 
sufficient resources would be provided to the bargaining team 
to negotiate a contract. Is he meaning that zero will now be 
enhanced, will be flexible, will be determined by a huge pot of 
money? What does the Minister of Finance mean about the 
word zero? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We have indicated on many, many 
occasions that there has always been flexibility. That is why we 
are negotiating agreements. If we were simply imposing 
agreements then there would not be negotiations. 
 
I’m going to encourage the member opposite to flip ahead in the 
dictionary to the part where it talks about negotiating. And he 
can maybe look up what the definition of negotiating means and 
report back to the Assembly tomorrow. I look forward to that 
report from that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 102 — The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure 
(Bodily Substances) Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. Order, please. 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 102, The 
Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 102, The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure 
(Bodily Substances) Act be now introduced and read for the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member for Melfort 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to make a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order, 
please. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the course of 
question period, the Speaker made a ruling on a question that 
was asked by the Leader of the Opposition in which he asked 
the minister opposite if the minister was implying that citizens 
were misrepresenting the truth and that the citizens were lying. 
 
I would ask the Speaker to review the transcript of Hansard 
because I think very clearly there was no inference of 
impugning the reputation of any member in the House, and the 
words were not meant to discredit any member in this 
Assembly, or act in a disrespectful way in this Assembly to any 
member. It was simply asking the question, since the minister 
had said the point was not valid and their lawsuit was not valid, 
were the accusations that the citizens making . . . what they 
were saying, was that implied to be lying. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think it was meant any way to impugn a member of this 
House and, as such, should have been allowed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On the point of order, the Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s well 
held in this Assembly that one ought not to do indirectly what 
one cannot do directly, and one ought not to ascribe comments 
to parties outside the Legislative Assembly, or draw on 
references from third parties outside the Legislative Assembly 
as they pertain to members of the Legislative Assembly and 
then use that as a guise to use unparliamentary language, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while you’re reviewing this matter, I wonder if 
you could also review the comments made by the Leader of the 
Opposition. Right after withdrawing the unparliamentary 
language in question, the Leader of the Opposition then posited, 
is the minister accusing them of not telling the truth? I would 
submit that too is unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker, and I want . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order, order. 
Members of the Assembly, order. Order, order. While I 

appreciate the fact that the members raised the point of order, I 
do believe it is the role of the Speaker to make these judgment 
calls and to apply the rules of the legislature in such a fashion 
that the members respect themselves and respect members of 
the public. 
 
Members of this Assembly have some very, very special 
privileges. And that is the privilege of free speech, that things 
can be said in this House that would leave them free from being 
taken to court in a court of law. But however, that privilege 
should not be abused in any way. And my ruling stands on that, 
and I ask members to watch your language very carefully and 
not to use unparliamentary language. There are many, many 
examples of that in their daily course of remarks. 
 
The member’s point is not well taken. Neither is the point of the 
leader of . . . the Government House Leader’s point with respect 
to his point on the point of order on the speech. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table written responses to written questions no. 973 through 975 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 973, 974, 975 have been 
submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

PRIVILEGE 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the amendment moved by 
the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege today to rise on the point of privilege presented before 
this House, and I’d like to speak to the amendment before the 
House. 
 
As Mr. Speaker just alluded to, we do have many privileges as 
elected members. And with regards to language, we often have 
to watch what we say. I recently myself had a situation such as 
this that inadvertently ended up shooting myself in the foot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to this point of privilege that is 
before the House, this is exactly what it is: it is a point of 
privilege. The issue before our Legislative Assembly today is, 
can the elected members do their jobs properly, or is being 
banned from a technical briefing available to the press a correct 
thing to have happen? And I would argue, Mr. Speaker, this is 
the only aspect before the legislature. It does inhibit members to 
do their duty. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just my opinion on this 
point. Federally, in the House of Commons, Speaker Milliken, 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

after a review to special committee of the House of Commons, 
found this as well. 
 
It seems that it would be a redundancy to have two sets of 
briefings, Mr. Speaker, when we can have one set of briefings 
using the precious resources of this province for the press and 
for members opposite, regardless of what partisan stripe they 
may wear, or even if there are members of the backbench of the 
government that would wish to be informed by a technical 
briefing to help their constituents. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is the essence of what it’s about. And I 
really am somewhat bewildered to find that the House Leader 
opposite would speak against such a thing. It only raises one 
simple question. What is there possibly to be gained from this? 
What is there possibly to hide? And I don’t really think that 
there is anything — Mr. Speaker, I would hope not — and 
that’s why it should be open to the members of the opposition 
as well as to the members of the press. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not my intent to discuss this motion at length 
today due to the fact that we have much important work to do 
before this Assembly. But in saying that, I would move an 
amendment to the amendment, just adding the words, “and the 
committee table its report in this Assembly no later than 
Wednesday, April 20, 2005,” to “the Standing Committee on 
Privileges.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the federal House of Commons, the Speaker 
returned the ruling of the committee on privilege within five 
days. This is an important issue, and if we are to vote on this 
amendment, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Carrot River Valley, that we be returned, as outlined here, to 
this Assembly promptly. 

 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is very reasonable. And in the 
time allotted between the return of the committee, I would hope 
that the government would provide briefings of a technical 
nature as they did yesterday morning to the members of this 
Assembly and the official opposition — this morning rather, 
Mr. Speaker — in the SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance]. 
 
[14:30] 
 
But there are a number of other technical briefings which are 
going to occur. The member from The Battlefords commented 
yesterday that they’ve done this in the past. We would hope that 
in the spirit of what’s going to, I believe, be resolved on the 
floor this afternoon, that this would be made available until we 
have a ruling from that committee. 
 
And so without further ado, Mr. Speaker, I make this motion, 
seconded by the member from Carrot River Valley. And it 
states . . . I move: 
 

That the amendment be amended by adding the words 
“and the committee table its report in this Assembly no 
later than Wednesday, April 20, 2005” after “to the 
Standing Committee on Privileges.” 

 
I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kindersley, and seconded by the member for Carrot River 
Valley: 
 

That the amendment be amended by adding the words 
“and the committee table its report in this Assembly no 
later than Wednesday, April 20, 2005” after “to the 
Standing Committee on Privileges.” 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very glad to rise 
and second the motion made by my colleague from Kindersley 
that talks about the timely resolution of this point of privilege 
that was raised in this Chamber yesterday by members of our 
party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at — and my colleague from 
Kindersley alluded to this in his remarks — of the timeliness of 
the Speaker’s decision from the House of Commons, and it was 
really within a five-day time span that the issue was brought to 
the Speaker’s attention, that the committee met and reported, 
and that the Speaker ruled on that particular point of privilege. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s been well documented in this 
House yesterday by members from our side that this is a very, 
very similar, in fact almost identical type of point of privilege 
as the one that was raised in the House of Commons in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole issue here, this whole point of privilege 
really strikes at the root of what the rights and responsibilities 
of any MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] or any 
Member of Parliament or any member that sits in a government 
seat has. What are his or her duties, what are his or her 
responsibilities to those that he or she represents in their 
constituencies. That’s why this point of privilege is so, so 
important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why I truly believe that it ought to be looked at and 
dealt with in a very, very timely fashion so that just over a week 
from now, as my colleague’s amendment states, you would 
have the opportunity to receive a report and report back to the 
House with your decision. And I think that was a very, very 
understandable and acceptable situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before I sit down I just want to mention also 
that I think what we’re looking at here today is something that 
. . . It’s a symptom. It’s a symptom of a government that’s been 
too long without thoughts and ideas and plans for the future. 
 
I was watching, Mr. Speaker, the House of Commons question 
period just before I came to the Chamber today and, Mr. 
Speaker, that government of that day is going through the very 
same thing. They’re going through a situation where they’re out 
of ideas. They’re old. They’re tired. They’re corrupt. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re on the verge of being replaced because of 
ideas, because of things such as this point of privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say in closing that this reign of error 
that we see on the other side of the House is very close to that 
very same position. So I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to stand and 
support this amendment to this motion. 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to rise on this motion as amended, along with the 
subamendment that’s before the House this afternoon. 
 
For viewers that are just tuning in, we have a motion that’s 
before the House that is dealing with the whole issue of 
privilege as it pertains to individual members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to be a member of the 
Assembly both in opposition and in government and I do recall, 
with some interest, the time spent in opposition when public 
accounts weren’t tabled for years. Crown corporation annual 
reports weren’t tabled for years, Mr. Speaker. And I think we 
can say with certainty that there are a number of accountability 
measures and responsibility measures that have been taken on 
the advice of Crown Corporations Committee or Public 
Accounts Committee or the Provincial Auditor that have led to 
further transparency, accountability, and responsibility for all 
members of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that what’s interesting is that we have a 
motion before the House that calls for this matter of technical 
briefings for individual members of the Legislative Assembly to 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges, with a 
subamendment that the opposition is proposing. The Privileges 
Committee would report back to this Assembly by April 20. I 
think it’s fair to say that members on this side of the House 
have no difficulty with the Privileges Committee reporting back 
to this Assembly by that date, outlining how we can assure that 
individual members of this Legislative Assembly have access to 
detailed technical briefings when it comes to the tabling of 
annual reports, if there is going to be technical briefings for the 
media and so on and so forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would however like to say to the member from 
Carrot River Valley that I do not think that I am corrupt; I do 
not think I’m corrupt. And I think I heard that at the end of your 
statements. I think as an individual member of this Legislative 
Assembly, you have brought . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member to 
direct all her remarks to the Chair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I say to you that as an 
individual member of this Assembly, and all of my colleagues 
that that member was referring to, take great umbrage to a 
comment from the member opposite that we somehow are 
corrupt. 
 
I have just said that the matter of privilege is an important 
principle for individual members of this Assembly. This motion 
is going to be referred to the Privileges Committee and that 
committee is going to report back. But I would just ask, I would 
ask the members opposite to be careful in the language that they 
use when they are talking about individual members of this 
Assembly. And I would also like to remind the members 
opposite that privilege takes place not only inside the 

Assembly, but outside of the walls of this Assembly as well, 
Mr. Speaker. And when you have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, please. I’d ask 
members on both sides to come to order. I recognize the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — And when an individual member of 
this Assembly stands in the House on a point of privilege and 
accuses members over here of being corrupt, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that speaks volumes to what that member has to say on 
the matter of privilege, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a motion that this side of 
the legislature can accept as amended, and I look forward to the 
Privileges Committee reporting back to this Assembly by April 
20. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. We will now put the question 
to the subamendment. 
 
Subamendment as moved by the member for Kindersley, 
seconded by the member for Carrot River Valley: 
 

That the amendment be amended by adding the words 
“and the committee table its report in this Assembly no 
later than Wednesday, April 20, 2005” after “to the 
Standing Committee on Privileges.” 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
The question before the Assembly is the amendment as 
amended. That is, the amendment moved by the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Yorkton, 
which would read: 
 

That the words before “that this Assembly urge 
government” be deleted and the following words be added: 
 
and that this matter be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Privileges, and the committee table its report in this 
Assembly no later than Wednesday, April 20, 2005. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

Now we will proceed to vote on the motion as amended, the 
motion that is moved by the member for Melfort, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question, or would the members like it read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Question has been called. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 99 — The Canadian Information Processing 
Society of Saskatchewan Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my pleasure to rise today in the Assembly, as the Minister 
Responsible for Information Technology, to move second 
reading of The Canadian Information Processing Society of 
Saskatchewan Act. 
 
This Bill would establish a self-regulation of the society known 
as CIPS [Canadian Information Processing Society], C-I-P-S, 
and would give title protection of information service 
professional, or ISP, to members of the society. 
 
To date, five of the seven provincial CIPS bodies have 
self-regulating powers and title protection of the ISP 
designation. British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, New 
Brunswick, and Nova Scotia have enacted legislation that 
provides for this organization in those provinces. 
 
Saskatchewan’s association has requested legislation that is 
similar to the other provinces and to professional statutes such 
as The Assessment Appraisers Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CIPS was established in 1958 and is the national 
professional association for information technology 
practitioners in Canada. Its present membership across this 
country is comprised of about 6,000 program and software 
developers, system analysts, web-based application developers, 
computer support and network administrators, and database 
administrators. CIPS Saskatchewan was incorporated in the 
year 2000. Currently there are over 250 members in this 
province. The provincial organization has identified, however, 
approximately 1,200 jobs in the province that meet the CIPS 
criteria to be registered as ISP designated. 
 
Part of the mandate of the Information Technology Office, Mr. 
Speaker, is to promote IT [information technology] sector 
growth here in Saskatchewan. To that end, the ITO 
[Information Technology Office] is undertaking several key 
actions to work with the industry to build capacity, to increase 
commercialization, better access to private venture capital, and 

to provide better services to Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Last November the ITO hosted a very successful IT symposium 
in Saskatoon. We saw over 70 representatives of the province’s 
private sector and academic areas attend to take part in a 
dialogue on building a collaborative and successful relationship. 
As well, we have in place the Minister’s Advisory Council on 
Information Technology, which I set up last year to deal with 
specific issues around research, education, and 
commercialization of technology, as well as how we build 
better private sector capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the growth of the IT sector in this province 
is recognizing its professional nature. The legislation we have 
before us today will provide title protection and self-regulation 
to the information processing profession, and it ensures that 
CIPS Saskatchewan will serve to protect the public against 
misconduct by those who may be involved in the business. This 
society has strict requirements for education and experience, 
stringent certification processes, a code of professional conduct, 
and penalties for non-compliance. 
 
CIPS has consulted with other professional organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, that might have an interest in or be affected by this 
legislation, and it has received verbal and written support. As 
well, I’m pleased to advise the Assembly that they have 
consulted with the advisory council on IT and have received 
support from that panel as well. 
 
All the costs that are associated with self-regulation will be 
borne by CIPS Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to advise members of this 
Assembly that the CIPS national conference, Informatics 2005, 
will be held here in Regina in May. The timing of this 
legislation and its early passage, I believe, would demonstrate 
this province’s support of professional self-regulation and 
public protection, and would nicely coincide with the national 
convention which is being held here in our centennial year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would urge all members to support this Act. And 
as such, I move second reading of The Canadian Information 
Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 99, The Canadian Information 
Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act, be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I rise to speak briefly on the Act . . . 
[inaudible] . . . representing, The Canadian Information 
Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act. It particularly is 
humbling for me to stand in this House as a member of the 
generation who had to firstly get my children, and now 
grandchildren, to help me program something as simple as a 
VCR [videocassette recorder]. And I feel a little bit humble to 
stand in the presence of information system professionals in this 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

province and in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is very important that professionals 
working in areas of particular importance have not only the 
right, they have the real obligation, to establish themselves as 
self-regulating professional bodies to ensure both that their own 
procedures are followed and standards are met, but it also 
serves as a safeguard for our society to make sure that these 
codes of ethics and conducts are established and followed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think all of us do recognize that information 
technology and all of the surrounding challenges of 
programming and software development and the Internet are all 
having huge impacts on ourselves and our society — and it’s 
going to increase at an accelerating rate. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it is absolutely a very positive day when we have this Bill 
introduced, and I am very pleased to hear the minister say that 
the national convention is going to be in our province. And I 
think that’s very fitting as well that at this time this legislation 
is brought forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had some preliminary discussions with 
the Canadian Information Processing Society and have had their 
encouragement for us in general to support this Bill. We look 
forward to some follow-up discussion with them to make sure 
that there’s been nothing omitted or any shortcomings to this 
legislation. However we are quite confident that all is in order, 
but in order to make sure that that final communication occurs, 
I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 99 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 101 — The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments 
Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements étrangers 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act. 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill seeks to establish a balance that would 
permit the enforcement of procedurally fair and financially 
reasonable foreign judgments, while ensuring that 
Saskatchewan residents are protected from the enforcement of 
inappropriate judgments reached in other countries. 
 
The Bill does this by establishing the applicable legal rules for 
recognition and enforcement of such judgments, rather than by 
simply relying on reciprocity of enforcement between states. 
Mr. Speaker, under this Bill, foreign judgments are only 
recognized in Saskatchewan where they meet specific criteria, 
and will only be enforced to the extent a similar Saskatchewan 
judgment would be enforced. 
 
As the Saskatchewan and Canadian economies have become 
ever more internationally integrated, a uniform Canadian 
standard for enforcement of foreign judgments is desirable to 

increase predictability in the international marketplace and to 
avoid a multiplicity of legal actions for Saskatchewan residents. 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will assist Saskatchewan individuals and 
businesses by avoiding the expense and time delay requiring 
legitimate foreign judgments to be retried in Saskatchewan 
before they are enforced. 
 
This is a uniform Act from the Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada, which had been recommended for implementation in 
all provinces and territories. It establishes that where a foreign 
court had a real and substantial connection to the subject matter 
for which the judgment issued, that judgment may be registered 
and enforced in Saskatchewan, but only to the extent that a 
similar Saskatchewan judgment could be enforced. 
 
For example, if an exorbitantly high American jury award were 
sought to be enforced in Saskatchewan under this Act, that 
money judgment would be reduced and enforced only to the 
dollar level that a Saskatchewan judgment on those facts would 
have provided for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, The Enforcement of Canadian 
Judgments Act, 2002, already provides for full faith and credit 
in the recognition and enforcement of judgments between 
Canadian provinces and territories. The existing foreign 
judgment Act takes the opposite approach for foreign 
judgments and provides instead for one of the most restrictive 
standards of enforcement in North America. 
 
This Bill is intended to strike a balance between the restrictive 
approach of the existing Act and the very open approach 
recently taken by the Supreme Court of Canada in considering 
the enforcement of foreign judgments in the absence of a 
statutory standard. 
 
It is our view that in international context, the procedural and 
substantive fairness of a foreign judgment cannot always be 
presumed. That being said, if those foreign judgments do meet 
specific criteria for fairness and jurisdiction, they deserve to be 
enforced without requiring the parties to go through the lengthy 
and expensive process of retrying the same matter in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to prosper in the 
international community. We feel it is appropriate to provide 
for clear rules, which that participation can be expected to 
flourish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 101, The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act, be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I stand to speak briefly on An Act respecting the 
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments that’s before the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is consistent with a number of Bills 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

that are being brought forward by the Justice department in this 
spring session that are moving the rules and the legal 
frameworks in Saskatchewan to be in compliance with national 
and international standards for the way the court system works. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is a worthwhile, is a 
worthwhile endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that there are some exceptions to what 
foreign judgments will be allowed in the province, and 
specifically they seem to be the recovery of taxes and matters 
arising out of bankruptcy, of insolvency hearings for 
maintenance or support, and for the recovery of monetary fines. 
 
There probably are very good reasons why these exemptions 
occur and why the exemptions, in terms of monetary awards, 
are limited to those that would take precedence in 
Saskatchewan, would be applicable under this Act. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s important that if we can streamline our 
system so that we don’t have to go through costly, repetitive 
court cases in this province, that that will be a betterment and a 
protection to all of our citizens. However, to make sure that we 
get some legal counsel on the nuances of this legislation, at this 
time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 101 be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 103 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005. Mr. 
Speaker, the main purpose of this Bill is to enhance the ability 
of the Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission to administer and 
enforce The Real Estate Act. 
 
The Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission is responsible for 
regulation of the real estate industry. The Superintendent of 
Real Estate oversees the activities of the commission. The 
commission is mandated to protect consumers and to provide 
services that enhance and improve the industry and the business 
of industry members. The amendments in this Bill will improve 
the regulatory environment for the benefit of the public and 
registrants within the real estate industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the real estate sector is a vital part of the 
Saskatchewan economy. The amendments I’m introducing 
today are required to ensure that The Real Estate Act remains 
up-to-date and effective in a fast-paced and changing 
marketplace. 
 
Currently the Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission consists 
of four members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, and five members elected by registrants. 
 
The amendments included in this Bill increase the number of 

members elected by the registrants from five to six members, 
and provide for the appointment of a member from the 
industrial commercial investment or property management 
areas of real estate practice by other members of the 
commission. Essentially, the amendments allow for broader 
participation on the commission and will able the commission 
to function more effectively in fulfilling its mandate. 
 
The amendments also provide that a vacancy in the membership 
of the commission does not impair the power of the remaining 
members of the commission to act. This amendment is 
important to ensure that the commission is able to continue to 
carry out its responsibilities to administer the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also allows the commission to take 
disciplinary action against former industry members for up to 
two years after the member leaves the industry. This is 
consistent with the approach taken in some other professions’ 
legislation. It is also consistent with the real estate legislation of 
other jurisdictions. 
 
A further amendment allows the commission to apply to the 
court for interim suspension of a registrant. Under the existing 
legislation, the commission may apply to the Superintendent of 
Real Estate for an interim suspension of a registrant of no 
longer than 90 days. In complicated matters, 90 days is not 
always long enough to complete an investigation and hearing. 
The amendments allow the commissioner to apply to the court 
for an interim suspension of a longer duration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also clarifies the requirements for the 
deposit of trust funds. In particular, the amendments require a 
brokerage to deposit all money received by the brokerage in 
trust for other persons within two business days after the later of 
the day on which the offer to purchase is accepted and the day 
on which the money is received by the brokerage. The 
maintenance of trust funds is a significant responsibility for 
brokerages. Clarification of this provision is required to ensure 
that trust funds are properly administered. 
 
The amendments proposed today also create a new category of 
registration for associate brokers under the Act. Essentially, an 
associate broker is an individual who has the same educational 
qualifications as a broker, but does not have the same 
responsibility for managing a brokerage’s office or supervising 
branch managers. 
 
This amendment will harmonize Saskatchewan’s real estate 
legislation with the legislation of other Canadian jurisdictions. 
Mr. Speaker, the changes reflected in this Bill have been 
developed jointly by Saskatchewan Justice and the 
Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission, in consultation with 
industry and consumer organizations. I appreciate the time, 
effort, and co-operation these groups have contributed to the 
development of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Real Estate Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 103, The Real Estate Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Melfort. 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s again 
a pleasure to speak briefly to An Act to amend The Real Estate 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we all have come to appreciate at one 
time or another in our lives the support and the information and 
the counsel of a real estate agent in this province. Many of us 
have bought and sold homes, residences, properties, etc., and 
we realize what an important function a real estate agent serves 
in negotiating those kinds of contractual changes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think as in any professional association, I 
think it’s important that they have strong and appropriate 
legislation governing how their association works and the 
standards and criteria that are required in order for members to 
practise in that field, because there’s a great deal of public trust 
and confidence that has been built up and has been maintained 
by real estate agents through their association over the years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly very much believe that the official 
opposition would be very much in favour of any kind of 
legislation that will strengthen and improve legislation affecting 
the real estate industry and particularly when that legislation has 
the support and the influence of realtors and people practising 
in the profession. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the official opposition has had the 
opportunity to briefly discuss some of these issues with 
members of the real estate profession and we look forward to 
doing that further in the near future. And in order to facilitate 
that, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I am on my feet today to discuss the second reading of 
amendments to The Planning and Development Act, 1983, Bill 
104, which I will move at the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
The Planning and Development Act, 1983, establishes the 
planning system in this province. The legislation provides 
municipalities with the authority to undertake community 
planning. It provides municipalities with the legal basis for the 
various tools and planning processes necessary for managing 
development. Although amendments have been made to the Act 
since it was introduced in 1983, a more detailed review is now 
necessary to ensure that the legislation meets current and future 
needs of the municipalities of this province. Municipal officials 
have indicated that there is a need to improve the Act in several 
key areas. 
 

The government is responding to this request and has 
undertaken such a review. The review of the Act is being done 
in two phases. The amendments before us today represent phase 
1. Phase 2 is expected to take place in the near future and will 
include further stakeholder consultations. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Bill is focused on fostering local autonomy and reducing 
provincial control over community planning. Proposed 
amendments also streamline planning and development review 
processes, provide clarity and flexibility, and improve 
enforcement for all municipalities with land use planning 
bylaws. 
 
Municipalities have said that there is a need to clearly identify 
provincial interests to assist them in community planning. Phase 
1 amendments will authorize the minister to develop statements 
of provincial interest. Actual development of the provincial 
interest statements is planned for phase 2. 
 
Other provinces have developed either provincial land use 
policies or statements of provincial interest to guide community 
and land use planning. For example, provincial interest 
statements may address such issues as drinking water source 
protection; development in flood risk areas; transportation and 
infrastructure; resource development, such as oil and gas; and 
environmental considerations. 
 
Amendments will require that municipal planning bylaws be 
consistent with provincial interests, and that variances granted 
to zoning bylaws also be consistent with provincial interests. 
The minister may then intervene in local planning and direct the 
zoning amendment only where there is a provincial interest. 
This replaces some of the more detailed provincial review 
processes now in place in legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some sections of the Bill will not be proclaimed 
until statements of provincial interest have been developed. 
This approach ensures that public interests continue to be 
protected while statements of provincial interests are under 
development. It signals to all municipalities that the province is 
committed to adopting statements of provincial interest and 
providing greater autonomy to councils that have been declared 
approving authorities. 
 
All municipalities will benefit from proposed amendments that 
will increase efficiency in the planning process. Planning 
processes will be streamlined for public notification of bylaws 
and development appeals. The apportioning of costs of 
preparing a replotting scheme will be clarified to include public 
highways and dedicated lands. 
 
Municipalities can presently adopt interim development control 
when developing or amending planning bylaws. Proposed 
amendments will broaden the municipalities’ ability to utilize 
interim development control more fully when undertaking a 
study of a land use planning matter. This is important for 
municipalities when they are undertaking planning work. 
However, proposed amendments will set a two-year maximum 
limit on the validity of interim development control bylaws to 
ensure that the new planning bylaws are completed in a timely 
manner and that new development is not unduly delayed. 



2488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

Amendments will also broaden the application of architectural 
control to include the site on which a building is located. From 
a planning perspective, it is reasonable to provide for municipal 
control on both the building and site to achieve proper 
aesthetics. 
 
Proposed amendments will increase the allowable extent of 
damage from 50 per cent to 75 per cent in determining if a 
nonconforming building can be repaired or rebuilt which will 
reduce hardship, for example, where a nonconforming building 
is damaged by fire. 
 
Proposed amendments will also strengthen bylaw enforcement 
by permitting municipalities to order completion of all work 
necessary to gain compliance with a zoning bylaw. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to assist municipalities, the Development 
Appeal Board will be required to specify a time limit on its 
decision equal to the period for which the development permit 
is valid and to clarify that the decision is specific to the plans 
submitted to the board. Municipalities have found that there is a 
need to prevent development from occurring years after an 
appeal decision was made and to clarify that a board’s decision 
applies only to the specific development proposal. 
 
The legislation is being made less prescriptive for all 
municipalities on matters respecting capital work plans and 
adopting new zoning bylaws. A municipality that is preparing a 
development plan will no longer be required to adopt the capital 
works plan. However, the municipality may do so if it wishes. 
This will eliminate time and expense. When a municipality is 
adopting a development plan or a basic planning statement, 
proposed amendments will eliminate the need to adopt a new 
zoning bylaw where one exists provided it is consistent with the 
plan or statement. 
 
Proposed amendments will also remove the time limits on the 
adoption of planning bylaws which, depending on the type of 
bylaw, previously ranged from six months to two years. These 
changes minimize costs to municipalities and respond to 
municipal requests for flexibility. 
 
Proposed amendments will clarify that land being subdivided is 
exempt from dedication of municipal reserve where records 
indicate that municipal reserve was dedicated or that cash in 
lieu dedication was paid when the land was previously 
subdivided. 
 
Proposed amendments also broaden the scope to which land 
may be required to be dedicated as environmental reserve at the 
time of subdivision, which will provide a greater degree of 
protection for natural areas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments will provide councils that 
have been declared approving authorities pursuant to the Act 
with greater flexibility, autonomy, and accountability consistent 
with the principles of The Cities Act. Ten of the 13 cities in 
Saskatchewan are presently delegated subdivision approving 
authority. These approving authorities have the administrative 
capacity and are in the best position to make local planning 
decisions. 
 
In these amendments the government is increasing local 

autonomy by eliminating ministerial approval of planning 
bylaws. These bylaws are basic to providing effective 
community planning and management of development by our 
municipalities. However, an approving authority will be 
required to refer a copy of new planning bylaws or amendments 
to the minister for review for provincial interest. This approach 
is similar to that of other provinces. 
 
For approving authority, ministerial approval will be eliminated 
for interim development control bylaws and for bylaws where 
the council is proposing to sell a buffer strip or walkway, or to 
sell or exchange a municipal reserve. The province does not 
need to oversee these municipalities on matters that are of a 
local nature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these 10 approving authorities are being 
provided greater local autonomy in a number of other areas 
respecting the adoption and administration of planning bylaws. 
Proposed amendments will allow the council to establish public 
notice policies based on minimum requirements in place of 
current notice provisions. This will provide cities with greater 
flexibility and a process similar to the public notice policies that 
may be developed under The Cities Act. Transparency and 
public participation in community planning processes will be 
maintained. 
 
Proposed amendments will also permit an approving authority 
instead of the minister to determine where an alteration to a 
bylaw is minor and the bylaw does not need to be readvertised. 
In these cases the responsibility should lie with the council as 
an approving authority. Removing this extra step will expedite 
local decision making and is especially important when new 
development hinges on obtaining approvals in an expeditious 
manner. 
 
Proposed amendments will now permit the local development 
appeals board to hear appeals respecting direct control districts, 
development levies, and the holding provision as a first step in 
the appeal process. A subsequent appeal can still be made to the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board. This change provides greater 
authority at the local level and can expedite development 
review. Fair and transparent appeal processes will be 
maintained. 
 
Approving authorities have been asking to increase the 
development appeal fee for a number of years. The government 
believes that development appeals must be affordable. However 
the government agrees that the current maximum appeal fee 
needs to be examined. Proposed amendments will permit the 
government to develop regulations in this regard that will apply 
to all municipalities. We will consult with stakeholders on any 
changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation will be made less prescriptive for 
approving authorities. The 10 approving authorities will also be 
able to set time limits for decisions on demolition and 
architectural controls and the holding provision that are more 
suited to their development review processes. The councils will 
be able to establish the scope and extent of minor variances to 
their zoning bylaws. 
 
These changes will shorten timelines for development review 
and will reduce the need for appeal. Councils will also be given 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

the freedom to independently determine the membership, 
powers, and duties for their local municipal planning 
commissions and development appeals board. 
 
The dedication of municipal reserves is an aspect of the 
subdivision review process and is an important element in 
overall community development. The amendments respond to 
city requests for more flexibility regarding municipal reserve 
lands. Approving authorities will be able to determine the way 
municipal reserve must be calculated when development is 
phased in over a period of time. They may also provide for the 
broader use of municipal reserve lands in their development 
plans. These changes will support the development of multi-use 
community facilities and will permit greater partnerships within 
the community. 
 
As I have noted, the proposed amendments significantly expand 
the powers of our 10 approving authorities. Proposed 
amendments will require approving authorities to retain 
professional community planners. This requirement will ensure 
that approving authorities have the appropriate level of 
expertise to address the complex and technical aspects of 
community planning. Approving authorities were originally 
delegated authority for subdivision on the basis that they had 
professional community planners to take on the responsibilities 
for subdivision review on behalf of the province. We wish to 
ensure that the intent is transparent. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will allow 
municipalities to more effectively undertake community 
planning. Mr. Speaker, amendments reduce provincial 
interference in local planning matters. It demonstrates our 
confidence in local government having greater responsibilities 
for local planning. The government is ensuring that the 
planning legislation meets the needs of municipalities in this 
province. 
 
I would urge each and every member of the House to review 
and support the Bill. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of Bill No. 104. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 104, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and address this Bill under second reading. I was listening to 
the minister on it and it sounds like it’s making quite a few 
changes on it, and going through the Bill you can see it makes 
quite a few changes. 
 
And I know the biggest need out there with towns and cities and 
villages is development. And they would always like things to 
move faster through government and approval, but there’s some 
concerns that I think will have to be raised. This Bill has to go 
to quite a few stakeholders because a Bill of this size affects 
basically every citizen in Saskatchewan on it. 
 
Some of the questions on provincial interest, I’m not quite sure 
how that’s going to speed things up. Does the minister 
determine that or is he going to let this . . . When a town makes 

a zoning bylaw, is it going to have to go through every 
department — Environment, Agriculture — to see if they also 
have a provincial interest in that, Mr. Speaker? So that’s a 
question to be asked. 
 
And also listening, he talked about changing the appeal fee, but 
I don’t see the cost in it of what they’re doing with it. So it 
always makes me a little nervous when this government says 
they’re going to adjust fees because you never know; they have 
in the past raised them quite substantially. And he’s right on 
both ends; it has to be substantial but it also has to be affordable 
for the people that are putting in the appeal process. It has to be 
fair. 
 
So I know that . . . I’m hoping that they . . . He talked about 
consulting with stakeholders, with the municipal governments. 
And I know on this side we definitely will be at that end to, 
checking to see if this Bill follows through. Because I can 
remember, I think there was a municipal Act that was 
introduced in the fall and they’ve pulled that because they had 
to make some changes in it. Some of the stakeholders felt there 
should be changes in that particular Bill. 
 
So following that with this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, I know 
that it should, it will take a little bit of time to go out to the 
stakeholders and to see how much consulting and to see if they 
approve of everything in here, because the main thing is out 
there you want to make sure that the towns have access to be 
able to change their bylaws and to work with them because just 
about every town right now is looking to expand businesses. 
And that involves zoning bylaws and changing the way that 
some of the towns do business. Over the past . . . and I know in 
my constituency there’s towns looking at packing plants, there’s 
towns looking at value-added businesses they would like to 
bring in and doing some development on that. So with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I will adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 104 be 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 105 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 105, The Local 
Government Election Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Local Government Election Act governs how 
urban municipalities and school boards conduct elections which 
are of course an integral part of the local democratic process. 
This Bill is to amend school election processes in order to 
accommodate changes to the boundaries of school divisions in 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

the past several years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments were developed in consultation 
with the Saskatchewan Association of City Clerks — which I 
add includes the city clerk in the city of North Battleford, Ms. 
Elaine Kostiuk, who has been talking about this issue for some 
time — consultation with the city clerks as well as with officials 
from Saskatchewan Learning, and from other municipal school 
board election stakeholders as required. 
 
Other amendments within the Bill are necessary, Mr. Speaker, 
to accommodate the consolidation of legislation for rural and 
urban municipalities into the single statute, the municipalities 
Act, Mr. Speaker. And I will speak to these in my remarks 
today. 
 
But first, Mr. Speaker, let me elaborate on the amendments 
pertaining to the school divisions. The Local Government 
Election Act contains provisions that enable municipal and 
school board officials to coordinate elections. The legislation 
defines two categories of school division — those that are 
wholly or substantially within a municipality and those that are 
not. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, the distinction between these two 
categories of school division was clearer. Those school 
divisions based in a city or a larger town were in the former 
category. The larger rural and northern school divisions were in 
the latter. Restructuring of school divisions in recent years has 
changed this by bringing together urban school divisions in 
which municipal officials had previously been responsible for 
school board elections with surrounding rural school divisions 
where school board officials have had that responsibility. 
 
If the current definition of wholly or substantially within a 
municipality is retained, Mr. Speaker, city officials will be 
required to undertake the school division elections in rural 
areas. The cities themselves say this is not practical. 
 
The amendments will redefine the phrase, wholly or 
substantially within a municipality, using either a geographic 
approach or based on where the majority of the schools 
operated by the school division are located. This will ensure, 
Mr. Speaker, that municipal officials will continue to conduct 
school board elections where it is appropriate, but that school 
division officials will have that responsibility where local 
circumstances make them more preferable approach . . . make 
that the more preferable approach. 
 
An amendment has also been proposed that would allow the 
Minister of Learning by minister’s order to assign the 
responsibility of conducting election in the school division to 
the secretary-treasurer of that school division. 
 
Further amendments in this Bill link the responsibility for 
conducting elections to the new method of determining whether 
a school division is wholly or substantially within a 
municipality. Essentially the election will be conducted by 
either municipal or school division officials, depending entirely 
on where the school division is located. 
 
To ensure that all elections run smoothly, the Bill includes 
consultation requirements between school board and municipal 

officials for determining polling places. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also change the number of signatures 
required on nomination forms for school division elections by 
requiring 10 signatures for the nomination of a school board 
candidate, whether or not the municipality is divided into 
wards. This will ensure that all school division nomination 
processes in the province are conducted consistently since 
currently the number of electors required to sign nomination 
forms varies according to the size of the community and 
whether wards are used or not. 
 
The last part of this Bill incorporates the provisions respecting 
rural municipality elections into The Local Government 
Election Act. The municipalities Act, Mr. Speaker, that is to be 
considered during this session will consolidate legislation for 
rural and urban municipalities into a single statute. 
 
The working committee that developed the draft Bill identified 
the election provisions and procedures for rural municipalities 
that are currently contained in the rural municipalities Act as an 
area unique to rural municipal governments and therefore an 
area of difference between urban and rural municipal 
government that should be retained. 
 
The working group proposed that the rural election provisions 
be added as a new division of The Local Government Election 
Act. All stakeholders and the Department of Justice were 
consulted and concur with this approach. The new division of 
The Local Government Election Act will come into force on the 
same date as the municipalities Act. 
 
It should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that as much as possible, the 
provisions related to rural election procedures have been 
retained in their entirety. There are, however, two exceptions to 
this that are worth noting. 
 
First, rural election provisions which now reference the term 
voter . . . will now reference the term, voter. With the 
introduction of the municipalities Act, the distinction between 
what is known as burgess, i.e., landowners and others with an 
interest in land regardless of residency, and electors, for 
election and public vote purposes, is no longer required. 
 
The municipalities Act will now only refer to voters, for which 
the RMs will be defined in The Local Government Election Act 
to include the current qualifications for both electors and 
burgesses. 
 
The second exception relates to inaccessible polling places for 
voters with disabilities, and the authority to allow rural election 
officials to conduct what is known as curbside voting in this 
situation. This addition will allow persons who are unable to 
enter the polling area to cast a vote in the election by providing 
the authority for election officials to remove election materials, 
including ballots and the ballot box, from the polling area and 
transport them to the person directly outside the polling area. 
 
Provisions have also been added to clarify how a person may 
request curbside voting, and in the case where curbside voting 
is requested, that normal election procedures exist as they 
would if the person was to cast a vote in the polling station. 
Similar provisions currently exist under The Local Government 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

Election Act for urban and school board elections. This change 
responds to a resolution adopted at the March 2005 SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accordingly I am proud to move second reading of 
Bill 105, The Local Government Election Amendment Act. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 105, The Local Government 
Election Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a second time. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up to discuss Bill 105, which I kind of . . . is tied a bit with 104. 
This seems similar to when the government was bringing forth, 
I think, the municipal Act last fall there. And I don’t think it 
quite did its homework like it did with the First Nations on the 
smoking end of it. And it had to pull that Bill and making some 
changes on it. 
 
So this particular Bill, same thing. We’re going to be sending it 
out to the stakeholders and discussing it because it does affect 
all the citizens of Saskatchewan when it comes to polling and 
voters and the rules on it because basically the same thing. You 
want everything. You want less interference from government. 
 
Naturally they have to set the rules, but you don’t want things 
too onerous that it makes it so complicated that a lot of the 
municipalities and trustees when they come to voting for town 
councillors and that makes it very difficult at that end of it. 
 
I see it’s going to also addressing The Election Act, dealing 
with voting with trustees at that end which is going to be a kind 
of a, I’d say, contentious still out there in rural Saskatchewan 
with a lot of school divisions, a lot of ratepayers that are, still 
feel that the divisions are too big, trustees are representing too 
big of an area, that they’re going to be losing their voice in that. 
 
Like I mentioned before in a previous speech, comes to voting 
with trustees, I still in my constituency don’t have any trustees 
that have stepped forward that I know of that have told me that 
they’re going to run for the school division yet. And with the 
elections possibly coming up in June, there could be a lot of the 
divisions are scrambling for trustees out there on the voting end 
of it. 
 
And I don’t know how much of the rule changes are going to 
be, but like I say, this particular Bill I think has to go to 
department and school divisions, Department of Education, also 
to RMs and towns and villages, resort villages. How is that 
going to affect their voting and their ability to . . . when it 
comes with councillors? 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that I have other colleagues 
that wish to discuss this Bill. And I think this Bill has to go out 
and make sure that this government did its homework because 
in the past it’s been shown that is hasn’t on that. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I will move that we adjourn debate on this 
particular Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill 105, The 
Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2005, be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 90 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 90 — The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
able to speak to Bill No. 90, the Act to amend The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. A measure of 
societies is really how a society and a country, or a state or a 
province, treats its most disadvantaged people — the sick, the 
infirmed, in our society. And I think that we as legislators need 
to keep that in mind always when we’re passing Bills and 
making decisions on items that will affect the people in our 
province, in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that in most societies these are attitudes 
and thoughts that resonate in democratic societies that look out 
for the most impoverished people in our society — and I 
believe this Bill speaks to that as well. We always hear 
informally about situations where people that have lost their 
mental faculties and are taken advantage of. And I don’t believe 
it happens on a regular basis, but we do hear that it does take 
place and it certainly is something that we as legislators need to 
address. 
 
And I believe the Bill, as stated, places an onus of proof on the 
party to show that when they’re entering into a contract with an 
adult who has been appointed a guardian, that they have 
reasonable grounds to believe that the adult lacked capacity at 
the time of the contract. And not only it speaks to the protection 
of people that may be infirmed, or not totally within their 
faculties to understand contracts that they may or may not have 
entered into, or realized that they’ve entered in . . . I mean 
there’s different types of contracts — verbal, written contracts. 
And these contracts do stand up in court whether they’ve been 
prepared by a lawyer, or just a verbal contract between two 
people. 
 
So it’s important that we look after that particular area that has 
a potential to injure or hurt an individual’s situation. As we 
know, contracts in our society are very, very important, and are 
really the basis to a lot of commerce that is done — or all 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

commerce, quite frankly — that is done in the western 
democracies. And it’s important that we strengthen the ability 
to have contracts. And, but not only strengthen the contracts but 
to have the protection around the contracts when it comes to 
people that are maybe in a position to be taken advantage of. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, this Bill needs to — and I believe it 
does — really put forward the whole issue of property 
guardianship and needs to be clearly defined, and you’ll find the 
relationship between the parties that is making the contract. 
And we certainly have considerable interest in making sure that 
this process is strengthened and people are protected. 
 
And it’s interesting to say that, also to note that this review or 
this appointment would apply if a guardian was appointed 
within a 12-month period. And so there’s those added 
protections there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition — the Saskatchewan 
Party — have looked at this Bill, our critic has looked at it, 
we’ve spoken to the stakeholders, and we believe that this is a 
Bill that should move forward to Committee of the Whole, 
where we can ask more questions concerning the Bill and 
implications of the Bill. But we believe it should be moved 
ahead so that this Bill could come into force in a more timely 
matter. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to let this Bill 
proceed ahead. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 90, The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005, 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move that Bill 90, The 
Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 
2005, be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that Bill No. 90 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 92 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 92 — The 
International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act/Loi de mise en oeuvre de la 
Convention de la Haye sur la protection internationale des 
adultes be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again 
to stand and speak to Bill No. 92. As the Bill has stated, that the 
Bill applies to international conventions on protection of adults, 
to Saskatchewan. And we understand that the intention is to 
create a common international framework for dealing with 
judicial questions related to adults who are unable to protect 
their interests because of impairment or insufficient personal 
faculties. 
 
Our critic has looked into this and basically doesn’t find any 
fault within the Bill, but there’s things that we need to look at in 
a general way, Mr. Speaker. I believe international law 
generally has progressed and is an improvement over the way 
things have been done in the past. 
 
But we know there are some exceptions to international law that 
certain nations take exception to. The most glaring example of 
course is the United States and the war tribunal, war crimes 
tribunal that is set up and the United States hasn’t signed on to 
that protocol. But I believe this Bill is something that all 
law-abiding nations in the world would not have a problem with 
because it’s . . . And again, it helps people that travel from 
country to country to fall under the same rules, regulations, 
jurisdictions that is common to the protection of adults who 
have impairments. And I believe that’s very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the states involved signed on to the present 
convention and recognize the need to provide protection for 
persons who are not in a position to protect their own interests. 
And it’s a way to avoid conflict between legal systems 
respecting jurisdiction and it also enhances the international 
co-operation that is important for the protection of adults in the 
various countries around the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Bill also, or the convention also 
determines which state has jurisdiction to apply to the 
convention and determines which law is to be applied by the 
authorities. And this also includes measures such as 
determination of incapacity and placing of an adult under the 
protection of a judicial authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of jurisdiction, this Bill, we believe the 
convention recognizes that the authority of the states where the 
person in question habitually resides has jurisdiction to take 
measures directed to the protection of adults, person, or 
property. 
 
So generally, Mr. Speaker, this seems to be a Bill that certainly 
makes a lot of sense. It brings many countries together under a 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

common law and where laws and measures are standard, so that 
people will know from one country to the other what the rules 
and conditions are. 
 
It’s just interesting to note that the convention does not apply to 
maintenance obligations, and trusts, social security, and 
measures directed solely to public safety. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I’d like to say that we in the opposition 
have taken a close look at this Bill, and we look forward to 
bringing up questions in Committee of the Whole. And so at 
this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like this Bill to proceed. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 92, The 
International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill 92, The International 
Protection of Adults (Hague Convention Implementation) Act, 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 
moved that Bill No. 92 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 94 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 94 — The 
Apiaries Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
the debate on the apiaries Bill dealing with bees. My old 
constituency, I don’t think I had any beekeepers. But when I 
first started going in my northeast and my new constituency, 
where the boundaries were changed quite radically, I seen these 

. . . they almost looked like tents. I thought it was a Boy Scout 
jamboree at first, was out there, when I drove by. And I was 
informed no, those were bee colonies. 
 
And in my area, that particular constituency between Nokomis 
and getting close, up towards Wynyard, there is quite a few. 
There is I’d say 3, 4 quarter sections that have them dotted out 
with the hay. They do two purposes. I mean, they get the bee 
production, the honey production, and also pollinate the grass 
around there for the people that cut hay. It does very good at 
that end for pollinating, and the grass at that end for selling hay, 
at that end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that I’ve been learning a little bit about the bee 
production and the problems that also arise with it, and also the 
growing industry out there with it, Mr. Speaker, now that it’s in 
my constituency. 
 
One of the things that I just, you know, have found out over the 
past few months or the last year I guess, that right now that we 
are producing some of the — per capita — the best, some of the 
best production of honey per hive, I understand of anywhere, 
with that the bees do very well in Saskatchewan here. In fact I 
understand now that they can keep the bees over the winter. 
One time they only had I guess the life span of the summer, and 
they would have to import bees. And also then you get into the 
cross border, which this Bill a little bit deals with I believe, in 
disease with that . . . of that industry. And we all know what has 
happened in the cattle industry with that. 
 
And right now I think that I understand a bit, because I’m only 
learning about it, and with this particular Bill . . . and also about 
the bee keepers in my area of the constituency of it that there is 
a concern. I mean nobody wants an industry that is growing — 
and it’s an industry that there is a lot of growth potential in it — 
that disease can destroy it. I mean it’s just like an animal or an 
insect like that, disease can spread through it very, very fast at 
that and wipe out whole colonies. So it is a particular concern at 
that end, Mr. Speaker, of this, and I think this legislation deals 
with that. 
 
But I also think there is two views out there from what I 
understand a bit, just reading some of the second reading on it 
and talking to a few people in the industry, that some people 
want a little more control. And some are scared that if you bring 
too many controls in that you won’t have the flow of bees 
across the border or even in certain areas I understand this Bill 
deals with, if there’s an infected area with bee mites that they 
can transported to another one. And also deals with enforcing 
that particular legislation at that end of it. 
 
And also dealing with . . . I understand that there will be some 
fines associated with it which I’m not sure, same thing, of how 
much that is or how enforceable it’s going to be, or how much 
. . . who’s going to be setting it out because we hope that should 
come from the direction of the beekeepers out there, the ones 
that are raising it, that will understand the disease and how it 
moves and what the areas are in that particular . . . or the 
problems are for that particular industry at that end of it. 
 
So this particular piece of legislation I going to be you know . . . 
I’m know it’s gone out to bee association. I’m going to talk 
some of my beekeepers in my northeast part of my constituency 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

and have them look at this particular piece of legislation and see 
what they think of it . . . with that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will move that we adjourn debate on this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 94 be 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 95 — The 
Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
able to join the debate on this particular piece of legislation 
today. Although I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that as short as this 
particular Bill is, it evokes a lot of controversy and reams and 
reams of material in terms of local concern. No single file in my 
constituency has generated as much media coverage or as much 
local interest and discussion and sometimes rather heated 
debate as has the issue of development in the Great Sand Hills. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the topic is well 
worth the consideration because the Great Sand Hills is a 
tremendously unique area of the province. Not only is it unique 
from a flora and fauna perspective, it is one of the few areas of 
the province that has actual moving sand dunes. And if you 
were to visit the area — if you can find it, I guess, first off — 
but if you were to visit the area, you would be amazed at the 
quality of the sand dunes and the size of the sand dunes and the 
fact that they are moving with some daily increments as the 
wind blows from one direction or the other. 
 
But having said that, the Great Sand Hills is also home to what 
is estimated to be 20 per cent of the natural gas reserves for the 
province of Saskatchewan. And as such, it contains great 
wealth. So we have these competing issues. We have the local 
land users, the individuals who ranch in the area. There is 
considerable amount of Crown grazing lease in the region that 
is held by local ranchers and used very carefully. As a matter of 
fact the husbandry, the stewardship provided by the local 
ranchers who run these Crown grazing leases is very precise. 
They are very dedicated to the control and proper use of the 
fragile grazing that’s in that area. 
 
But it’s also highly contested for its mineral wealth by a number 
of oil and development companies. There’s some need, as has 
expressed by the industry, to put some pipeline components into 
that area if they’re going to collect the existing natural gas. And 

there’s also the environmental issues which are very pertinent to 
the discussion. And having had conversations with people on all 
sides of the equation, I can understand the difficulty in coming 
to a satisfactory solution that would meet the interests of all 
parties. And this particular piece of legislation is, in my view, 
an attempt by the government to try and reach that compromise. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The question is, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this particular 
piece of legislation accomplishes the government’s purpose. 
Now if I had been given more time I would have liked to have 
recited some of the history that attends this particular piece of 
legislation. And as I indicated it’s quite precise, but I want the 
House to know, the Assembly to know, that this particular piece 
of legislation directs itself exclusively to the Great Sand Hills. 
And I’d like to read part of this Act into the record today. It 
says that: 
 

No designation of land as an ecological reserve, nor any 
restriction of activity that may be conducted on an 
ecological reserve located in the Great Sand Hills, may be 
revoked except by the Assembly. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, that last set of words, that last phrase as part 
of this particular Bill is what causes me pause, frankly, to ask 
why would this particular piece of legislation require an act of 
the Assembly to change. And it would seem to me that going 
forward with the changing technology that is becoming part of 
the developmental capability of the oil and gas industry, with 
the kinds of changes that we’re going to see in the future in 
terms of energy needs for this province, the question I want to 
ask right now is, will this Legislative Assembly, the members 
of this House, have the technical capability and understanding 
to make decisions related to some of the changes that might 
eventually be necessitated by different demands in the days 
ahead? 
 
That’s one of the questions. The other question that is not 
addressed in this particular piece of legislation as I see it is that 
current leaseholders, oil and gas companies that purchased land 
in auctions in good faith, auctions that were conducted by this 
government, by the Department of Industry and Resources . . . 
that land, those leases were purchased by the oil and gas 
industry in good faith. Now those rules are being changed. Is 
there going to be some compensation to those industry players 
for the fact that this particular piece of legislation will not allow 
development of those leases that were purchased? 
 
I think that that type of issue needs to be addressed because if 
we want the oil and gas industry to be an important, ongoing 
player in our economy, they have to know that when they make 
purchases of leases in good faith that those lease opportunities 
will be recognized and allowed to proceed by the government 
from which those leases were bought. 
 
So those are a couple of the issues that I think this particular 
piece of legislation does not address. It does a substantially 
better job on recognizing the ecological and environmental 
concerns that are at play in this particular issue, and I have 
certainly no reason to object to a lot of that concern by this 
government or players in the environmental movement. But the 
point of the matter is that there is considerable delicate 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

balancing required on this issue, and I’m not sure that this Bill 
accomplishes that. 
 
I would like to continue to address this Bill at a future date, but 
for now, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Cypress 
Hills that debate on second reading of Bill 95 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I do now leave the Chair 
for the Assembly to go into the Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. I call the Committee of Finance to order. 
The first item before the committee are the consideration of 
estimates for the Department of Health, vote 32, starting on 
page 75 of the Estimates book. And I recognize the Minister of 
Finance to introduce his officials and make a brief statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Sometimes I feel like the Minister of 
Finance, but I’m the Minister of Health, and I’m very pleased to 
have with me today a team of people. To my left is John 
Wright, the deputy minister. And to my right is Lawrence 
Krahn, the assistant deputy minister. Directly behind me is 
Duncan Fisher, also assistant deputy minister. And to his left is 
Mike Shaw, associate deputy minister. And then to Mr. Fisher’s 
right is Max Hendricks, the executive director of finance in the 
administration branch. 
 
I also have with me today at the back of the room, Bonnie 
Blakley, who’s the executive director of health human resource 
planning; Roger Carriere, who’s the executive director of 
community care branch; Carol Chernick-Smith, who’s the 
director of the capital asset planning and the regional policy 
branch; Lauren Donnelly, who’s the executive director of acute 
and emergency services; Bert Linklater, who’s the executive 
director of the regional accountability branch; June Schultz, 
who’s the director of the budget and financial planning from the 
finance administration branch; and Tracey Smith, who’s the 
assistant to the deputy minister. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister of Health. And I think I’ve 
offended both the Minister of Health and the Minister of 
Finance at the same time. I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s a privilege to 
stand and start on the, I guess, well hopefully a long process of 
estimates. We don’t have a lot of time today, but over the next 
couple, three weeks or a couple months, whatever it takes to go 
through the estimates of the Department of Health. 
 

This is my first enter into this area as the newly named critic of 
the Department of Health. Of course the member from Melfort 
had been looking after this file for six years and had been doing 
a very good job. And he’d been doing such a good job that quite 
frankly I didn’t pay a whole lot of attention to it and now I’m 
kind of kicking myself. Over the last number of years I should 
have been paying perhaps a little more attention. And maybe 
that lack of attention may be evident in some of the questions I 
ask as we go through the day or through the time that we have. 
 
But certainly, when you’re dealing with a budget of $2.9 billion 
or close to $2.9 billion, I think the first question for me, when I 
looked at that, is where does a person start? That’s certainly a 
huge department and a huge allotment of money for health care. 
But I think and I mean I can speak from my own perspective 
and any polling that’s been done, I think from any group, that 
we would see that health care is probably the number one — 
not probably — is the number one issue facing people in 
Saskatchewan and also across Canada, because it’s something 
that hopefully we don’t deal with a lot, but we know people that 
have been through the system. And it becomes probably the 
most important issue to many, many people. 
 
I’d like to welcome the officials here as well, and Mr. Wright 
on his new position as deputy minister. We had the opportunity 
of asking questions in different committees, mainly Crown 
committees, when he was in charge of SaskPower and found 
that always very, very informative. So I think we’ll certainly 
probably have the same response as we go through the 
estimates here today. 
 
I was interested that the minister didn’t have any opening 
remarks and maybe you do have some opening remarks. 
Generally that’s a bit of a kind of a start into when we start 
estimates each year, after the budget, is the minister will have 
opening remarks and then I would follow on from that. And I 
think if the minister did have opening remarks, I’m quite sure I 
know what he would say; that the system is big, but it’s 
working very, very well. 
 
And I don’t know if I would disagree completely with the fact 
that it’s working quite well. But you know, I will say from my 
perspective as critic or as just MLA for the constituency of 
Indian Head-Milestone, unfortunately what we see all the time 
or often are the situations that haven’t worked so well. 
 
And I know I’ve heard the minister stand up in the House many 
times and cite the number of procedures, the number of visits 
into the health care system. And you know, the vast majority of 
those go through and go along quite well. But the ones that 
don’t are the ones that come to our office, whether it’s to my 
constituency office or to the other 28 constituency offices that 
we have in this province, or right to our caucus staff. And so 
then we deal with those issues as best we can. 
 
I will say also that it’s not always the concerns that come to a 
constituency office or the caucus office. I think we all know of 
people that work in the health care system. I certainly do. My 
wife works in the operating room at the Regina General so I, on 
a regular basis, hear some of the concerns that the nurses are 
feeling in that setting. We have a social life that often comes 
into contact with doctors and other nurses and health care 
professionals. And when you sit and talk to those people you 



2496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

find that, you know, it isn’t just a perfect system. You know, 
people do have troubles within the system, whether it’s in the 
patient care, whether it’s in the professional side of the health 
care system. 
 
And so what I would like to do over the next . . . well not the 
amount of time that we have today but over the next number of 
hours of estimates as we go forward through this legislative 
session, before the estimates are passed, talk about a number of 
those different areas, whether it’s recruitment and retention of 
health care professionals — nurses, lab techs, those type of 
people — to some of the issues around physicians, to some of 
the issues around long-term care, to some of the issues that, you 
know . . . I mean, there are so many different areas that we hear 
of concerns. And this is, I think, a great opportunity to have the 
dialogue and I guess some of the concerns answered by the 
department. 
 
The first area that I did want to talk about though is the . . . and 
it’s looking back a number of years to the health care districts 
that then went to regional authorities. We’re sitting at 12 
regional authorities now and we came from 32 health care 
districts. And prior to that, one Health department that looked 
after all of that, and local boards that kind of were in charge of 
their own area, whether it’s a hospital in Redvers or whatever it 
might be. 
 
I would be very interested to hear from the minister, and I know 
this is looking back and so there may be some folders, if that 
information is here, leafing back to some of the administration 
costs or savings that we have seen over the last 10 or 12 years 
of health care reform that this province has been going through. 
I guess it’ll probably be about 14 years of health care reform 
that this province has been going through from the one Health 
department that oversaw everything to the 32 districts to then 
the 12 regional authorities. 
 
And I guess the question that I get often is, what are the . . . 
have there been savings? Is it more expensive dealing with just 
administration? Because when we think of health care, I think 
most of us think of health care as, you know, front-line care. It’s 
the patient-doctor relationship; it’s the nurse-patient 
relationship in the acute care facilities; it’s those type of issues 
that we look at when we first talk about health care. But 
certainly, there’s more than that. 
 
There’s, you know, the whole issue of administration. And so 
my question is a broad one, first of all. But could you answer 
how much money was saved on administration costs? Does he 
feel when we went from, first of all, one department to 32 
authorities, or was there an increase in costs for administration? 
And maybe before that answer, the minister may want to do 
some opening remarks as far as his vision of where he sees 
health care going into the future. 
 
[16:00] 
 
One last thing . . . Maybe I’m going to take this whole time 
myself if I don’t sit down and be quiet here and let the minister 
answer. But, I mean, it’s amazing when we look at the health 
care budget over the last 10 years increasing $1 billion — from 
roughly 1.9 to 2.9. And so, in a broad-brush question, is it 3.9 in 
the next 10 years? You know, where is health care going into 

the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I was appreciating the opportunity to give 
an overview of the direction of where I wanted to go, and I 
know that the member from Rosthern . . . he’s not here but I 
think he’s the one that asked me that question when I was first 
appointed as Minister of Justice. And I talked for 45 minutes, 
and so I didn’t think anybody would ever ask me that question 
again so . . . 
 
But what I think, what I want to say is that the public can learn 
quite a bit from the questions that I received from the member 
opposite. So I think that what I will say is we have a budget of 
$2.9 billion in Health, which is an increase of 192 million over 
last year or 7.1 per cent. And we often end up in budget times 
talking about that increase — that 192 — and don’t necessarily 
talk as much about the $2.7 billion otherwise. 
 
And so what I have tried to explain to people, and this is what 
the member was referring to, is that as it relates to how many 
days of hospital care . . . 800,000 days that we did last year; 
94,000 surgeries, or about 258 a day; 4.6 million visits to family 
doctors; and almost a million visits to specialists. And so you 
can talk about all of the advice given on the provincial 
telephone advice line; or the road ambulance trips, 88,000 road 
ambulance trips; 1,200 air ambulance trips; and covering the 77 
per cent of the overall costs of 8,700 residents in long-term 
care; and keep going on with the numbers of CT [computerized 
tomography] scans — 83,000 CT scans; 12,750 MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging]. 
 
So you start with that kind of a base and then we build on some 
of the things that are here. Now I think the specific initiatives 
that we have, have been spelled out. And I think we’ll get to 
some of those that . . . And I’ll wait for some of your questions 
on that. 
 
But you asked a very specific question about admin costs, 
administration costs. And one of the interesting bits of 
information that we have is that in ’02-03 budget — which is 
just three back — the admin costs were 105.1 million; ’03-04, 
102.2; ’04-05, 93.6. And so as we move forward in this next 
budget, it’ll probably be somewhere in that range. 
 
But if you can recall, the budgets have gone up about $200 
million a year approximately each year, and the admin costs 
have gone down. And what we have seen is that the 
administrative savings around how we organize things have 
made a difference, and the actual admin costs have gone down. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So, I mean, I appreciate that. Is there any 
sort of a break then? Do we notice a big break when we went 
from 32 health districts to 12 regional health authorities? Was 
there a jump at that time? You’re showing a, you know, a 
progression down of 3 million, the first numbers you gave, to 
another 9 million in the second set of numbers you . . . we 
dropped down as far as administration costs. Was there a 
significant jump when we moved from 32 health districts to 12 
health authorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think we have it broken down like 
that. But, I guess, to give an example is that most of the 
administrative costs do relate to the actual management of the 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

system which are the CEOs [chief executive officer] and senior 
people. The board costs are a component, but it’s not a large 
component and so that we continue to provide the services 
across the board. 
 
But we’re also continuing to ask questions. And if you notice in 
this year’s budget, we have actually set forward the fact that we 
are going to be doing some reviews and that includes an overall, 
sort of, admin review of the cancer agency. We’re looking at 
some of the things in Saskatoon Health Authority and the 
Kelsey Trail Health Authority. And what our plan is, is to 
budget in basically reviews of how the operations are going in a 
way that we can get through each of the health authorities over 
the next four years. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I would be interested if the minister could 
then answer . . . [inaudible] . . . we should see the reduction of 
administration costs. And I just I guess, for the public record, I 
want to make sure that we’re comparing everything that we — 
you know, in 2004 — that we compared in 2002 or 2001. I 
mean it’s pretty easy to show administration costs dropping in 
one area if, for example, some of the administration was moved 
over into a different department and itemized in a different way. 
 
And so if he could give me a kind of a brief outline of what he 
is considering as administration costs and if that’s comparative 
year after year after year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The administration costs that are included 
in this discussion include general administration, so that’s the 
executive offices, the board costs, planning and development 
and related items, the finance costs, human resources, 
information technology and communications. And the numbers 
that I did give you are apple-to-apple comparisons, if I can put 
it that way. 
 
Because what we have done is, through the accountability 
structure that we have, made sure that people are coding the 
expenses the same way and we keep working at that. But over 
the last three years, we’ve become much better at making sure 
that we’re comparing the same costs, because it’s helpful for 
one region to look and see how much they’re spending versus 
the other regions. And we’re finding that sharing of information 
has been quite valuable. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’d be interested then too to look at when 
we look across the country — because I know every province is 
grappling with the same issues around health care, and I’m sure 
it is the number one issue in every province across this country 
— how do we compare then on a percentage of our provincial 
budget? We look at 93.6 billion or million, I guess, so that 
would be roughly 30 per cent of our provincial budget. Is that 
correct? And how does that compare, how does that compare 
with other provinces and their administration costs? 
 
And again, once again, I don’t know if we’re comparing . . . 
You know, when they compare their administration costs, are 
they the same as what we’re comparing? But you know, as a 
percentage of our provincial budget in health care, do we 
compare . . . how do we compare with other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m very pleased to answer that 
because, as you know, the Canadian Institute for Health 

Information or CIHI provides comparative descriptions of 
various aspects of the Canadian health care system. And for the 
’03-04 health year, CIHI had Saskatchewan listed with the 
lowest administration costs in Canada. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I look on the first page of the budget item, 
and we see full-time equivalent staff, and we see that going up 
roughly 30, 28 positions. Can he — the minister — explain 
where those positions are, not by person or by job description, 
but where are the full-time equivalents that the department is 
bringing on stream? Where are they fitting into the 
organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll provide some detail here for you. 
There are one-time requirement jobs for the health card renewal 
project, which is going ahead; there are six positions that’ll be 
an increase. As well, the primary health care awareness 
strategy, which are also one-time costs. On behalf of the 
country, we are providing service and there are three jobs there. 
So that’s a total of nine. 
 
There are transfers from contract to salary employees. So this is 
moving positions. In the health information solutions centre 
staffing, there’s 2.5 positions like that, and also in the corporate 
information and technology branch, there’s one position. So 
that adds another 3.5 positions. 
 
In the cost-savings area, we’ve added some particular jobs. 
There are four in the drug plan under the maximum allowable 
cost program, and that allows us to add that increased 
supervision. And in the medical services branch staffing, there’s 
one more person there. That’s to monitor the billing in both 
those areas. 
 
For operational pressures, there’s two staff added at the 
provincial laboratory, and there are two added in the policy and 
planning branch. 
 
For primary health care reform — that’s the overall initiative — 
we’ve added 2.7 staff in that area. And then for new initiatives 
and requirements, public health area, there are three positions. 
And in the genealogical area, there’s a 1.5 position. 
 
And when you add all those together, you would end up with an 
increase of 28.7. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The minister talked about nine one-time 
positions — money that is obviously for this budget year — 
nine positions that are going to fill the role. Could he explain to 
me what those roles are? You used a couple of examples or a 
couple of . . . said a couple of areas that you’d be moving 
towards. Can you explain those areas and what those full-time 
positions are going to be doing? And then, I guess the following 
year, are we expected to see the full-time equivalent leave drop 
down by nine then again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, those nine positions will be gone 
after this year; they are people that are hired on a temporary 
basis. Six of them relate to the renewal of the health card. This 
year we’ll be sending out a new health card, and that involves 
lots of cards going out and then keeping track of the ones that 
are returned and making sure people get those cards. And that 
will be — it’s starting now — but the real intense time will be 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

in the fall. 
 
The other three positions relate to the primary health care 
awareness strategy. Under the federal money that we received 
as provinces, different parts were allocated out to different 
provinces, and Saskatchewan was given the job of preparing the 
national communications around primary health care. And so 
we’re hiring three people in that area to help with that particular 
job, which we anticipate will be finished by the end of the year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I don’t know if the minister would have this 
information, but we were talking about full-time positions. Over 
the last year, as far as health districts, do we know how many 
more administrative . . . have they added to the administrative 
positions? I know what you’re saying here is that the total cost 
has gone down, and so you . . . one would anticipate the 
full-time equivalents in the different health districts for 
administration would have dropped as well. Can the minister 
confirm that — if the management or administration at the 
different health districts has dropped as far as full-time 
equivalents? I’ll just leave it at that for now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This year’s budget will allow us to 
increase the number of positions between 100 and 150 in the 
regional health authorities. But we don’t have a breakdown of 
exactly where they are, but they would predominately be in the 
health provider positions — nurses and other staff. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So increasing the staffing in all 12 total, by 
100 to 150, but we don’t know if those are going to be 
front-line workers or, you know, some more administrative 
staff. You don’t have that breakdown; you’re just saying you 
have the total number? 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Perhaps I can explain a little bit about 
budgeting. We give the budget amounts to the regional health 
authorities when the budget is released. And then they are right 
now working together to put together their plans. Now we have 
a pretty good idea of what they’re going to do, but we don’t 
have the finalized budget plans which especially relate to 
hiring. And so if you ask me this question in about two months 
or a little more, we’d have a much better idea and be able to 
give you a total breakdown. But primarily I think they do relate 
to the front-line service positions. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess one last question then in this area. 
And again this is looking back, but when you look at the 12 
different health care regions and they have their CEOs and the 
administration staff that flow in behind that, and you take that 
number of people that are, I guess, in administration in the 
health care regions, through the 12 regions that we have, would 
you say there is less number of people in administrative 
positions now than there were before we went through health 
care reform — let’s say in the, you know, in the early ’90s — 
and then again from the districts to the authorities? Would you 
say there are less full-time equivalencies in the administration 
positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to that is yes. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well maybe I’ll ask for something a little 

more complex than. Could you tell me the numbers? I mean the 
simple answer is yes. How many? Are we looking at a major 
reduction or, you know, are we . . . I would like to know and be 
assured myself when I talk to people. 
 
And I hear this all the time. I hear it from a lot of people, not 
only just people that are accessing the system, but as I said in 
my opening remarks, people that are in the system that say, 
man, there seems to be more management and more 
administration now than there was 15 years ago. You talk to a 
lot of people that are in the system, they’ll say that’s where a lot 
of the money is going. 
 
So we hear from you that, no, there’s not as many people, but 
we’re hearing it anecdotally. So I guess what I’m asking the 
minister, is to give something more than a yes or no answer and 
let me know and assure me — reassure me — that I can go out 
and say to people in my health district that right now we have 
less people in the administration positions in health care than 
we did 12 years ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the information that we collect 
across the system is, as I set out for you, the administrative 
costs, and those are the related kinds of positions. And what we 
do know, that the out-of-scope portion is substantially less as a 
percentage of the total group within that, and if you define 
administrative people as the out-of-scope portion, then it is, you 
know, that smaller group. So I think the specific information as 
we move forward will have more data about this. 
 
But practically, what we know across the system is that we’ve 
reduced the administrative costs. We know that the comparative 
data that’s used by CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health 
Information] on a national basis shows that we’re at some of the 
lowest administrative costs. One year we were the lowest in the 
whole country. And I know what they try to do is to make sure 
they get common descriptions across the country. 
 
So our goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate 
support. You don’t want to get too thin on administration 
because then that causes problems for the front-line workers as 
well. But we’re continuing to work to get that right balance. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that sheds a little more light on it, I 
think, because certainly that’s what we have heard, is that what 
you’re comparing now for administration costs are people that 
are out of scope. And what we’re hearing often is that that is 
one way of determining it, but what we’re hearing again from 
people that are in the field, is they’re saying, well yes, I mean 
this person is doing administrative work but they’re in scope 
and so it’s not looked at as administrative work, you know, in 
the way that you’re determining the cost of administration. And 
that’s what we’re hearing, is that people are . . . or their salaries 
are being paid, you know, through acute care when they have 
very little to do with acute care, but that’s the way their salaries 
are being paid. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think if you listened to my description of 
what administrative costs were earlier — general 
administration, executive offices — clearly some of those 
people would be out of scope. Board costs — well, they’re not 
part of that — but planning and development, many of those 
people are within scope. Finance officials — there’s a whole 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

array of people that work there. Human resources, information 
technology, communications — all of these ones. 
 
So I don’t think that using that definition is how the information 
I’ve provided here is calculated. But what we continue to do is 
watch very carefully across the whole system, and we also look 
and compare ourselves to other provinces and other places 
where work is being done. And we have to make sure that we 
have enough administrative staff to provide the support for the 
front-line workers, and we’re continuing to work at that 
balance. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess maybe switching gears a little bit 
and talking about some of the changes that have come about 
since 1997 after the Dorsey report and the change in the union 
structure, I think there was what, 538 different bargaining units 
down to 45? Can the minister explain to me if they’ve realized 
savings in that area, bargaining with 45 as opposed to 538, and 
how that has worked since 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that what we now have in 
some sectors of health bargaining is province-wide bargaining, 
and as it relates to some of the service side we have regional 
bargaining, but clearly discussions go across the whole province 
as it relates to those particular units. 
 
I think that practically, we’ve achieved many, many similarities 
in making sure people are paid fair wages. It’s been part of the 
introduction of pay equity across the province. All of these 
things have made it simpler in one sense to negotiate contracts, 
but it’s been a long, difficult process to do all of those 
comparisons. And so I think practically, the discussions still 
become challenging because they’re dealing with some 
challenging work issues, but on a broader basis we’re not 
having to deal with as many units. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One question regarding . . . and I don’t have 
much time. I’m going to be turning it over to a couple of my 
colleagues to ask questions here in about five minutes. But I do 
want to just kind of get a broad brush of what the department’s 
— and I will get into this much more in depth in the future — 
but regarding recruitment and retaining of, we’ll say RNs 
[registered nurse] or any health care, any of the health care 
professions. But it seems like we continually hear that there is a 
shortage of registered nurses and RPNs [registered psychiatric 
nurse]. We continually hear that. 
 
And I’ve asked questions of the minister in the House here, how 
we can have a shortage. We can be graduating . . . and so many 
of those people that are graduating cannot find full-time work. 
So I mean for anybody that looks at it from the surface, say 
we’ve got a shortage but there’s no full-time work, and that just 
doesn’t make sense to many, many people, especially when you 
look at so many of the health care districts — authorities I 
should say — and you look at the amount of overtime being 
paid. 
 
So I guess I’ll ask the minister first of all what their plans are to 
recruit, but more importantly, retain the nurses that we are 
training right now? We are training you know roughly . . . I 
think 260 are graduating this next year. It would be nice to hear 
the minister say that every one of those graduating nurses will 
have full-time work in our province. Unfortunately I know the 

answer will be no to that, and so we’ll see an awful lot of those 
people leaving the province, that we have trained. 
 
So can the minister give me their idea of what is going to be 
happening into the future to retain most of our graduates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the action plan that the Premier and I 
brought forward on behalf of the government in December 
2001, the retention and then recruitment of health professionals 
was a very key part. And it continues to be a key part and we’ve 
done some very aggressive things. 
 
You’ve asked some specific questions around nursing positions 
and so I will focus all my comments on the nursing. And I’ll 
take information from once again the CIHI nursing report for 
2004, which reflects back on 2003. But in that year, 54.3 per 
cent of employed RNs and 74.1 of employed RPNs had 
full-time positions, and this is higher than the Canadian average 
of 51.4, as well as higher than all of the other Western 
provinces; 34.6 of employed RNs had part-time positions and 
25.8 of employed RPNs had part-time positions. Both these are 
lower than Manitoba and Alberta, but slightly higher than BC 
and the Canadian averages of 32.2 and 24.6. 
 
Of the employed RNs with casual positions, there were 11.2 per 
cent which was lower than Alberta at 15.5 and BC at 17.4, but 
higher than Manitoba at 6.1. That’s 2003 in the CIHI nursing 
report. 
 
It also showed in that report that the numbers of registered 
nurses had increased by 3.7 per cent from 8,198 to 8,503. That 
was from 2001 to 2003. The psych nurses’ numbers increased 
by 1 per cent: 930 to 939. And the licensed practical nurses’ 
positions increased by 2.2 per cent: 2,011 to 2,056. In that same 
period between . . . the numbers of overtime hours for SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] members declined by about 
11.4 per cent. 
 
Now in our system right now we have the new graduates that 
are coming out of the system from some of our new initiatives. 
One of the challenges is to make sure that these people get 
positions. Now there are positions available across the province, 
but there aren’t as many of them available as there were a 
couple of years ago. Overall in the health care system we think 
there’s a vacancy rate of about 1 per cent, and that which . . . 
and the jobs that are there, are available, if you go to the Sask 
Health website and then go to the regional health authorities, 
you can find those particular jobs. 
 
And so basically we are continuing our expansion of the 
nursing program, the Nursing Education Program of 
Saskatchewan, and so that there will be 400 new entrants in 
2005. And these will continue to provide a supply of registered 
nurses and registered psychiatric nurses. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well thank you for that response. I will 
certainly be asking more questions regarding that area. And 
kind of going back on some of the numbers that you have given 
me, I think there’s a couple more questions that come to mind 
automatically from those numbers that you had stated. 
 
But unfortunately I have to be at a meeting here right now so 
I’m going to turn it over to the member from Rosetown-Elrose. 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

[16:30] 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Yates): — Thank you. I recognize the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I’d like to 
also extend my thanks to the minister and his officials for 
attending to these estimates. I want to focus, at least the primary 
part of my questions, to the capital budget portion of the 
estimates. 
 
And first of all just to get a perspective, I’m wondering how the 
funds allocated for capital projects in this upcoming fiscal year, 
2005-2006, compare to previous years allotments for capital 
funding. I don’t know how far back to go, but perhaps we 
should go back to, say, maybe 2002-2003 just to get some idea 
of what trends we are seeing in the capital budget allowance in 
the budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay. The information . . . I think you 
want to see the trend. Two years ago the number was 34 million 
on the capital budget. This just relates to facilities. Last year it 
was 22.085 million and in this year’s budget we have 36.5 
million. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay. Thank you very much. Could you 
indicate . . . And I know that this is complicated because there’s 
a process to go through and we’ve discussed this in Public 
Accounts. Projects are in different stages and some of those 
stages are initiated at the local health authority level. And at 
some point — and I’ve forgotten now exactly which stage, but 
approximately stage 3 or 4 — your department kicks in and 
becomes far more involved in moving these projects along. 
 
So I would want to know which new facility projects were 
approved for the first time in this current fiscal year and how 
that compares to capital projects that were approved for the first 
time by your department in the last fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think your question is, what are the 
ongoing projects versus the ones that are new? In some sense, 
all of them have been . . . are ongoing. But sort of the green 
light to go ahead this year is Maidstone and Preeceville, and 
also Oliver Lodge is one that we’re working at as well as the 
Saskatoon mental health Hantleman institute. So those are ones 
that we have moving ahead this year. 
 
But from the ones that are continuing are clearly Herbert, the 
Outlook operation. Well there’s a whole number of them. We’re 
almost done with Tatagwa View in Weyburn. I’m not sure if 
you want me to go through all of these different ones but I’m 
happy to answer questions that you might have. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you. Yes, I think we’re on the 
same wavelength here. You’ve mentioned four projects that 
were approved for the first time for this fiscal year. I was 
wondering which projects were approved for the first time by 
your department in the last fiscal year. So I’m not talking about 
projects, say, that go on, you know, that were approved but not 
completed yet from two or three years ago. But from last year to 
this year, what is the comparison? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think you can tell by the way the trend 

went that last year we basically were just getting the money to 
keep the projects going that we had announced from the 
previous years. And so we didn’t have any new ones. So this 
year we had that opportunity to move forward because I know 
that the Outlook project was announced the previous year and 
it’s still on track. A number of the others are in that mode. And 
we’re just making sure that the funding’s there as they go 
through all of their appropriate steps. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. I think that just the way you 
answered that, that you understand that there is some confusion 
and that’s why I’m asking these questions, to try to clarify the 
process to determine whether these projects will go ahead. 
 
You and I are both familiar with the Outlook project so let’s use 
the Outlook project as an example. The Outlook project was 
announced in the last fiscal year that it was going forward by 
the provincial government. So were there dollars in the last 
budget, the budget of 2004-2005 that were used for the Outlook 
hospital project, or is the year 2005-2006 the first actual year 
when dollars are flowing from your department towards that 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well basically what we try to do is set out 
the plans. And we fund things as they happen. And for the 
Outlook project, the money’s all there for this project to 
proceed, and as they go along with the various steps, then the 
money is available for them to continue. And I think, you know 
practically, it’s usually that planning stage where there’s lots of 
hard work going on. It’s kind of like the duck on the water with 
the feet going like crazy but it doesn’t look like a lot of action is 
there. 
 
But what we know is once you get to the plan and get the 
architects and engineers having everything ready to go, and you 
actually can start the construction, the projects move very 
quickly. And I know for a fact that that Outlook project is just 
very close to being in a place where they can move very 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. It’s becoming somewhat more 
clearer now. 
 
So you say the money is all in place. I think I understand what 
you’re saying. In fact then, the money was all in place in the 
last fiscal year, it’s just that as the money is required it will be 
allocated to the project. So in effect when last year’s budget 
was passed, the project was certainly going to go forward, and 
it’s just a matter of the allocation going out in subsequent years. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well it might help you — it’ll take just a 
couple of minutes — but I think you might find this interesting 
and the public may find this interesting. 
 
We have a capital policy with 18 developmental steps that we 
go through. And basically there’s a requirement to have all of 
the sort of letters crossed, i’s dotted, t’s crossed, these kind of 
things, as you move through the step. 
 
So the first part is the consultation phase, so you have to 
complete and submit a current facility management plan. 
Second one is complete and submit a needs assessment and 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

expression of interest for the capital project, so that’s getting the 
community support. Third, there has to be review of the 
Saskatchewan Health internal project team — in other words 
the people who have a lot of experience in developing projects. 
Then there has to be the submission of the project brief. And 
then there’s a ranking of the projects, which is the budgetary 
process. So that’s the first of the consultation phase. 
 
Then you go into an approval phase. And so you go through and 
basically look at the status of the project submission. So that’s 
basically approving that this thing goes ahead. Then there’s a 
discussion of assigning the roles and responsibilities between 
the regional health authority and Sask Health as to who’s going 
to be doing which parts. 
 
Then the complete functional program process. So you have to 
get the . . . you often hear this term about getting a functional 
program, what is it you’re going to actually going to provide in 
this community. And then also, that’s prepared by the regional 
health authority and the regional health authority also submits 
the complete concept plan. It’s at this stage then where you get 
into the approval of the scope and the cost — in other words, 
what kinds of things are going to happen. And then when that’s 
done, we’ll sign the capital project funding agreement. So it’s 
setting out what’s going to happen. 
 
Once that’s completed, then you end up going into the project 
or delivery phase, in other words. And so you complete the 
schematics and the design development. So that’s where the 
consultants are there — architects and engineers — and you 
complete the contract documents, which sets out very clearly 
what it is that you want to build. And then the next step is you 
get approval to call for tenders. 
 
So in other words, everything is in place and we’re okay to see 
what kind of bids will come in. So then you do the call for 
tenders, review those, and request approval to enter the 
construction contract. You get that one agreed to. 
 
Then you go ahead with completing the construction. And then 
you implement the commissioning of the program and any 
decommissioning. So you have to get out of another facility or 
whatever to do that. 
 
And finally there’s a . . . the last step is a post-occupancy 
evaluation. In other words, you go in with the consultants and 
others to make sure that everything has gone according to the 
plan that you have. 
 
And so that’s the kind of steps that are there. And I think you 
could hear at various points where communities are in this 
process. And we end up having massive amounts of money that 
go with the construction stage. And at the earlier stage there are 
points where there’s quite a bit of money that goes ahead, but 
it’s not as much as in the construction stage. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you very much. So, Mr. Minister, 
could you then just tell me at what stages, say, both the 
Moosomin facility and the Outlook facility are at, at the current 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m pleased to report that they’re 
both in the same position, which is at the design development 

stage. So they’re working with the consultants to get all of the 
drawings ready so they can do the tender. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay, thank you. So of the 18 steps or 18 
stages, what particular number are they at, just so that I would 
know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In that long list that I read you, it’s step 
12. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you very much. The reason that I 
did quiz you — and I have discussed this issue before — is 
there was, one of your colleagues suggested somehow that if, 
you know, that if a project . . . even though a project was 
approved some time ago, that, you know, if members of the 
opposition voted against the budget, somehow it would kill the 
project, which isn’t necessarily true because there is a 
commitment to go forward. And I think you’ve confirmed that, 
and I appreciate that. 
 
I want to move on to something that occurred in the Fyke 
report, and that was Mr. Fyke had recommended that 
Saskatchewan put in place primary health care teams. I just 
wonder if you might indicate through this process to the people 
of Saskatchewan what funding is in place to put in place 
primary health care teams, how many primary health care teams 
are currently in place, or perhaps your department is now going 
a different direction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank the member for that question. 
Right now we have 34 primary health care sites in the province 
and they provide access to primary health care services for 
about 23 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan. The 
budget this year — which the member should vote for because 
it does make a difference whether we pass the budget on all of 
these things — will add an additional 23 teams, so that at the 
end of this year we anticipate we’ll have 57. In the budget this 
year the amount allocated for the primary health care initiative 
is $14.6 million. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Could the minister indicate 
how many personnel there are in each health care team? And 
then I guess we could multiply that by 57 to know how many 
that there will be at the end of this fiscal period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I can’t give you a precise example that 
you can just then multiply by the total number because 
sometimes there might be three doctors and a nurse practitioner 
and other people; other times there’s five or six. But practically 
what I’ve given you the numbers of is specific sites where 
things are happening, and these are both in rural areas and in the 
cities. And we’re quite excited about the fact that we can move 
this along. Because clearly in the riding that you represent, 
you’ve provided leadership in this over many years. And so a 
lot of the things that we’ve learned there we’ve been able to 
translate across the province. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. And I understand that the size 
of the teams would vary depending on the location and the 
services provided. So perhaps then the minister would indicate, 
of the members that serve on these primary health care teams, 
would it be fair to say that they were all practising health care 
professionals prior to the formation of these teams, it’s just that 



2502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2005 

they’ve been coordinated in this new structure? Or would it be 
rather, would it be a more correct assessment to say that a 
number of these people have been recruited, you know, from 
either their training institution or from other parts of Canada or 
beyond to serve in these health care teams? 
 
[16:45] 
 
I guess what I’m driving at is are these just existing health care 
professionals in a different structure, or are we looking at an 
increase in health care professionals that have been recruited 
from training institutions or from other areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The way it works most of the time is that 
you gather together the physicians in a local area and help them 
set up a centre. The additional staff is usually the nursing staff, 
the primary care nursing staff that’s added in there. 
 
I think they also though are recruiting new doctors sometimes 
into these situations because it does provide some stability and 
broader coverage within a team concept, and there are a 
number, especially of the new graduates, who are quite 
interested in that. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Has your department set 
objectives and standards that these health-care teams are 
required to meet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is yes, we have. And we’re 
quite firm to make sure that we end up getting the array of 
services that we require. So one of the common points for all of 
them is to have a primary care nurse and that’s . . . but some 
other ones may include some pharmacy assistants in various 
ways, physios, and others. And so it’s development of that 
team. 
 
And as we move forward we keep learning more things, and so 
it allows us to develop. But it’s the core of providing the 
medical and nursing skills that provides for the primary health 
care centre. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. I wonder if you could provide 
me with a copy of what those objectives and standards are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d be happy to provide that to you. I 
don’t have it with me today. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — No, that’s fair enough. Again just on the 
primary health care teams, I’m sure it must be, you know, given 
the shortage of health care professionals and the demand for 
their services, not only in Saskatchewan but on a much broader 
basis, it must be difficult to attract certain members to that 
team. Could you just outline for us where the greatest 
challenges and frustrations are in putting together the primary 
health care teams? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — One of the reasons that we do this — and 
we strongly believe in it — is that it does provide stability to the 
medical services. Often in a region, especially in some of the 
rural areas . . . and I think the Kyle-Beechy area is an example 
of that. And so what we’re seeing is that some of the initial 
recruitment may be tough to get positions in primary care is 
there. But once we get the teams together, they seem to be very 

solid, and they provide stable coverage and allow for 
replacement of doctors on a more orderly basis. 
 
When you just have single practitioner operations, if that person 
goes, then you have to start all over again. And one of the 
things about the primary health care centres is the fact that they 
continue and if they require more staff, well, they can recruit 
them. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m not sure there was an 
answer there. I just saw some information recently that 
indicated that the number of doctors in Saskatchewan — I think 
it was per 10,000 population — has actually slightly increased, 
but the number of nurses per 10,000 population has decreased, 
if I saw the information correctly. I’m sure there must be some 
challenges. 
 
Well I’m wondering are the challenges in putting these teams 
together. And I’m thinking, I guess, primarily of the rural and 
northern areas because that’s where, you know, it’s essential 
that these teams be in place to provide adequate health service. 
You know, is the challenge to find, you know, more than one 
doctor? Is the challenge to find the adequate nursing staff? Is 
the challenges in the emergency response aspect, or is it in 
preventive medicine? Is it in, you know, I guess, you know, I 
guess that’s what I was driving at. Where is the greatest 
challenge in getting the health care professionals into the 
primary health care teams in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’ll try to answer your questions. I 
know you’re asking across a broad area, but it relates to the 
supply of physicians in Saskatchewan. And if you ask what’s 
the toughest area, well clearly the toughest area is to physicians 
in rural Saskatchewan. And that’s why we have taken some 
very innovative ways of trying to provide support, and we 
continue to work with the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 
Association] and the college to see if there aren’t some new 
ways we can do that. 
 
But let me give you the information as to what’s happened, and 
I’ll give you the numbers, sort of at year-end for the last four 
years, except I only have up until December ’04. I don’t have 
the March ’05 numbers yet. But as it relates to rural family 
practitioners, in March 2000 there were 210. March ’01 there 
were 211. March ’02 there were 236; March ’03, 230; March 
’04, 240. And then at the end of the year last year there was 
239. But it’s an increase of a small amount in the rural areas. 
 
As far as it relates to the total number of family practitioners in 
the province over that same time period, I mean I won’t go 
through each year, but we had 924 in March 2000, and as of the 
end of December ’04 we had 935. So it hasn’t gone up in the 
family practitioner side that great. 
 
On the specialist side over the same period, March 2000 right to 
December ’04, it’s gone from 702 up to 774. So there’s been an 
increase in the numbers of physicians in the province, but it 
hasn’t gone up dramatically. And as we know that’s some new 
ones coming and some leaving plus a number of the graduates 
who come from our medical school here setting up practice. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you for that answer. Just one last 
area that I want to touch on. I’m hoping my colleague will be 



April 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2503 

able to get a couple of questions in as well. As far as emergency 
response times are concerned, does your department have again 
objectives and standards . . . I’m thinking again of outside of the 
urban centres. What is an acceptable response time for an 
ambulance to get to the scene of an accident or, you know, a 
heart attack victim or whatever? 
 
Do you have maximums that you will not allow the system to 
exceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well it’s a very good question, and as you 
know, a few years ago we ended up with a Cross-Keller study 
across the whole province which, there were some positive 
things in there. But there were many communities that didn’t 
like the solution. 
 
And so in our action plan in 2001, we took the community 
responses and other consultation through the Fyke 
consultations, as well as that Cross-Keller, to develop our plan. 
Now we have an emergency response team across the province 
that’s looking at and gathering information as to where you 
would go. 
 
And the types of things that you measure are well . . . how long 
does it take you to get out to the patients and how long does it 
take to get back. There’s quite a bit of work being done about 
how to set some of these kinds of standards. And so I’d be 
happy — maybe at a time when we have more time — to 
actually go through and give you more detail about that. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Wilkie, or 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I just have a couple 
of questions. In the Heartland Health Region . . . short four 
doctors according to the . . . [inaudible] . . . In the town of 
Biggar, we’re short one doctor. 
 
There’s an effort going on to recruit doctors. I just want to 
know what is your department and what is your government 
doing to help individual communities to recruit doctors, 
whether they be Canadian doctors or foreign doctors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I know we have some pressure here, but 
we have a whole number of recruitment programs that we 
operate together with regional health authorities and with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and also with assistance 
from the college. And I could go through and give you all that 
description, or I can actually give you a written description of 
that for you because I think we’re pushing up at the time here 
where I need to maybe thank all of the officials who have 
provided the advice and thank the members opposite for the 
question and move that we report progress and ask to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Do you mean to rise and report 
progress? It has been moved by the Minister of Health that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is 
it agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of Committees is 
recognized. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Whip 
that this House be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2471 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2471 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2471 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2471 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2471 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2471 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2472 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2472 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2472 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2472 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2472 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2472 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2472 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2473 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2473 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2473 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2473 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 25th Anniversary of Terry Fox’s Marathon of Hope 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2473 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2474 
 Kawacatoose First Nation to Host Summer Games 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2474 
 Watrous Winterhawks — 2005 Senior “B” Provincial Champs 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2474 
 National Wildlife Week 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2475 
 Melfort and District Mel-Bex Awards 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2475 
 Lac La Ronge Indian Band Elects First Woman Chief 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2475 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 SaskPower’s Wholesale Electrical Rates for Swift Current’s Electrical Utility 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2475 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2476 
 Tobacco Control Act Litigation 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2477 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2477 
 Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Litigation 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2478 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2478 
 Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2479 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2479 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 102 — The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2480 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2481 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2481 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2481 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2481 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2481 
SPECIAL ORDER 
PRIVILEGE 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2481 



 

  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2482 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2483 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 99 — The Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2484 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2484 
 Bill No. 101 — The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements étrangers 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2485 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2485 
 Bill No. 103 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2486 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2487 
 Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2487 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2489 
 Bill No. 105 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2489 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2491 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2491 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................2492 
 Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi de mise en oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection internationale des adultes 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2492 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................2493 
 Bill No. 94 — The Apiaries Act, 2005 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2493 
 Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2494 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2495 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2495 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2500 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2503 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


