















































Hansard: April 11, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 89A  MONDAY, APRIL 11, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2441 
 April 11, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of a 
different sort today, concerned with SAMA [Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency] . . . [inaudible] . . . for 
school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to reverse charges 
recently made that require the education sector to 
contribute to the cost of SAMA, as this added burden for 
school boards will ultimately lead to higher property taxes 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
community of Frontier. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the horrible drug, crystal meth: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine, the education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Aberdeen 
and Vonda. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition signed by people concerned about the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions that is proposed by the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition and they 
are all from the community of Elrose. I am pleased to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Briercrest. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today with a petition regarding the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Tribune, 
Oungre, and Bromhead. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens who are quite concerned with crop insurance 
premium hikes and also the coverage reductions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Bladworth and Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition from citizens opposed to possible reductions 
of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Landis and Biggar and district, I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
constituents concerned about the deficiency in residential 
support for southwest Saskatchewan residents who have 
long-term disabilities. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, a number of petitions today, all of the 
petitioners from the city of Swift Current, save one from 
Cadillac. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 180, 637, 640, 715, 716, 720, and 730. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased today to introduce in your gallery Cindy Zerr. 
I’ll get Cindy to stand up. Now Cindy is the mother of Arielle 
Zerr who is one of our Pages. And when I asked her what does 
your mom do, or what does she do, you know what could I say 
about her, she said oh, she’s my mom. So there you go, you 
firmly established yourself in that niche. 
 
So I’d like everyone to join me in welcoming Cindy, Arielle’s 
mom, here today. Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister for Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, today in your gallery are 25 public servants that 
have spent the morning at the legislature touring the building 
and meeting with the Legislative Library people as well as 
receiving a briefing on the legislative process. As well I 
understand that they had a tour of the cabinet room. They 
represent a number of public servants from various government 
departments such as Health, DCRE [Department of Community 
Resources and Employment], Environment, Highways, Ag and 
Food, the Public Service Commission, Finance, Industry and 
Resources, and the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they will be meeting with the Minister of Labour 
following question period. I hope they enjoy the proceedings 
this afternoon, and I would ask all members of the legislature to 
welcome these 25 public servants to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the public service members 
here this afternoon. And I have the great fortune to meet with 
you after you meet with the Minister of Labour, and I look 
forward to that. 
 
It certainly is, I think, a very wonderful outreach program for 
this Assembly to invite our public servants into the legislature 
to see how the Chamber works and how the legislature itself 
works, and I look forward to meeting with these folks this 
afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly some guests here from the great 
country of Korea who are studying at the University of Regina, 
and they are accompanied by Pam, one of our Pages. 
 
So I would ask Jung and Lee if they would wave, and we will 
acknowledge them and welcome them here to the Assembly, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly two young women seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They are Katie Westendorp and Sarah 
Yaremchuk, if you could please stand and give us a wave. 
 
Sarah is in this year’s graduating class from Martin high school, 
and Katie is an aspiring actress. And it’s my understanding that 
they are from the fine riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, but 
they’re not here to visit their MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]. They’re here to visit their friend, Jonathan 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

Moscoso, one of our Pages. So maybe we can catch up later. 
Anyway, please welcome them to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a great deal of pleasure, I introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the House someone sitting in the west gallery: 
Lily Olson who has been a friend for a few years. 
 
Now I was trying to decide how to introduce Lily. She wears 
many hats, is involved in many groups. Last I heard, she’s still a 
GSU [Grain Services Union] member, on leave working for the 
CLC [Canadian Labour Congress]. But like I say, Mr. Speaker, 
she wears many hats and carries many torches and does a great 
deal for the community and Saskatchewan as a whole. And I 
would like to welcome her here and hope all my members will 
join with me. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Saskatchewan Centenarians 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you about two 
Saskatchewan centenarians who hail from the Rosetown area. 
Alta Johnston was born in a covered wagon near Barnes, 
Okalahoma on December 5, 1902 when her family was making 
their way to Canada. 
 
She married Wilson Johnston in 1928, and they farmed in the 
community of Zealandia near Rosetown. She currently resides 
in Saskatoon so her sons, Wendel and Bill, were pleased to 
receive the centennial medallion and certificate on her behalf. 
 
Ivy Hunt was born in Winnington county of York in England on 
March 31, 1905 and just turned 100 years last month. She came 
to Canada with her parents on a cattle boat in 1906. In 1907, the 
family moved to Saskatchewan, and Ivy resided in Regina, 
Kenaston, Kindersley, Forgan, Saskatoon, and Glamis. 
 
In 1928, she married Forrest Hunt and they began farming in 
the Sovereign area near Rosetown. They raised a son, Douglas, 
and a daughter, Valeda. In 1972 they retired to a home in 
Rosetown where Ivy lived until 1996, when she moved into 
McNab Place. She currently resides at the Biggar Diamond 
Lodge. 
 
Family and friends joined with Ivy Hunt to celebrate her 
birthday with a party that included skits, songs, and food, as 
well as a presentation of her centennial medallion and 
certificate. The highlight of the day for me was watching Ivy, 
who loves music, singing with her two remaining sisters at the 
party. 
 
Congratulations to Ivy Hunt and Alta Johnston, Saskatchewan 

centenarians from Rosetown in this our centennial year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Youth Means Business Workshop 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The Beaver River Community Futures Development 
Corporation, located in Beauval in my constituency of 
Athabasca, recently held a one-day workshop in Meadow Lake 
to raise the awareness of youth entrepreneurs amongst northern 
students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Youth Means Business was the theme for the day 
and it certainly rang true as ambitious young people from 
almost every community and First Nations in the Northwest 
attended a conference where they watched three presentations 
on combining creativity with entrepreneurship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Monica Coneys, a former resident of South Africa 
who now lives in Saskatoon, was one such presenter. She told 
students how she used music, drumming, and dance to 
encourage teamwork. The second presenter, Renee Bouvier, 
created a structure out of spaghetti and gummi bears to 
encourage team co-operation and problem solving, Mr. 
Speaker. Finally, students also heard from Lee Bell of Meadow 
Lake, who started a recording studio and explained the process 
of creating a CD [compact disc]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this workshop emphasized the importance of 
northern communities working together and showed students 
that entrepreneurship can be exciting and creative, and there’s 
all different ways of making a living in their hometown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join in me in 
acknowledging the Beaver River Community Futures 
Development Corporation for hosting this very important 
conference and exposing our young people in the North to 
innovative ways of doing business. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Centenarians Awarded Centennial Medals 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — In recent weeks I’ve had the honour and 
privilege of visiting with three special ladies and their families. 
I met with each of these women to present them with the 
Saskatchewan centennial medals to honour them as 
Saskatchewan centenarians in our province’s 100th year. 
 
Mr. Speaker and members, I very much enjoyed the opportunity 
on behalf of my constituency and our province to thank and 
recognize the special people who make this province work — 
people like Belle Harley, Nettie Rolph, and Katie Stewart, each 
with over 100 years of experience, each with amazing stories to 
share. 
 
Their stories are of courage, strength, and hard work. They have 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

endured personal hardships, achieved personal victories and 
accomplishments. They have contributed to their families and 
communities. Each in their own way helped to build our 
province into what it is today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I ask members of the 
legislature to join with me in recognizing and honouring our 
Melfort constituency centenarians — Belle Harley, Nettie 
Rolph, and Katie Stewart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Centennial Peace Legacy 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Centennial 2005 Peace Project engages the 
province’s young people through various forms of art and 
activities in promoting a peaceful and compassionate 
environment in schools, communities, and abroad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nearly 300 students from the Grant Road and 
Kitchener public schools in Regina are creating a culture of 
respect and understanding to mark the province’s centennial 
year. This peace project, Mr. Speaker, is an expansion of Hear 
the Children Peace Day event that was founded by SaskEnergy 
in 1998 in Saskatoon. 
 
In 2003 the Canadian Red Cross in Saskatchewan began hosting 
the event as part of its educational programming. And now, Mr. 
Speaker, to build on the success of this initiative, two more 
Hear the Children Peace Day events will be held in the province 
in September of this year, one in Regina and the other in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through art projects, peace poles, and virtual 
diaries, this project provides our young people with an 
opportunity to become involved in the centennial celebrations 
while empowering them with a sense of responsibility about the 
role they play in shaping the future of our province and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
SaskEnergy and the Red Cross for their commitment to Hear 
the Children Peace Day events and in commending our young 
people from the Grant Road and Kitchener public schools for 
taking a leadership role that will build a legacy of peace 
throughout Saskatchewan and bring ongoing benefits to us all. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Watrous Resident Named Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to talk about a remarkable constituent from 
Watrous. 

On March 23, at the Watrous Civic Centre, friends and family 
gathered to honour Mr. Ervin Gross who was named 2004 
Citizen of the Year. Mr. Gross was born in the Simpson district 
in 1940 and later, in 1954, his family moved to Watrous, the 
community where he has lived ever since. 
 
In 1962 Ervin purchased a local barbershop, which has now 
become the longest run, single ownership business in Watrous. 
Mr. Gross’s continuous generosity around his community has 
earned him a great level of respect over the years. He was also a 
travelling barber, making house calls as well as hospital calls to 
all those unable to attend his shop. He has made many trips to 
Saskatoon, Young, and Liberty, as well as monthly visits to the 
Mandall House and Manitou Lodge to deliver his services there 
and spread some good cheer amongst the residents. 
 
Ervin is a diehard Montreal Canadiens fan — a man after my 
own heart — and a strong supporter of the Watrous 
Winterhawks, a team he played on as goaltender for 25 years. 
He rarely misses a Winterhawks game and each year he and his 
wife Carol present the Reg Preston Memorial Trophy to the 
most deserving player on the Winterhawks team. 
 
Ervin also spent many years on local council, first on Watrous 
Town Council from ’78 to 1988, and later on Manitou Beach 
council from 1993 to 2001. He sat on many committees and still 
is an active member of the Manitou Beach Recreation Board 
where his long record of volunteer community service 
continues. 
 
I would ask that all members join me congratulating a true pillar 
of the Watrous community, Mr. Ervin Gross. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Mortlach Commemorates Empress of Ireland Disaster 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the pleasure of attending a service of 
remembrance in Mortlach, my hometown, to honour Edith Hart 
and four family members lost in the Empress of Ireland 
maritime disaster of 1914. Edith’s parents, Mr. and Mrs. 
William Hart, also died in the tragedy, as did infant and brother 
William Hart and John Scott. 
 
On display this past weekend at the Mortlach community hall, 
Mr. Speaker, were the Empress of Ireland artifacts and 
Mortlach Village Council minutes expressing sympathy to the 
families of the local people who perished. 
 
Historian and retired teacher Marion Kelch was showing the 
artifacts to students and the public. As well, Mr. Speaker, Rob 
Rondeau, formerly of Rosetown and now a professional diver 
who was instrumental in the recovery process, was also present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Empress of Ireland was the class of the 
Liverpool-Quebec City route which brought 117,000 passengers 
to Canada. An estimated 80,000 of those passengers settled in 
the Prairies. Today, Mr. Speaker, there are almost 400,000 
residents in Western Canada who can trace their roots back to 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

the journeys of the Empress. 
 
On that fateful evening of May 29, 1914, 26 Saskatchewan 
residents aboard the Empress perished. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the House today in the year of our centennial 
and recognize this very important part of Saskatchewan history. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Rocanville Tigers Win Championship 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Wednesday evening, March 30 was a very special time for the 
community of Rocanville and in particular their favourite senior 
hockey team, the Rocanville Tigers. Mr. Speaker, it was on that 
evening that they captured the Triangle Hockey League 
championship for 2005. As Allan Reavie, the coach, says, “It 
was a great moment for the Tigers who had not won a league 
championship since 1981.” And he says, “It’s the goal every 
year to win the championship . . . and to win it in four straight is 
just huge.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Rocanville went into the final series they 
felt they were in for a real significant battle because they were 
taking on the Ochapowace Thunder, who had just defeated the 
Esterhazy Flyers, who were the league champions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, teams like the Rocanville Tigers or Esterhazy or 
Ochapowace, these individuals are the people who really create 
excitement in our communities during the winter months. And 
many people take the time to go and support senior hockey but, 
Mr. Speaker, this would not happen if it were not for all the 
volunteers who give of their time and support their local 
communities, their rinks. 
 
And so at this time I would like to say hats off to the Rocanville 
Tigers, Triangle League hockey league champions for this year. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Revenue-Sharing Agreement with Municipalities 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, first 
it was Regina with the 4 per cent hike in property taxes. My 
own hometown of Swift Current’s announced a tax increase. 
Saskatoon’s talking about a 4.8 per cent tax hike. Mr. Speaker, 
Yorkton, Yorkton has now confirmed a 4 per cent tax hike for 
its property owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, indirectly but to be sure, this government is 
picking the pockets of property taxpayers in the province of 

Saskatchewan while they sit on record revenues from the 
resource sector. Mr. Speaker, homeowners across Canada need 
. . . across Saskatchewan need tax relief. They need a provincial 
government that cares about revenue sharing. 
 
Why does this NDP government refuse to address the 
revenue-sharing issue for municipalities in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I appreciate the question. Certainly the member of the 
opposition Conservative Party should be aware — because I 
answered this question a couple of weeks ago — that we have 
entered into discussions with the municipalities to address the 
issue of revenue sharing over the course of the next couple of 
months. Mr. Speaker, also I can’t help but notice that just a little 
over a week ago in this House we had a budget vote, a budget 
vote that committed $55 million to education property tax relief 
and the opposition voted against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Yorkton Mayor Phil DeVos says his 
city was looking at a 10 per cent rate hike, but with a lot of 
work they’ve reduced that number. The mayor of Yorkton says 
there are many reasons for the increase, but fundamentally it 
comes down to no increase in revenue sharing from this NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker, including a government whose 
Deputy Premier represents that very community. The mayor 
says and I quote: 
 

Like just about every other community in the province, 
we’re staring down the mouth of a tiger that says 
increases. 

 
Homeowners across the province — Saskatchewan families — 
are looking for leadership from this government with respect to 
revenue sharing. Why is that leadership not forthcoming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again, appreciate the question. 
 
The members on this side of the House have been appreciative 
for quite a number of years of the work that is being done at the 
municipal level by municipal leaders, mayors, councillors, 
reeves, and councillors . These people put in a lot of time every 
year to meet the needs of their communities. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this government — just as they do at the municipal level, Mr. 
Speaker — this government sat down to review revenues and 
expenditures and the needs of the communities. We made 
decisions regarding choices, and, Mr. Speaker, when we looked 



2446 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

at what the municipalities were asking us for after they 
reviewed their needs and expenses, Mr. Speaker, they said we 
wanted infrastructure funded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we’ve committed $11 million worth of 
brand new money to infrastructure at the request of the 
municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister and this 
government should be appreciative as to what municipalities 
have done because in the ’90s when this government sent out 
the call for fiscal austerity, they phoned the municipalities. 
That’s whose phone rang, and the budgets for municipalities, 
the revenue sharing was cut massively by this government. 
 
Well now the government is sitting on significantly more 
revenues. The cupboard is not bare, and municipalities, mayors 
and councillors who report to their taxpayers are asking why the 
government has 50 million more dollars to invest in more 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]. Why do they have $72 million to lose on a BC 
[British Columbia] telecom — $72 million, Mr. Speaker — and 
no more money for meaningful revenue sharing for property tax 
relief? What’s wrong with the priorities of this NDP 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sure that the leader of the Conservative Saskatchewan Party 
recognizes and remembers some of the history that he may even 
have been a part of in the early 1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the urban revenue pool back in 1981-82 had 
increased by 10.2 per cent, and in ’82-83 just prior to the 
change in government, it increased by 11.5 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, when we look at the 1980s — that revenue-sharing 
pool — where did it go: ’85, 0 per cent; ’86, 0 per cent; ’88, 0 
per cent, ’89, 0 per cent; 1990, 0 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the last 
three years under this government, 18 per cent, 15 per cent, 20 
per cent increases, for 54 per cent in the last three years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Funding for Centennial Celebrations 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatoon Optimist Club has been organizing Canada Day 
celebrations in that city since . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Estevan. 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatoon Optimist Club has been organizing Canada Day 
celebrations in that city since 1971. It is one of the largest 
celebrations in Western Canada. This year the Optimist Club 
wanted not only to celebrate Canada Day but the province’s 
centennial as well. Last fall the club applied for a centennial 
grant and was turned down. Brad Sylvester, the Chair of this 
year’s celebration, was told he would not get funding as the 
Optimist Canada Day is an existing event. 
 
Can the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation explain why 
the province denied the optimist club funding for this year’s 
celebration? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, there is a number of events 
that are being planned throughout Saskatchewan. Just this 
morning the member from Moose Jaw North announced a 
provincial-wide celebration that’s going to be happening. And a 
lot of these recommendations came from a committee of the 
province’s people that made a number of recommendations to 
us in how we were going to celebrate our centennial. 
 
And I think there’s a lot of opportunities for the people of 
Saskatchewan to commemorate and celebrate our centennial. 
And I know that we can’t cover all the costs, but there is 
opportunities for all of them to participate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the optimist club applied for a 
grant to help celebrate Saskatchewan’s centennial. One of the 
ways they wanted to do this was through a fireworks display, 
but under the regulations, centennial funding cannot be used for 
fireworks. The optimist club was quite shocked to hear today 
that the province is spending almost $1 million for a huge 
fireworks display in 15 different communities, but it won’t 
provide funding for their Canada Day event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the double standard? Why can some 
communities get funding for fireworks and others not? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that we are 
not funding for Canada Day celebrations. And I also want to 
say that for our centennial year, it’s a once-in-a-lifetime 
opportunity. And I think this is a time where we want to include 
all of the provinces, all of the province including 15 
communities, including 2 northern communities. 
 
So I would urge the members opposite to join in in our 
celebrations and not be such party-poopers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2447 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, in a letter he sent to the centennial 
office, Brad Sylvester speaks of direct conversations he had 
with the Premier at the 2004 Optimist Canada Day. Mr. 
Sylvester writes that the Premier talked with him about the 
funding for centennial events and that the Premier, quote, 
indicated his opinion was the province should enhance existing 
as opposed to inventing from scratch or at least a portion of 
both. 

 
After he was turned down for funding, Mr. Sylvester wrote to 
the Premier to find out why, especially given their conversation 
last year. Can the Premier tell this Assembly why he would tell 
the Optimist Club of Saskatoon that he thought the province 
should enhance existing events when in actuality they were 
being turned down? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again that 
there’s all kinds of opportunities for the whole province and all 
communities to be part of our centennial celebrations. And we 
also have a group of, a large number of volunteers all over the 
province that are working hard to commemorate and celebrate 
our centennial. We have an independent body of people that 
determine, based on criteria, who gets funding for different 
events and legacy projects. 
 
And I think I would urge again the members opposite to join us 
in our centennial year of commemorating and celebrating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, Brad Sylvester and the Saskatoon 
Optimist Club are upset that the government does not have 
money for a free event, one that would be accessible to 
everyone, one of the largest celebrations in Saskatoon each 
summer. Mr. Sylvester writes, it is truly frustrating as an 
organizer of a free entertainment day in a city park to hear the 
province does have $675,000 to help fund a user-pay 
celebration and nothing for our day. 
 
Can the Premier explain this to the Assembly, exactly that? 
Why does this NDP government have money to put into an 
event that people have to pay to see, but refuses to provide 
funding to an event that is open to all citizens of Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, there is a number of 
signature events that are going to be happening throughout the 
province, and the gala is going to be one of those. And if you 
look at the lineup of talent that’s coming home from originally 
Saskatchewan residents, I think it’s not expensive at all. 
 
And there’s a whole number of other events happening 

throughout the province including homecomings and reunions 
that are going to be available to every citizen in this province, 
and those that are originally from Saskatchewan will be urged 
to come home as well. So again I would urge members opposite 
to join us and commemorate and celebrate because it only 
happens once in a lifetime opportunity for all of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Forecasting Oil Prices 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It’s now becoming increasingly clear 
this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s now 
becoming increasingly clear this NDP government lowballed its 
forecast for oil revenues in this year’s budget. No one except 
this NDP is predicting an oil price of under $42 a barrel this 
year. In fact, just last week the International Monetary Fund 
sharply increased its projection to $52.23 a barrel. Mr. Speaker, 
why is this NDP government lowballing the government’s oil 
revenues? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The Department of Finance, in putting together its 
forecast for the budget, relies on the advice of the Department 
of Industry and Resources. The Department of Industry and 
Resources has the facts with respect to the amount of 
production that they anticipate in Saskatchewan during the 
course of the fiscal year. The department then also surveys 
various industry analysts and tries to establish an average price 
as to what their forecast will be for the coming calendar year 
and also the fiscal year. They then provide advice to the 
Department of Finance as to what they think that price will be, 
and it’s on that basis that we then book a number and book the 
revenues that we see in our estimates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the average closing price of West Texas Intermediate light 
crude oil over the first week of 2005-2006 is $55.60 a barrel. As 
a result, this NDP government has collected, since April 1, $11 
million more in oil revenue than its own budget estimates. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Finance. Does this NDP 
government intend to spend this money on teachers? Will it 
spend this money on hard-working nurses, or will it be wasted 
on bad investments and boondoggles, as has been the practice 
with this government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
should remember that we’re only a week or so into the fiscal 
year, and when we book a price, that’s for 365 days of the year. 
And now if the member can tell us what the figures will be for 
remainder of the year, then maybe he’s got a point. But I don’t 
think he can. 
 
Which raises the question, which raises the question: how is it 
that he is able to say with that degree of certainty that we’re 
lowballing prices, yet he refuses to provide to the Legislative 
Assembly his analysis, his process, his methodology for 
arriving at that conclusion? If he does have a methodology that 
results in a different conclusion, perhaps he would provide that 
methodology to the members of the Legislative Assembly, and 
the price of the barrel of oil that he anticipates for the year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to present the 
information to the minister that he desires. I thought that him 
and his department would have that information. If the price of 
oil stays where it is today for the rest of the year, this 
government will have an additional $423 million, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the Romanow government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. Order, please. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Romanow government 
used to have a formula for distributing excess revenues: 
one-third on new spending, one-third for debt reduction, and 
one-third for tax reduction, Mr. Speaker. Under that formula, 
everyone got a share in that extra revenue when it came in. Now 
all we get with this NDP government is higher municipal taxes 
and money wasted on Navigata and Pangaea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want tax relief. Will 
this NDP government commit today to follow that formula and 
use a portion of its extra oil revenues to reduce taxes in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the process that we 
utilize to determine a price for the barrel of oil going forward is 
not dissimilar to the process utilized by the province of British 
Columbia or the province of Alberta. I believe the price for 
British Columbia is very similar to the price that we’re 
establishing. 
 
But I don’t know very much about this “if” methodology, Mr. 
Speaker. And perhaps the member might elucidate on that little 
word which is such a big word — if. If oil prices stay at a 
certain level. What information does he have that oil prices will 
stay at that level, Mr. Speaker? If, if, if — that’s a little word 
but has major consequence for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And on that basis he would start spending money, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re back to the old days of Mr. Devine here. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Collective Bargaining with Public Sector Workers 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last week the NDP caucus Chair told the Leader-Post 
that a number of unions had settled outside of the 0, 1, 1 wage 
mandate. He said, and I quote: 
 

If you look at some [of the] settlements and what they 
have achieved, then it is my belief that our settlements in 
the public sector have exceeded the cost of living. 

 
The president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour agrees. 
The same day, Larry Hubich said: 
 

. . . he too believes the NDP government’s public sector 
wage mandate . . . has been breached in many contracts 
and is now serving no purpose other than to make 
bargaining more difficult. 

 
Who are we to believe? Can the Minister of Labour tell us if it 
really is 0, 1, and 1, or is it what the NDP caucus Chair and 
what the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] president 
say, that the mandate has been breached and settlements have 
exceeded 0, 1, and 1? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Now going into this bargaining process . . . and I think I’ve 
repeated this enough times that it should be fairly fixed in terms 
of the parameters of the bargaining process. As you know that 
during some years when we’ve had good fortune — which I 
remember two big bump-ups since ’91 when I’d been elected 
— we have attempted to bring the spending line of government 
in line with revenues. In this past year, we adopted 0, 1, and 1 
with flexibility. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to explain more 
about what that is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 0, 
1, and 1 wage mandate simply doesn’t fly with the public sector 
unions any more. Last week Larry Hubich told The StarPhoenix 
that, and I quote: 
 

“I don’t understand the strategy of sticking to this phony, 
ill-advised, non-supported [wage] mandate of zero, one 
and one” . . . 

 
He also told the Leader-Post that the NDP should, and I quote, 
“ . . . be abandoning their ill-conceived zero, one and one 
[mandate].” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Larry Hubich calls this a phony mandate. The 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

NDP caucus Chair even agrees with that. What is the purpose of 
this strategy? Is it to negotiate in bad faith, or is it to create a 
false front for this government’s backroom deals — something 
the Health minister admits is common practice within the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, I do find this a little bit odd that we have now the 
Conservative Sask Party opposite trying to cast themselves as 
the friends of Larry Hubich and the friends of labour, but I’ll 
just let that pass for a moment. 
 
If the member wants to go back to the past maybe we can 
discuss their enthusiasm for the core services review which cuts 
hundreds of public servants in the provinces where it’s been 
undertaken. They can talk about the member who talked about 
getting rid of the skunks in the public service, and he apparently 
knows where they are. And so I would just say that mandate or 
not, Mr. Speaker, every government goes to the bargaining 
table with a budget. We adopted a budget guideline with 
flexibility, and certainly I think we’ve demonstrated that 
flexibility at the different bargaining tables. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what we are agreeing with and 
talking about is that unions are telling the NDP just how 
disrespectful the 0, 1, and 1 mandate is to the process of free 
collective bargaining. Stephen Foley of the Canadian Union of 
Public Employees has told the media that the NDP should have 
scrapped 0, 1, and 1 altogether and put unions on equal footing 
to do collective bargaining, Mr. Speaker. He told the 
Leader-Post last week that 0, 1, and 1, quote, “ . . . doesn’t 
ensure that everybody is treated fairly . . . ” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been calling on the NDP to drop the 0, 1, 
and 1 mandate for some time now. The unions are doing the 
exact same thing. When will this government start telling public 
sector workers by dropping the 0, 1, and 1 wage mandate and 
treating them fairly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think we’ll be happy to go 
head-to-head with the members of the opposition on the topic of 
fairness at any given time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Let me read a couple of quotes from 
the member opposite at the Sask Party’s convention, the 
“mandate for the civil service should be to go and find a real 
job.” Or we have this other lovely quote, Mr. Speaker: offer 

civil servants the opportunity to participate in the private sector. 
 
[14:15] 
 
And as much as I respect the private sector, I don’t think that’s 
what they had in mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now within the flexibility in our budget approach to bargaining 
in this last round, we’ve addressed health plan issues. We’ve 
addressed recruitment and retention issues. We’ve addressed 
hours of work issues, and we’ve addressed classification issues, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, how can anyone trust this 
government? This is a charade; this is a charade. Let’s put the 
position, let’s put the positions of the members opposite on the 
record for this so-called debate that the member wants to have. 
 
Let’s review what the Premier said. He respects collective 
bargaining and that the NDP would never interfere in 
negotiations. The Health minister, the Health minister says 
interfering in negotiations is common NDP practice, especially 
on the eve of an election. The minister responsible for public 
sector compensation says, zero but with flexibility. What does 
zero really mean then, Mr. Speaker? And the NDP caucus Chair 
says, the mandate is out the window, and it has been since the 
get-go, Mr. Speaker. When will the NDP stop using workers in 
this province as political pawns and give them the straight and 
honest goods, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to approach 
this for a moment from a different tack seeing as we don’t seem 
to be getting anywhere with this one. 
 
Everybody has to construct a budget and in order to pay people, 
not just this year but next year and the year after and the year 
after that, there’s an issue of financial sustainability. And the 
fact is that when the Minister of Finance speaks to the spending 
proclivities of the member opposite, he is trying to create a 
sustainable budget plan for government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order, please. The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 

Incentives for Potash Industry 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

Saskatoon I was pleased to announce incentives that will 
encourage expansion in Saskatchewan’s potash industry, 
incentives that will have a positive impact on job opportunities 
and the overall wealth of our province. 
 
Potash mining is very important to Saskatchewan. Canada leads 
the world in only two areas of mineral production, potash and 
uranium, and both industries are located right here in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s potash industry accounts for 30 
per cent of world production. Our province earns over $370 
million annually through potash royalties and taxes. Over 6,000 
of our citizens are employed by the potash industry directly or 
indirectly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our mining companies are good employers. 
Mining employees are the best paid sector of our labour force. 
Mining companies also are major customers to a large number 
of Saskatchewan suppliers, from engineering, machining, and 
transportation companies, to name but a few. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we’re blessed with potash reserves that 
can easily supply world demand for hundreds of years. World 
demand for potash is growing and will continue to grow for as 
long as population numbers and income levels continue to rise 
around the world. 
 
Saskatchewan’s potash industry has significant expansion 
potential and we as a government want to promote this potential 
to its fullest. That is why we are announcing two new tax 
measures. First, projects that increase the productive capacity of 
their mines by at least 200,000 tonnes of potassium chloride per 
year will be eligible for a 10-year holiday from base payments. 
The second change is a capital investment incentive. Companies 
will receive a depreciation rate of 120 per cent on new capital 
expenditures. 
 
Industry has responded very quickly to these changes. Potash 
Corp of Saskatchewan announced an investment at both its 
Lanigan and Allan facilities totalling $456 million. Agrium has 
stated it will invest approximately $65 million expanding its 
mine at Vanscoy. Mosaic announced it will further develop its 
Esterhazy facility with an investment up to $210 million. Mr. 
Speaker, this represents over $700 million in new capital 
investment, and will involve 1,700 person-years of construction 
work, and will create more than 230 permanent jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the projects announced today are the equivalent of 
two entirely new potash mines, and will increase our potash 
production by over 20 per cent. These measures are part of a 
larger plan to encourage growth in Saskatchewan’s mining and 
petroleum industries. 
 
In 2002 we made oil and gas drilling in Saskatchewan 
competitive with Alberta. In the same year we established the 
six-year mineral exploration incentive package. And there’s an 
explosion of exploration activity going on in Saskatchewan, 
which bodes well for the future of mining in our province. In 
2003 we reduced profit taxes for the potash industry and 
provided more favourable recognition for capital expansion. 
 
Recently we announced incentives for encouraging enhanced 
oil recovery projects because it is well known, Mr. Speaker, that 
the key to Saskatchewan’s oil resource is to improve recovery 

from existing reserves and wells. Today we’re making more 
changes. 
 
Mining is a key cylinder in the economic engine of 
Saskatchewan. It is the third largest sector of our economy. We 
will continue working to ensure that the province offers one of 
the most competitive mining investment climates in Canada and 
in the world, which is recognized, Mr. Speaker, by mining 
commentators around the globe. 
 
All change comes as a result of extensive consultation with our 
stakeholders. We’ve worked closely with the potash industry to 
introduce tax measures today that will stimulate optimal 
development. Saskatchewan has a more competitive business 
environment for the potash industry as a result of these changes. 
 
We have an environment that rewards substantial new 
investment. At the same time we are preserving government’s 
existing revenue base. The change will generate new 
opportunities and wealth all around. It will ensure 
Saskatchewan remains the dominant player in the international 
potash industry. This is good news, Mr. Speaker, and all 
members of this House should stay tuned for more good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Today’s potash announcement enhances 
what is already a good news story in Saskatchewan. Our 
economy is growing, Mr. Speaker. We’re building on our 
strengths to create new opportunities for our young people and 
to build our economy for future generations. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
respond on behalf of the Minister of Industry and Resources. 
And the Saskatchewan Party is pleased to hear today of the 
announced incentives that will encourage expansion of the 
potash industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Last fall, Mr. Speaker, there was concern that the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan was contemplating expanding in 
New Brunswick rather than in Saskatchewan because of the 
high taxation rate in Saskatchewan. The industry indicated that 
the tax — provincial tax combined with the federal tax — was 
69 per cent, and in New Brunswick if they expanded there, the 
taxation would be less than half of the amount of what it would 
be in Saskatchewan. 
 
At that time when the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
raised their concerns, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
went on record and made comments in the House and in the 
press, indicating that the government should cut taxes to spur 
growth in the potash industry instead of driving investment 
away. He also went on to say that he called on the government 
to implement new growth tax cuts that will incent a company 
like PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan] to invest here. 
He further said that the government should implement changes 
that would lower the tax rate for incremental growth in the 
potash production. 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition also in the 
Promise of Saskatchewan, his economic paper, advocates the 
creation of new growth tax incentives to spur economic growth 
in specified industries. And also in the Saskatchewan Party’s 
100 ideas, no. 21, we also reiterate the same policy, Mr. 
Speaker. So we are pleased today that the government has 
responded positively. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party would also like to take this opportunity 
to congratulate the industry for their efforts and their 
determination to sustain and grow the potash industry in 
Saskatchewan so that Saskatchewan can remain the world’s 
leading producer of potash. The companies are prepared to 
increase their capacity to supply the ever increasing demand for 
potash but must be able to do so within a competitive 
environment. The potash industry is a major contributor to the 
economy and is key to job growth. 
 
Today we support the government in its announcement, an 
announcement that outlines steps to ensure that there is a 
competitive advantage for the potash industry to remain and to 
expand in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
Injury Income Benefits 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This morning SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
announced that it is increasing injury income benefits to their 
most seriously injured customers. The government will soon 
introduce legislative amendments to make these income benefit 
enhancements possible. Mr. Speaker, upon proclamation of the 
legislative changes required, SGI customers who suffered 
catastrophic injuries prior to August 2002 will all receive the 
same income benefit based on the industrial average wage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The increase in income benefits will 
affect approximately 200 customers injured prior to the 
introduction of no-fault in 1995, Mr. Speaker, and before 
improvements were made to benefits in August 2002. In both 
cases some customers are currently receiving an income benefit 
less than the industrial average wage. 
 
These customers who are permanently and severely injured will 
receive, at a minimum, an income benefit based on the 
industrial average wage which is currently at $430.56 per week, 
Mr. Speaker. The benefit will be indexed to the consumer price 
index. This will mean an increase of as much as $180 per week 
for some of the affected customers. This is a very important 
benefit announcement for these particular SGI customers who 
rely on these injury income benefits to live on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This change is being made to ensure that all customers who do 
not have choice in their insurance coverage prior to 2002 are all 
receiving the same level of benefits. The government is very 
pleased that SGI is able to make these enhancements to income 

benefits without having to increase insurance rates and while 
providing Saskatchewan motorists with the lowest auto 
insurance rates in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — SGI’s strong and prudent management 
has given it the flexibility needed to improve many benefits for 
its customers in recent years and especially in recent months. In 
January, SGI more than doubled the maximum benefit available 
to good drivers under the safe driver recognition program, again 
without increasing insurance rates. 
 
Last month, I was able to announce that later this year SGI 
customers will be able to make Auto Fund transactions using 
credit cards, again without increasing insurance rates. 
 
SGI is doing an excellent job of looking after the insurance 
needs of the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan want to 
see it stay that way, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the minister for sending me his speaking notes on this 
particular issue, prior to the House. Mr. Speaker, this is an 
important announcement and an important change at SGI, 
particularly in the area of funding those that were injured prior 
to 1995 and are on long-term disabilities. 
 
I know that I have met over the years a number of them, 
particularly those that are brain injured that certainly do need 
the support. Mr. Speaker, they all need the support but that 
particular group has made representations to this Assembly in 
the past looking for additional support, and that is critical, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The minister has mentioned that there’s 200 customers that 
were injured prior to 1995 but he gave no numbers of those that 
will receive additional benefits from the implementation of 
no-fault insurance to 2002. And I think that would be an 
interesting number to receive because you have to ask, why did 
some people receive the maximum allowable for the average 
industrial wage and others did not? And if it was part of the 
formula that was in place for SGI, has the whole formula 
changed, or what has changed? 
 
One of the concerns that I have though, Mr. Speaker, is whether 
or not there will be any retroactivity in payments made to these 
clients that may have been entitled to the full amount of the 
average industrial wage prior to 2002 and didn’t receive it. Will 
they be receiving a top-up for that full amount? Because the 
minister talks about a one-time cost of $30 million. Now as this 
increase goes on over the years, that there will be a cost in 
there, is that included in the $30 million or is that a one-time, 
upfront cost of $30 million? 
 



2452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

The reason I’m concerned about that, Mr. Speaker, is that there 
was a Federal Court settlement, or decision made by the 
Supreme Court of Canada, in February that came down and that 
lump sum payments for benefits have now become taxable. Is 
SGI going to take that into account if they’re making lump sum 
payments and pay sufficient funds so that the net is what is 
properly applied to the client rather than a gross that would then 
be taxable, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This is a good move but the minister continues to need to 
explain and provide the details on this particular issue as they 
move ahead. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before orders of the day under rule 7(1) to raise a point of 
privilege. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member please succinctly state his 
point of privilege. 
 

PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today, 
SaskWater officials were holding an embargoed technical 
briefing on the 2004 annual report for members of the news 
media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition sent a staff member to that 
technical briefing, requesting that they be in attendance, and a 
member of Executive Council told him he was prohibited from 
attending at the meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a precedent set in the House of 
Commons in Ottawa that said when you deny access to 
members of the opposition, any members of this Assembly, to 
the same kind of information in a timely way as what happens 
to the media, that is a breach of privilege for members in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. We’ve sent you much more extensive 
arguments in this regard and we await your ruling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — With your permission, Mr. 
Speaker, if I might make a few comments with respect to the 
issue of privilege for the House. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the ruling that 
the member references in the House of Commons in Ottawa is 
clearly with respect to legislation. This is not an issue of 
legislation that’s before the Assembly. 
 
I might also point out, Mr. Speaker, if it’s a question of 
technical capacity of matters that are to come before the 
Legislative Assembly, we take the point of view, that is the 
Legislative Assembly takes the point of view, that there should 
be sufficient grants provided to the caucus offices so that they 

can have the research staff that can assist them in reviewing 
documents that are to come before the Legislative Assembly. 
The members are certainly, I think, provided with embargoed 
copies of these reports and they have the research staff to help 
them to understand these documents, unlike the media who may 
not have that kind of capacity given . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members not to intervene 
while another member is on his feet and the floor at this time. I 
invite the Government House Leader to proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — So, Mr. Speaker, again the 
members of the opposition are provided with, in our view, 
sufficient funds to engage researchers to enable them to 
understand matters coming before the Legislative Assembly. 
We would take the point of view that that’s not something that 
would necessarily be available to members of the media, who 
must cover a large number of files in any given day, and 
therefore a technical briefing would be appropriate for the 
media. 
 
If it’s the intent of the opposition that there should, in addition 
to caucus grants, now also be technical briefings on all matters 
coming before the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
you that from the government’s point of view, we’d certainly be 
prepared to entertain that. 
 
We received no request for any technical briefing from the 
media, only a request that they be able to attend an embargoed 
briefing for the media. It’s not our responsibility, I would 
submit, to have the researchers . . . And I might point out that 
there was no request by a member. There was simply a request 
by staff of the members to go to this embargoed technical 
briefing. But if it’s their intent to go to the briefing to see what 
the nature is of the inquiry on the part of the media, as to the — 
in this case — the report that was the subject of discussion, it’s 
not our responsibility to provide the opposition with that kind of 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if the opposition is of the view that there should be, in 
addition to the grants they receive as a caucus, additional 
opportunities through technical briefings prior to something 
being tabled — not necessarily a technical briefing with the 
media — we would certainly entertain any such question, Mr. 
Speaker. But to say that the media receiving a briefing on a 
specific item, we should also be entitled to attend that because 
we want to know what kinds of questions the media might be 
asking, well it’s not our responsibility to assist the opposition in 
determining what the lines of inquiry will be by the media. 
 
As I’ve indicated, we provide them the funds so that they can 
do their research on the technical matters of issue coming 
before the Legislative Assembly. If they require something in 
addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I think the government would 
certainly be prepared to entertain that. So I don’t think that 
there’s a question of privilege here at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — At 11:20 a.m. today, in accordance with rule 
7(1), the Opposition House Leader gave notice that he proposed 
to raise a question of privilege. And I thank the member for 
providing notice and the documents related to his case. I also 
would like to thank the Opposition House Leader and for . . . 
the Government House Leader to provide the additional 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

information in their interventions this morning . . . this 
afternoon. I’ve had an opportunity to review the case and 
review some of the literature involved. 
 
In his case, the Opposition House Leader stated that a staff 
member of his caucus was denied access to a technical briefing 
on the 2004 annual report of the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. The decision to prohibit the attendance of the staff 
member, in the opinion of the Opposition House Leader, 
constitutes a breach of member’s parliamentary privilege. 
 
The basis of the member’s case is a ruling by a Speaker of the 
House of Commons made March 19, 2001. In that ruling, 
Speaker Milliken found that the denial of members or their staff 
to an embargoed technical briefing for media on a Bill 
constituted a prima facie contempt of parliament. The Speaker’s 
finding was later supported and reinforced by a review 
conducted on the matter by the House of Commons’ standing 
committee on procedure and House affairs. 
 
I want to remind members that under rule 1 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, in all 
cases not provided for, the usages and customs of the House of 
Commons of Canada as in force at the time shall be followed, 
so far as they may be applicable. I have surveyed the precedents 
of this Assembly and find none directly applicable to the denial 
of access of members or their staff from technical briefings. 
 
In making his ruling, Speaker Milliken acknowledged that 
lock-ups and embargoed technical briefings, for a long time, 
had been the way parliamentary business was conducted at the 
House of Commons. He also stated very clearly that previous 
Speakers had consistently ruled that it is not a breach of 
privilege to exclude members from lock-ups. 
 
However it was his point of view that the denial of information 
members needed to do their work was a key consideration in the 
case at the House of Commons, when members and their staff 
were denied access to technical briefings. Speaker Milliken 
stated the following: 
 

To deny to members information concerning business that 
is about to come before the House, while at the same time 
providing such information to the media that will likely be 
questioning members about the business, is a situation the 
Chair cannot condone. 

 
Despite this being a departure from previous rulings of the 
Chair, the House of Commons standing committee on 
procedure and house affairs supported the ruling. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Speakers have admonished the government 
for releasing Bills to the public before their introduction to the 
Assembly. Such infractions were not considered a breach of 
privilege. However this Assembly has no case as close as the 
Milliken ruling I have just cited. 
 
Despite that case relating to a technical briefing on a Bill, it is 
important to understand that whether a Bill or a report, the 
principles underscored by the House of Commons committee 
remain the same. That principle is, that nothing should be done 
that disadvantages or impedes members from carrying out their 
parliamentary functions. Speaker Milliken noted in his ruling 

that the practice of media lock-ups and embargoed technical 
briefings, whether they be on Bills, budgets, or Auditor General 
reports, are successful and useful when members and staff are 
given access. 
 
Given the Milliken ruling and the finding of the House of 
Commons committee on procedural and House affairs, as well 
as taking into consideration the arguments presented to this 
Assembly, I believe it would be appropriate for the Assembly to 
consider the direction that this Assembly wishes to take on this 
matter. Therefore I find that the Opposition House Leader has 
made sufficient case for me to find prima facie case of breech of 
privilege, and I invite the member to make his motion. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Following my remarks I will be pleased to present a motion that 
will read as follows: 
 

That this Assembly finds Executive Council staff members 
to be in contempt of the Legislative Assembly for denying 
official opposition access to the April 11, 2005, technical 
briefing on the 2004 SaskWater annual report, and that this 
Assembly urge government and Crown corporation 
officials to respect the rights and privileges of all members 
of this Assembly, by ensuring that official opposition 
members and their staff are allowed to attend any 
embargoed news conferences and technical briefings open 
to the members of the news media. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think there are some points that are really 
fundamentally important, to how any government and any 
opposition and members of this Legislative Assembly can 
conduct the responsibilities that are entrusted to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly correct that all members of this 
Assembly are legitimately deserving of all the information that 
is pertinent and relevant to matters that are going to be 
considered by this House, in a timely way. Mr. Speaker, we 
understand that in order for this to function, that there are rules 
of embargo that have to apply and confidentialities that are 
appropriate. We are not arguing or disputing the fact that there 
is the question of embargoed releases — as the media 
understands there are questions of embargoed releases — of 
technical materials and information surrounding not only Bills 
but also those issues surrounding the Crown corporations, 
which clearly in this province are under the responsibility and 
purview of the Legislative Assembly committees on Crowns, in 
order to review and to be aware of the activities of the Crown 
corporations in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to address some of the issues 
that were made by the Government House Leader in 
commenting and providing advice for your ruling. Mr. Speaker, 
the official opposition is not asking for an increase of its budget 
in order to do research and these type of functions. What it’s 
simply asking is for the government to allow, not on a 
case-by-case basis but on a matter of privilege, that when 
technical briefings are provided to the media, that members of 
the opposition and/or their designated staff are able to attend 
those technical briefings that are given so that officials from the 
various department or Crown corporation can make sure that 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

the media is fully aware and cognizant of what information is 
included in that Bill or in those Crown corporations. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this does not require anything further than 
allowing for one or two extra persons to be in attendance at this 
technical briefing, so that when the members are briefed by 
their staff member after the embargo is lifted, and the media 
actually queries members for their reaction, that they will be in 
benefit of the same detailed information that the media itself is, 
who is posing the question to members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is indeed as a matter of privilege that 
members should be entitled to that same level of information 
and confidence, that they have the greatest possible depth of 
knowledge about what the Bill or the Crown corporation report, 
in this case, is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may well be that it’s a departure from the 
current status quo, but I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, 
that this is not without precedence, in terms of being allowed to 
technical briefings. And on March 22, one day prior to this last 
provincial budget, the official opposition requested of the 
Finance minister his permission for exactly this to happen — 
that the minister would allow that members of the opposition or 
designated staff would be in attendance at the technical briefing 
on the budget document. And I would like to quote from a 
document, Mr. Speaker, and I stress I am quoting and here is 
what the document said: 
 

I, Harry Van Mulligen, hereby provide permission for 
Opposition Members of the Legislative Assembly and 
support staff to attend the Technical Briefing with respect 
to the 2005-06 Budget said Briefing scheduled for 9:00 
a.m. March 23, 2005 in Room 218 of the Legislative 
Building subject to the terms and conditions of the 
Embargo Agreement. 

 
Harry Van Mulligen signs this document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were very appreciative of the fact that we were 
allowed to send staff to that technical briefing on the budget 
document, and certainly I would express publicly our 
appreciation to the Minister of Finance for that courtesy and 
consideration. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, surely the official opposition does not have to 
go cap in hand every single time, case by case, every time there 
is a Bill or a Crown corporation tabling a document or an 
annual report and ask for the permission of the minister on an 
ad hoc basis and depending on the will of the minister and what 
mood they might be in at the day that we may or may not get 
access to these technical briefings. 
 
Surely the precedence set by the Minister of Finance is a good 
precedent and something that all members of this Assembly 
would see as logical and appropriate and be very much desirous 
to support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important to state that, you know, 
this House in the last two years or so have taken some steps to 
make this House operate more effectively and efficiently than 

maybe it did in the past. And I think that this is an opportunity 
for the House to take a further step that would actually improve 
the quality and the knowledge of the members that are 
participating in debates and making comment on issues, either 
pertaining to Bills and legislation that is coming before the 
House or the budget on an annual basis of course and/or reports 
from our Crown corporations. 
 
The government and I think the opposition understands very 
clearly and well how important it is that everyone has 
knowledge and a complete set of facts in terms of being able to 
comment on things that are before the House. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s very, very important that this House takes the time to 
consider this and consider it very importantly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in going through the details of this ruling, I think 
that there is information and precedented that certainly has 
come from the Speaker of the House of Commons in Canada on 
March . . . The situation was in March 2001 where a very 
similar circumstance pertained to the House of Commons in 
Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, it was very similar insofar as a member of 
the staff of the opposition was denied access to a technical 
briefing, in this case on a piece of legislation, on a Bill and not 
a Crown corporation report. But I think that it is pretty clear that 
the House of Commons clearly believed that this was an issue. 
 
The Speaker in his ruling on March 19 said, and I quote the 
following: 
 

. . . the issue of denying members information that they 
need to do their work has been the key consideration for 
the Chair in reviewing this particular question of privilege. 
To deny to members information concerning business that 
is about to come before the House, while at the same time 
providing such information to media [which] . . . will 
likely be questioning members about that business, is a 
situation that the Chair cannot condone. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of that request by the opposition, the 
Speaker agreed that this was a matter that should be discussed 
by the House of Commons, and in their discussion there was an 
agreement by the House of Commons that this issue be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Procedure and House Affairs of 
the House of Commons. And so as a result of the motion that 
was put to the House of Commons, this issue was referred to a 
standing committee on privilege . . . or Procedure and House 
Affairs. That committee reported on the matter as follows, and 
again I quote: 
 

The major difficulty in this case arises from the fact that 
the pre-introduction briefing was offered exclusively to 
representatives of the media. Not only were Members of 
the House of Commons not offered or invited to such a 
briefing, their staff [was] explicitly denied entry to the 
technical briefing that was given. Members were, 
therefore, predisposed to disadvantage and embarrassment 
in that they could be questioned about business to come 
before the House or [be] just introduced, without being 
provided with the same information as those asking them 
had. This is precisely what happened to Mr. Toews who 
was the Official Opposition critic for the Justice portfolio. 

 
The committee went on to say, and I quote: 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

The provision of the briefing to the media and not to 
Members [of] legislation before its introduction to the 
House of Commons, undermines the pre-eminence of the 
House of Commons in legislative matters, and the right of 
the House to be informed first. Such an action impedes, 
obstructs, and disadvantages Members of Parliament in 
carrying out their parliamentary functions. In all of these 
circumstances, the Committee has come to the inescapable 
conclusion that the privileges of the House and its 
Members have been breached in this case. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the case that we’ve brought before this 
Assembly in regard to the issue that occurred today is very 
clearly similar in nature — almost, arguably, identical. 
 
Clearly official opposition members require access to 
information about the Crown corporations’ annual reports. All 
Crown corporations’ annual reports are subject to the review by 
the Crown and Central Agency Committee which include 
members of the official opposition. 
 
Therefore the official opposition, furthermore the official 
opposition critic is usually questioned by the media about each 
Crown report when it is released. This creates the real 
possibility that a member, on very short notice, is going to be 
facing questions based on information that the media could 
have as a result of the technical briefing, and the opposition 
member who has to make this comment is not privy to that 
same information. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, if you compare it to the situation of the 
House of Commons in Ottawa we have a very similar condition 
in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it is indeed appropriate that this 
motion be considered and be supported by all members of this 
legislature, that this legislature looks at the issue of the role and 
responsibility, not only of government members and ministers 
of the Crown and senior members of Crown corporations, but 
also recognizes that in order for our parliamentary system to 
function in the true sense of the word, there has to be an 
informed and enlightened opposition who can then undertake 
their responsibility of holding to account the government and 
the members of the senior level of Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope and trust that the government will see their 
way clear to supporting this motion. I certainly think that it is an 
important motion that needs to be considered. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that when the government recognizes that this is an 
important piece of change that can occur in this Assembly and 
occur for the betterment of the proper and thorough 
investigation and consideration of matters before this 
Assembly, that we will see that the government as well as 
opposition members will agree today to support the motion that 
has been proposed. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would move: 
 

That this Assembly finds Executive Council staff members 
to be in contempt of the Legislative Assembly for denying 
the official opposition access to the April 11, 2005, 
technical briefing on the 2004 Saskatchewan Water 
Annual Report and that this Assembly urge government 

and Crown corporation officials to respect the rights and 
privileges of all members of this Assembly by ensuring 
that official opposition members and their staff are 
allowed to attend any embargoed news conferences and 
technical briefings open to members of the news media. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would so move this, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort and seconded by the member for Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That this Assembly finds Executive Council staff members 
to be in contempt of the Legislative Assembly for denying 
the official opposition access to the April 11, 2005, 
technical briefing on the 2004 SaskWater Annual Report 
and that this Assembly urge government and Crown 
corporation officials to respect the rights and privileges of 
all members of this Assembly by ensuring that official 
opposition members and their staff are allowed to attend 
any embargoed news conferences and technical briefings 
open to members of the news media. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to second my 
colleague’s motion. Mr. Speaker, I agree with the comments 
made by the member from Melfort. And I’m frankly troubled 
that this is an issue that is even before the House today. 
 
The issue that we’re dealing with is the very essence of how a 
government communicates with its citizens. I think we have 
become so embroiled unfortunately in politics and political 
gamesmanship that what we’re doing is thwarting the very 
reason that we were elected to serve. This is not something 
that’s part of partisan or party politics. This goes to the very 
method and the very issue of what a government was elected to 
do, and that was to pass legislation, pass a budget, and 
communicate with its citizens. 
 
What happens and what this government wants you to do, Mr. 
Speaker, is to allow them to say, we will selectively choose 
which citizens we feel are appropriate to give embargoed 
information to and which citizens we feel are not appropriate to 
do that. 
 
What would happen, Mr. Speaker, if to carry this to its 
conclusion, they’d say, oh well, we don’t think the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] is particularly supportive. 
They’re using these things for what we don’t think are 
supportable purposes, even though there’s never been an issue 
that the embargo has been breached. But they say the CBC, for 
example, is not using this information appropriately, fairly, or 
for the reason it was put forward, Mr. Speaker. So at that point 
in time they say, we will do a technical briefing for all the 
media in the province with the exception of the CBC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the underlying principle that’s here is that this 
information is not party information or political information. 
This is information prepared by government agencies, Crown 
corporations, and departments — information that was prepared 
and put together by professional civil servants with taxpayer 
dollars. This is something that is funded by the citizens of this 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

province, and it is not right for anyone in this government to 
stand up and say, we wish now to be selective and decide who 
we can parcel information to, at what point, and in what fashion 
we can do it. 
 
If a member of the media is entitled to that information, clearly 
a member of the opposition should be entitled to be there so 
they know what type of questions will be put forward so that 
they can have the same background information that the media 
has with regard to the operation of whether it’s a government 
department, a Crown corporation, or any other entity that is 
funded with taxpayer dollars. 
 
[15:00] 
 
This goes to the very fundamentals of our democratic process, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think if the members opposite step back and 
just consider who is paying for this, they would give it some 
thought and they would say, absolutely. As soon as we’re going 
to give it to the media, we should give it to the members 
opposite. They sign the embargo agreement the same way that 
the media does, and deal with it in this same fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the research and background material that’s given 
at technical briefings is not prepared by caucus staffers or party 
staffers. That information is prepared by civil servants — who 
are on a government payroll — and very much belongs to the 
public at large, to the citizens of this province. To try and treat 
that information otherwise or try and deal with it in a selective 
fashion is inappropriate. It’s wrong, and frankly, Mr. Speaker, I 
find it offensive that we’re even having to have this debate. 
 
When this information is put forward, put forward to the media, 
clearly we’re in a position that we should have that information 
as members of the opposition. We as members of the opposition 
have constituents and have citizens of the province that contact 
us for information. To put members of the opposition or 
members of the government — whether they’re backbench, 
cabinet, or this side of the House or that side — at a 
disadvantage in dealing with their constituents is wrong. It’s 
offensive. It’s not right, and it’s not democratic. And I think if 
those members had to account to their citizens and say, gee I’m 
not entitled to have this information — only some MLAs are 
entitled to it — it’s something that would not be acceptable. 
And I’d like to urge them to give this matter some serious 
second thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a situation that is exactly . . . 
[inaudible] . . . with the situation that arose in the House of 
Commons. The Speaker gave a thorough and well-reasoned 
judgment in that decision. A copy of that has been provided to 
the Government House Leader and to yourself. And the 
comments that you raise are something that I think is fair. It’s 
appropriate and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just ask the member 
not to refer to any remarks with respect to the Speaker in this 
debate. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — I’ll just deal specifically with the ruling that 
was made, Mr. Speaker. What was happening in Ottawa was 
virtually the same thing that was happening here. Courtesy 
information was being provided on an ad hoc basis, subject to 

signing an ad hoc . . . The technical background, which is the 
access to the officials that prepared the documents, that dealt 
with it, that information was not given to other members, and 
those members were not adequately able to carry out their 
function. 
 
They . . . [inaudible] . . . and the Speaker made a ruling, and 
made a ruling that that was something that was undemocratic, a 
wrongful use of government funds to try and deal with it, and 
talked about lock-ups, talked about other things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not an issue of a lock-up or something 
where you may glean some information by the long term that 
you spend there, or trying to spin the media, to use that term. 
This is simply a matter where information is provided, usually 
by way of a PowerPoint presentation, by way of having two or 
three government officials there that are able to answer 
questions, have some form of dialogue with them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we find this something that we’re not at all 
comfortable with. There will probably come a time in the future 
— and frankly, I hope the not-too-distant future — where the 
members opposite may be sitting on this side of the House, 
some of them that do get re-elected, and certainly would not 
want to see them in that position where they have to go back to 
their constituents and where they have to go to their 
constituents and say, I’m sorry, I’m not in government any 
more, therefore I can’t get this information, or I don’t 
understand this issue. 
 
It’s imperative that all of us as MLAs are going to have to have 
full, complete, frank, and open access to all information that’s 
prepared by or for any government official when it’s being 
presented to the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just think that the members opposite should give 
it some serious thought to what kind of precedent they want to 
send, and what kind of a message that they wish to send to their 
constituents, to their taxpayers, and to the citizens of this 
province by this kind of a selective democratic process which, 
frankly, is not allowed in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rules of our legislature are that unless contrary 
in another rule or ruling, we are bound by the precedent set in 
parliament. And, Mr. Speaker, the precedent that’s put forward 
is exactly on point, except that it deals with a Bill rather that a 
technical briefing dealing with a finance matter. And frankly, I 
can see absolutely no difference whatsoever. 
 
It’s a matter that that is the information that the public is 
entitled to, that is the information that MLAs will be asked 
about, and there’s not a reason in the world why each and every 
MLA shouldn’t be there or shouldn’t be entitled to have an 
official from their office, from their department to be there to 
gain and gather the information that’s to be there — and to not 
only that, but to hear the questions that are being asked by other 
members of the media, other MLAs from either side of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that all the members over there have in the 
past, at least outwardly, put forward the position that they 
wanted to be democratic and wanted to be perceived as being 
democratic. And for them now to say, no, we’re not doing this; 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

we’re going to use those taxpayer dollars to be secretive; we’re 
going to use that information to try and thwart you, the 
opposition, in your obligation to carry out your role; Mr. 
Speaker, it is offensive. It’s not something that I think this 
legislature or the legislature in any province would condone or 
should carry out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move to second this motion and urge all 
members to support this motion and would hope that we’re in 
the position that, after brief consideration, some of the members 
opposite would very quickly want to be supportive of this as 
well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate all of the comments that I’ve heard from the 
opposition in this with respect to this motion. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that when issues of reporting 
accountability are brought to the attention of the government, 
we tend to respond positively. I think our record over the course 
of the last 14 years or so has been a very good record in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
No one could possibly confuse the record of the NDP 
government in Saskatchewan with that of the Devine 
Conservative administration which preceded it in the 1980s. 
Some of the members opposite either served with that 
administration or worked in that administration, worked very 
hard then to deny access of members of the Legislative 
Assembly to report. 
 
One remembers, one remembers the comments of the Finance 
minister at that time when he was asked about not providing the 
public accounts in a timely fashion — said that, well I don’t 
have to do that and if I don’t have to do that, I’m not going to 
do that. And so it was with the public accounts; so it was with 
any number of reports. So it was with measures that would help 
the members of the Legislative Assembly and the public to 
understand important things like the finances. The changes 
since 1991 have been very great in this Assembly and I think it 
speaks well to the record of the government that we embrace 
reporting, we embrace accountability, Mr. Speaker. So there is 
much for us to agree with in the comments of the members 
opposite. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve always taken the position 
that opposition members should be assisted to be able to 
understand the great complexity of matters that come before the 
Legislative Assembly. It is for that reason that the grants to the 
caucus offices, and in particular the opposition caucus, has 
grown substantially over the years so that the members can 
have the benefit of both staff internal to their caucus to research 
and review matters that come before us, whether it’s legislation 
or budgetary or reports such as the report under question, but 
also to engage research advice from outside their caucus, that is 
to say professional research and advice from within the 
community at large. 
 

So we’ve taken a position that caucus members, and 
particularly the opposition caucus, should be funded 
appropriately to enable them to do that, and I’m pleased to see 
that there has in fact been almost a tripling of the caucus office 
grants to the opposition caucus over the course of the last 
number of years. And we would hope that that tripling of funds, 
Mr. Speaker, will assist them to do the research that is 
necessary to understand the complexities of matters that come 
before us, but we don’t lay hard and fast rules about how those 
funds should be expended. If the opposition, for example, wants 
to spend that money on television advertising to promote their 
leader, well that’s certainly their prerogative and their right to 
do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I might point out too that there’s an important distinction here 
between the research capacity and the support that is provided 
for the opposition caucus to understand the complexity as 
matters come before us. 
 
I might point out that in addition to that, members themselves 
are in a position to ask questions in committees of the 
Legislative Assembly. I would note that this particular report 
will be referred to a committee of the Legislative Assembly, 
and in that committee the members have the opportunity to ask 
detailed questions about what is in the report and detailed 
questions about the activities of the corporation in question. 
 
That’s not something that the media can do, Mr. Speaker, but 
that certainly is a right that the members have. And they’re 
assisted by their research capacity which is in turn supported by 
a vote of the members of the Legislative Assembly and 
something that we’ve always supported, Mr. Speaker, because 
we believe that in our system of government there should be an 
opposition that is in a position to effectively criticize the 
government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the technical briefings for the media are provided 
so that the media members might be in a better position to 
understand some of the technical details in those reports. Those 
are briefings that are provided by officials — or responsible 
officials in this case — would have been provided by the 
officials of SaskWater prior to a press conference, an 
embargoed press conference with the minister. 
 
So I’m not really clear what it is that members will gain from 
that kind of technical briefing. Again, given the level of support 
they have for research capacity, what additional information 
would be provided that they cannot garner at this point, 
recognizing too that in this particular case, when it comes to a 
report, that the report in question, the members receive an 
embargoed copy of that report the day before, I believe. And 
they certainly have an opportunity again for their research staff 
to go over that report and to prepare the members with any 
relevant questions that might be forthcoming from the tabling of 
that report here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I don’t think that the media necessarily have the technical 
research capacity to do an in-depth analysis of a report such as 
this. And that is one of the reasons that over time it’s seen as 
necessary to provide some technical background for the media 
on what is contained in the report so that they might be assisted 
in asking their questions of the appropriate government 
officials. 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, if the opposition, in addition to the research 
support that is provided to them, if in addition to that the 
opposition wants a technical briefing for their members and the 
members’ staff, the opposition only need ask the government. 
We’d be pleased to provide that kind of technical briefing. 
 
I’m not sure that I would want to necessarily, as the motion 
indicates, provide them entry to the technical briefing that’s 
provided to the media because in our view the opposition is 
more interested in that technical briefing for the lines of inquiry 
that the media have so that they might then use those lines of 
inquiry in question period or outside of question period. So it’s 
more a matter of determining what is the spin that should be put 
on this as opposed to understanding the details of the reports, in 
this case the SaskWater Corporation report that comes before 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So I would make a distinction about what kinds of opportunities 
should be provided for the opposition. If it’s a technical briefing 
for matters . . . for members of the opposition, the same 
technical briefing that we would provide to the media, then 
we’re quite prepared to do that. And if we had been asked to do 
that in this particular case, we would do that. 
 
But to gain entry into a technical briefing for the media so that 
they can gain insight, not necessarily into the report, but into the 
direction that the media is going, well that’s something else 
again. And I don’t propose that it’s my responsibility to make 
the opposition spin doctors, their work, to make it any easier, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not our responsibility to assist them to 
understand what the media is thinking, and where it is that the 
media want to go. I was interested to hear that the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast, when he seconded the motion, in fact 
made it clear that what they want to do is they want to 
understand the media’s questions. Well it may assist them in 
terms of what kinds of questions they would ask in question 
period. It may assist them in terms of how to put the right spin 
on things in the media scrums that are held after question 
period, but that’s not our responsibility to do that for them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so I take the point of view that if it’s a matter of technical 
briefings for members of the opposition, the same technical 
briefing that’s provided to the media, then we’re quite prepared 
to provide that kind of opportunity for members of the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would venture to say that questions of reporting, 
accountability are evolving questions. We as a government take 
our work seriously that the House, the government, must be 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, that we should 
always look in good faith at opportunities that help us to 
improve accountability. 
 
I think the suggestion from the opposition that there be 
technical briefings is a reasonable suggestion. We’re prepared 
to look at that and to work with them in good faith. We’ve 
taken a number of steps over time, whether it’s providing for 
the appointment for example, of a Provincial Auditor by the 

Public Accounts Committee as opposed to the Provincial 
Auditor being appointed by the government — as was the case 
in the administration that they supported many years ago, Mr. 
Speaker — you know, that’s the approach that we’ve taken over 
time and the approach that we want to continue to take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that some sections of the motion to not be 
acceptable to the government, and therefore I’m going to argue 
that by way of amendment that those comments be excluded 
from a further review of the amended motion so that . . . by the 
Committee on Privileges so that that committee can examine 
this issue and come back perhaps with some guidelines for the 
Legislative Assembly as to how we should deal with this matter 
in the future. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I then move, seconded by the 
member for Yorkton: 
 

That all the words before “that this Assembly urge 
government” be deleted and that the motion so amended 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve had a moment to look at 
the motion, and I would ask the Government House Leader, the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, if he would be in agreement 
with the Speaker’s rewording of his motion in this manner, that 
the motion would read: 
 

That all the words before “that this Assembly urge 
government” be deleted and the following words be added: 
 
that this matter be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges. 

 
It has been moved by the member for Regina Douglas Park and 
seconded by the member for Yorkton: 
 

That all the words before “that this Assembly urge 
government” be deleted and the following words be added: 
 
that this matter be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges. 

 
Seconded by the member for Yorkton. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This has been 
an ongoing issue in this Assembly for a good number of years, 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition’s opportunity to have access to 
technical briefings provided by government officials to the 
media. 
 
I remember back, shortly after 2001, decision made by the 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

House of Commons and Speaker Milliken to allow opposition 
members and staff in Ottawa at the House of Commons to have 
access to the technical briefings that were being given to 
reporters in Ottawa. 
 
A budget was coming down in Saskatchewan that year and the 
member from Saskatoon Massey Place was the Finance 
minister at the time. And he was going to deny the opposition 
and their staff members access to the technical briefing that was 
being given to the reporters that evening prior to the budget that 
was going to be delivered the next day. 
 
And the fact is the denial was even beyond the technical 
briefing. He was not going to allow the opposition members to 
even have access to the budget at all, which meant that the 
media was going to have access; therefore, the public in the 
sense of the media would have access to government 
information 12 hours prior to that access being given to the 
members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And based on the ruling by Speaker Milliken in Ottawa, when 
we raised this issue with the member from Saskatoon Massey 
Place at the time, he finally did relent and allow the opposition 
to have access to the budget documents and I believe at that 
time as well, to the technical briefing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But since that time, from time to time, this very issue raises its 
head again, Mr. Speaker — over and over — where the 
government wants to deny the opposition members to access to 
information that it’s providing to the media, therefore to the 
public, Mr. Speaker. So members who are elected at large by 
the people of Saskatchewan are being denied access to 
information which they need to carry out their duties as the 
elected representatives of each of the constituencies across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, information which the public . . . excuse 
me, which the government is giving to the media and to the 
public. 
 
That is a totally unacceptable situation, Mr. Speaker, and a 
situation which Speaker Milliken in Ottawa ruled was 
unacceptable — that members of the opposition should have 
access to information equal to that of the media, Mr. Speaker. If 
there is an embargoed copy of information, if there are 
embargoed technical briefings, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition 
have the same access as the media has — not different access, 
Mr. Speaker — the same access, the same bureaucrats, the same 
information, the same opportunity to question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And those things the government has been trying to deny time 
and time again, until they’re reminded of Speaker Milliken’s 
ruling and then they relent. This time, Mr. Speaker, the briefing 
this morning, the government did not provide access to. And 
that is clearly, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, a breach of the 
member’s privilege of this Assembly, that the public has access 
to information prior to the members being given access. 
 
I listened to the remarks by the Minister of Finance, the 
member from Regina Douglas Park, Mr. Speaker, and earlier in 
his comments, before the ruling was made to allow for this 
debate, he argued that resources . . . that the opposition had 
significant resources to provide themselves with the 
information, that the issue was about resources not about access 
to the information. 

And yet I find it farcical, Mr. Speaker, that that member turns 
around and says the media — CanWest Global, CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Limited], the CBC, Rawlco Radio, Rawlco 
corporation — do not have the resources available to 
themselves to acquaint themselves with the issues, to acquaint 
themselves with the legislation, with the reports, that the 
government needs to provide them with a technical briefing as 
to what the reports and legislation is about, but that the official 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, has the resources to do that. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, these companies that represent the media, that are 
going to the technical briefings, that the ministers are inviting 
in, are multi-multi-million dollar corporations. Yes, some of 
them are funded by the public. CBC receives hundreds of 
millions of dollars every year, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t have 
enough resources, so the government will provide them with a 
technical briefing, while the members of the opposition, who 
receive only in the thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker, for their 
research, have more than enough resources, according to the 
minister. 
 
I’d like to point out to the minister that, yes, the resources 
available to the official opposition have indeed increased over 
the last number of years. The reason for that is, Mr. Speaker, is 
because we have elected a lot more members on this side of the 
House, much to the member from Regina Douglas Park’s 
chagrin, I’ll admit — much to his chagrin. But the people of 
Saskatchewan chose to make the opposition almost as large as 
the government and therefore provide resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But down the road, it’s not to say that the next opposition will 
have the same number of people, therefore the same number of 
resources. But the rules will apply equally, whether you have a 
large opposition such as we have today or where you have a 
very small opposition, such as what we’ve had in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, with eight members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resources are reliant on the number of 
members, not the fact that you’re in opposition or in 
government, Mr. Speaker. So when the government argues that 
there is sufficient resources available presently, that may not 
necessarily be the case today and it certainly will not be the case 
tomorrow, where the resources made available are dependent on 
numbers, even though the rule application, Mr. Speaker, will be 
identical. 
 
So if members of the opposition are expected to do all of the 
research that the government has already done and gather the 
information that the government has already gathered once, Mr. 
Speaker, the next opposition needs to have access to that 
information equally. The rules will apply the same. Whether 
you’re small or large, it’ll be irrelevant because that will be the 
rule. And the government of today, the NDP government of 
today is trying to deny access. 
 
And yet the minister stood in his place here not five minutes 
ago complaining, Mr. Speaker, complaining that the previous 
administration did not give the opposition of the day access. 
And so what is the minister’s reply to that, what is the 
minister’s actions? To do exactly the same thing that the 
previous administration done, the one that he was criticizing, 



2460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I have to ask, is that minister, is the member from Regina 
Douglas Park prepared to criticize himself for doing exactly 
what the previous administration did, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 
Speaker, he can’t have it both ways. He can’t claim to be the 
saviour democrat and yet act exactly like the group before him 
did that he is condemning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it, as I mentioned earlier, amazing that the 
minister would want to defend the corporations, the 
multi-million dollar corporations in the media that they don’t 
have enough resources but that the opposition does have. I find 
that ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess I have to ask, why? Why does the minister want to deny 
the opposition access to the same, same briefing, the same 
technical briefing that the media are at? What is he hiding? 
What information becomes available to the media that they 
don’t want the opposition to have, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Are they going to present two different briefings? Are there 
going to be two separate sets of books provided? Is the briefing 
simply going to be their dog and pony show and then . . . 
[inaudible] . . . out the door before anybody can ask any 
questions? You don’t know, Mr. Speaker, because you’re not at 
both of them to judge whether or not the presentations are the 
same. 
 
So is the member going to be given access to the same 
information, to the same officials, for the same amount of time 
that is provided to the public by the media, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We can’t make rules in this House that will become that 
specific unless we want to create laws that are huge and 
immense and try to cover every possible situation. No, Mr. 
Speaker, what this House needs to do is to make a rule 
regarding access to embargoed materials, to embargoed 
briefings, that everyone has the same access and equal 
opportunity at those briefings, Mr. Speaker, regardless of 
whether you’re in the media, the official opposition, or 
whomever else the government is giving access to. But the 
official opposition has to have equal access and equal 
opportunity at those briefings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government, the Minister of Finance, was talking about the 
costs. Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to increase the 
cost if you’re having two separate briefings. If you’re doing it 
two separate times, that means that the government officials 
have to be here twice as long, you have to have two different 
rooms, or perhaps the same room for twice as long, Mr. 
Speaker. So it becomes an additional cost that the Minister of 
Finance is saying they can’t afford. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, why is the minister suggesting spending 
twice as much money if he’s saying that they can’t afford to do 
it? Do it all at the same time, Mr. Speaker. Give the members 
the same access that he is giving to the media, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess the minister in his comments is saying that the media 
should have access to the briefings but the opposition shouldn’t 
necessarily have access to the briefings; is saying that he 
doesn’t believe the media has the technical competency to be 

able to understand the issue, to be able to understand the 
budget, to be able to understand the Crown report, such as it 
was this morning; that the government has to go in there and 
spoon-feed them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I think the media has a lot more ability than what the 
minister gives them credit for. They have an understanding, and 
that’s perhaps what the minister is concerned about. He doesn’t 
want the official opposition in there to hear the questions that 
the media is asking of the officials to gain an understanding, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure why he’s afraid of the media’s 
questions, but he certainly seems to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister has moved an amendment to this particular 
motion, Mr. Speaker, and the part that he is removing — and 
I’d like to read it: 
 

That this Assembly finds Executive Council staff members 
to be in contempt of the Legislative Assembly for denying 
the official opposition access to the April 11, 2005 
technical briefing on the 2004 SaskWater annual report . . .  

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if there is no breach of privilege then 
obviously the members of Executive Council are not in 
contempt of the Legislative Assembly. But if they have indeed 
breached the privilege of the members of this Assembly, then 
they are in contempt of this legislature, Mr. Speaker. And it 
needs to be clearly laid out that any member of Executive 
Council or of the government that denies the members of this 
House on either side the opportunities to fulfill their duties as 
elected by the members, by the people of their constituency, 
that they are indeed in contempt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it needs to be made clear to the government, to 
Executive Council, and to their employees that they have to 
follow the rules, that it is in contempt of this legislature if they 
fail to do so. And to deny a member of this Assembly his rights 
and privileges to represent his constituents is a contempt of this 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and needs to be dealt with 
as such. 
 
And that’s why we’re bringing forward this motion, because we 
believe that the actions of the members of Executive Council 
breaches the privileges of the members of this Assembly, in this 
case the members of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. And 
the Executive Council needs to be reprimanded for that, Mr. 
Speaker. It needs to be clearly pointed out to them that they 
have no rights to deny the opposition access to the very same 
information on an equal basis as they provide to the media and 
to the public, Mr. Speaker. And that is exactly what they have 
been trying to do over and over again a number of times, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Speaker Milliken in Ottawa in 2001 reviewed a somewhat 
similar situation and made a very clear ruling, Mr. Speaker, that 
government cannot deny opposition the access to information 
that they’re providing to the public through the media — to 
members of the Assembly, to members of the House. 
 
I think that this House can find no other ruling, Mr. Speaker, 
than to agree that members of this Assembly have to have equal 
access, the same as the media and the public have, Mr. Speaker, 
to information, and that to deny members that same 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2461 

opportunity, equal access and equal rights, Mr. Speaker, to be 
fair it has to be available to all members of this Assembly at the 
same time so that members can carry out their duties. 
 
We walk out of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, after a presentation 
of an annual report. Let’s say it happens after routine 
proceedings, 2:30 in the afternoon. The media have had this for 
four or five hours, whatever the case may be, and yet the 
members of the official opposition are expected to walk outside 
and answer questions on a document that may be of 
considerable size and content within five minutes. It makes it 
extremely difficult, Mr. Speaker, to be able to deal with those 
situations. 
 
So members on both sides of the House need to have equal 
access and equal opportunity to bring fairness to the debate, Mr. 
Speaker, because otherwise the members of this House have 
had their privilege breached and are unable to perform their 
duty in the manner that is required. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe we need to vote against the 
amendment which tries to neuter this motion and support the 
original motion, Mr. Speaker. I will be voting in favour of the 
original motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
. . . I guess I wish I could say it was a privilege to join into the 
debate on this motion, but it really isn’t when you think of the 
intent of the amendment to take away from the motion that was 
put forward. 
 
The motion that was put forward was very common sense. It is 
the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. It talks about openness. It 
talks about accountability. It talks about a number of things that 
really have been precedent setting in this Assembly and in the 
House of Commons that have been set up for years, Mr. 
Speaker. With the opposition members or staff attending 
technical briefings is nothing new. We have been doing it over 
a number of years that I have been present in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So unfortunately, for some reason, whether the Minister of 
Finance got up on the wrong side of the bed today or whoever 
was in charge of the technical briefing for SaskWater got up on 
the wrong side of the bed today or perhaps even more 
importantly there was something in that briefing that the media 
may ask that they didn’t want to get out — maybe that’s what it 
was, Mr. Speaker. Maybe that’s what it was. 
 
Maybe there was something in the technical briefing that they 
didn’t want to have go public and were just hoping the media 
maybe asked it and the officials answered it and it wouldn’t get 
reported after. But they sure didn’t want the opposition. So you 
know it’s really, really unfortunate that we have to have this 
debate and speak on the motion and now the amendment. 
 
I want to talk about the two or three arguments that the Minister 
of Finance used as to why this motion couldn’t go forward, why 

the government could not agree with the motion put forward, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would invite, I truly would invite members 
on the government side to stand and justify why they are going 
against this motion, why they can’t support the motion, defend 
what they are doing, Mr. Speaker. Because quite frankly, quite 
frankly the arguments put forward by the Minister of Finance, 
the member from Regina Douglas Park, really do not hold any 
water at all. And he was really kind of treading in quicksand, 
and really had a very difficult job rationalizing why they 
couldn’t support the motion. He really couldn’t defend their 
actions. 
 
[15:45] 
 
His first argument when he started speaking to this motion is he 
was talking about, oh doesn’t the opposition have enough 
money to do the proper research? That was his first argument, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, it’s really interesting. And I’ve been in this 
House for six years and I’ve listened to the member from 
Regina Douglas Park, the Minister of Finance, when he was 
minister of Social Services . And I’ve heard him speak many, 
many times on different — whether its private members’ day or 
whatever — and you can be guaranteed when he gets into 
trouble, when things aren’t going very well for him, he will 
always revert back to the 1980s. He always reverts back to the 
1980s when things aren’t going quite the way he expected them 
to or wanted them to. 
 
And it’s interesting. You know, I think it was the Minister of 
Health the other day said, get over it; get over the 1980s 
because they are long gone. But it’s interesting because he’s 
arguing about how terrible things were then, he was arguing 
about how terrible things were run in the 1980s. And what he is 
doing today is absolutely what he was arguing against in the 
1980s. It’s the height of hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, to say that it 
was so terrible in the 1980s, and then do the very thing in the 
year 2005 that he was complaining about back 25 years ago. 
 
Because you know, in the 1980s — I believe it was the election 
of 1982 when the then premier at that time, prior to the 1982 
election — Allan Blakeney was in power. And it was a tired 
and worn-out government, not un-similar to what we’re facing 
today, Mr. Speaker. And it was a government that had lost 
touch. It felt that . . . it was arrogant; it could hide things; it 
could do just whatever it wanted to leading up to that 1982 
election. 
 
Well things changed quite significantly and the government 
changed to a Progressive Conservative government under Grant 
Devine . And I believe the Allan Blakeney government were 
reduced to — and you can correct me if I’m wrong, and I’m 
sure they will from the other side — about 10 seats . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . 8 seats. Thank you for correcting 
me. I thought it was 66 seats and they were down to 58 
government and 8 opposition. 
 
Regardless, at that time after that election, there were eight 
members. So I would use the Minister of Finance’s argument 
that how we get financing, how we get resources to staff and 
have research is so many dollars per member. So at that time, 
when there were only eight NDP members, there would have 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

been very little, limited — extremely limited — resources for 
that NDP opposition caucus at that time to hire researchers, to 
do the work that the opposition needed to have done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So his argument right now is, there’s more than enough money. 
There’s more than enough money for the opposition to hire the 
researchers that they need, and so we shouldn’t be allowed into 
the technical briefings. 
 
Well let’s fast forward this. Maybe in four years, maybe in two 
or three years, maybe in eight years, when that cycle turns 
around again sometime — and I don’t care whether it’s a Sask 
Party government or an NDP government — but the opposition 
is limited to five or six seats, five or six seats, and then see if 
the Minister of Finance thinks it’s right and just that, oh, the 
opposition has five or six seats; they may have one researcher; 
that should be all the information they need. Under that one 
researcher, they should be able to glean all the information they 
need to respond properly to the various issues that come 
forward. 
 
It’s an absolute ludicrous argument, Mr. Speaker, because after 
the 2003 election, the opposition is as big as an opposition can 
possibly be in this province. The opposition will never be larger 
than it is in this legislative session, Mr. Speaker, at 28 members. 
 
So because we receive, again, allowance per member and we do 
have a very highly qualified and competent staff of researchers, 
that doesn’t mean that because the opposition is at 28, they 
shouldn’t be allowed into a technical briefing. That has 
absolutely nothing to do with the argument. The argument is 
access to information that is being provided to media. Does it 
matter whether it’s an opposition of 2, 22, or 28? Is that the 
argument that the government is using, because that is the 
argument that the Minister of Finance has used, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I said, I would invite other members of the government 
caucus to stand up and say, is that the argument you’re going to 
use. If the argument is that you’ve got enough members so 
you’ve got a full cadre of research staff, you shouldn’t be 
allowed into technical briefings, but if you only have . . . let’s 
see, British Columbia with two NDP opposition members, two 
opposition NDP members in British Columbia — and they 
should not be allowed into any technical briefings? Or because 
they only have two members in the opposition NDP caucus in 
British Columbia, they should be allowed in, but if they had 20 
members in the NDP opposition caucus, they shouldn’t be? 
 
Is that the argument, Mr. Speaker? Because that’s the exact 
argument that the Minister of Finance has put forward. It has 
absolutely no basis. The members in British Columbia, the 
opposition . . . Just for people that maybe don’t know, it was a 
NDP majority government that was absolutely annihilated down 
to two members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well hypothetically, and I don’t think it’s that hypothetically, 
but let’s imagine in a year or two when it’s a Sask Party 
government that’s absolutely annihilated this NDP government 
and they have two members, should we stand up when we’re in 
government on that side of the House and say, well with two 
members you have more than enough research capital; you 
shouldn’t be allowed into technical briefings? Or should we say 

because you only have two members, you should be but you 
won’t be if you would’ve elected four more or twenty more. Is 
that the argument? Because that was the argument put forward 
and if that’s the argument put forward, I would ask members of 
the government to stand up and defend that debate, Mr. 
Speaker, because they can’t; it is undefendable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other area that he talked about, and certainly has been some 
talk, is that perhaps we should have a second briefing. We 
should have a briefing for the media and then we’ll make sure 
everybody clears the room and the officials can stay there and 
we’ll bring in the opposition staffers or the opposition MLAs 
and we’ll do it all over again, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 
government thinks should happen, is that we should have a 
mulligan, I guess you’d call it. That’s what the Minister of 
Finance would say is that, because we had the opposite . . . We 
had the staff in there for the first briefing, we’ll have a redo or 
we’ll do it again. We’ll have a . . . like a mulligan, a mulligan 
so that the opposition can stand up and ask the same questions 
that the . . .  
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Okay. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce some guests who are in your gallery. They 
are visiting here from British Columbia. It is Martin Dillabough 
from Quesnel and his daughter Julia. Julia is attending 
university here in the school of justice and also plays hockey for 
the Cougars. And so we’d like to welcome them to the House. 
 
I would say that . . . just to let you know that Martin runs a dude 
ranch out in Quesnel and if any of the members would like to 
go for a guided trail ride overnight or a longer period, they 
would be welcome to contact him. So nice to have them here 
and I’d ask members to welcome them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

PRIVILEGE 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for not letting me 
talk . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point 
of order. The member opposite has twice now used the phrase 
that the Speaker has previously ruled out of order as an attempt 
to bait and insult the Minister of Finance. And I would ask that 
you ask for him to withdraw his comment. 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast. Or why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise to respond to the 
member opposite’s point of order. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
comment that was made by the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone didn’t deal with the Minister of Finance and 
didn’t deal with any member by name. It dealt with a golfing 
tournament; it dealt with an unrelated issue. 
 
I can understand the ruling that the Speaker made earlier where 
it was talking about what the Finance minister had done and 
where there was an issue with name similarity. What we’re 
talking about is the golf tournament redo or takeover, no 
different whatsoever than any number of other places where 
that term might be appropriate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re at a point where we cannot be 
overly sensitive on this type of issue, where we’re not talking 
about the Minister of Finance or somewhere else where there 
may be an issue of taking somebody’s name or using it 
otherwise. We cannot, we cannot develop a system of rules 
where we cannot carry on our business or make a point or make 
a routine statement for fear that somebody’s name might be . . .  
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — The Speaker has 
previously ruled that the member would refrain from using the 
word mulligan and I would also so rule. I recognize the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll certainly try and 
refrain from using the term mulligan as much as I possibly can. 
I’m even thinking about — well I won’t go any further down 
that line — about a golf tournament that we do have coming up. 
And you know, we send . . . we sell extra shots I guess is what 
we’ll call it. So we’ll certainly say that we’ll call an extra shot. 
We’ll ask the . . .  
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to raise a point of 
order. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Point of orders. Go 
ahead. I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s well established 
in our rules and in our practices that when Mr. Speaker makes a 
ruling as you have done, sir, then the member who then rises to 
his or her feet should then not reflect upon that ruling, as the 
member for Indian Head has just been doing. So I would ask 
you to rule the member out of order. And if the member can’t 
stick to being in order, then you should ask him to . . . or you 
should move on to another speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I would caution the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone to refrain from 
commenting on the Speaker’s ruling. I recognize the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll just 
go down another fairway on this discussion, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’ll start talking a little more about, for example the . . . Now 
I’ve lost my train of, my train of thought. When we talk . . . 
What I was talking about, Mr. Speaker, what I was talking 
about, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that we could have a technical 
briefing for the media and then turn around and have another 
technical briefing for the rest of, whoever needed to be there, 
Mr. Speaker — whether it was ourselves as MLAs or whether it 
was our staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But even more importantly, and I can remember attending a 
couple of technical briefings that I was allowed into, not in the 
role as Health critic but in previous roles, and I found it quite 
interesting, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll be very interested to know 
what the government policy is in the event, or using the 
examples of the briefings that I was attending, where there were 
a number of third party interest groups at that technical briefing, 
Mr. Speaker. The technical briefings that I happened to be at, I 
would say there were five — no less than five — third party 
interest groups interested in what the discussion or what the 
issue was. And it was . . . I mean, it was about school board 
amalgamations. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The technical briefing was on school board amalgamations and 
there were people there from the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation]. There were people there from the school boards 
association. There were people there from LEADS [League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents]. 
There was people there from SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities]. And there was people 
there from SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association]. They all had a vested interest on what this 
announcement was being made, the announcement that was 
being made regarding school board amalgamation. 
 
Now we had asked if we could sit in on the technical briefing as 
well and the government said yes, you may. There is not a 
problem with you sitting in on the technical briefing. They had 
absolutely nothing to hide. There was nothing to hide. They had 
made their decision on what they were doing with school board 
amalgamation. Whether we agreed with that or not had no 
bearing on whether we were allowed in. 
 
I think we had been on the record and I had spoke before about 
the amalgamation issue and the government knew where we 
would be standing. They knew what their announcement was. 
So it didn’t have any basis as to whether we agreed with what 
was being announced or disagreed. 
 
The government was announcing school board amalgamations 
and the School Boards Association really wanted to know all 
the ins and outs and hear the media ask the questions. And 
certainly they would be asking those questions later, but they 
wanted to know what the media would be asking the minister 
and his . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Minister of Finance 
is saying, oh yes. Well what were they there for then, Minister 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

of Finance? Why were they allowed into the technical briefing? 
Why were they allowed into the technical briefing, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
They were interested in the information being given by the 
department officials that perhaps they didn’t have access to at 
the time because, you know, the announcement would have 
been made and the media would have been asking the School 
Boards Association for their point of view. They would have 
been asking the teachers association for their point of view. 
They would have been asking Neal Hardy and SARM their 
point of view. They would have been asking Don Schlosser and 
SUMA their point of view. 
 
And they were able to be in and listen to the department 
rationalize and explain the reason for school board 
amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. And we were able to sit in on that 
briefing too and learn what the department officials had to say 
about school board amalgamation. 
 
Now it seems really quite interesting that the government would 
open it up to the media and they would open it up to the special 
interest groups — the third party special interest groups — but 
then say no, opposition MLAs and staff can’t attend. Is that 
what it’s going to be? 
 
Okay, so the member from Saskatoon Nutana is saying, we’ve 
done that. So why didn’t it happen this morning? What was 
wrong with this morning? It’s happened over and over again, 
but it didn’t happen this morning, and why not? 
 
So the government has got caught on this and for some reason 
they feel that, geez, we really have to kind of start 
backpedalling . We can’t give in to this, so let’s make it, let’s 
get it into a debatable motion when it doesn’t have to be this 
way whatsoever. 
 
The government could have handled this in a totally different 
manner. They could have simply said, we were wrong by not 
allowing the opposition members, be it MLAs or staff, into that 
technical briefing. We were wrong, and we will next time that a 
technical briefing is offered up to the media, you will be 
allowed access. That’s how it could have been solved because 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana just said, well you were 
allowed into others. So yes, a precedent has been set. So why 
not today? 
 
Today the argument is there’s too many opposition members. Is 
that the argument? That was the argument by the Minister of 
Finance. There’s too many opposition members. You get too 
much money, and you have too many researchers, so you 
shouldn’t go into the technical briefing. How ludicrous is that? 
It has no basis whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But even . . . if you ask me, what makes even less sense is to 
have two technical briefings, to have two technical briefings — 
one for the media and one for the opposition staff and the 
MLAs. That’s how we’re going to address this problem. When 
there is precedent set in the House of Commons over and over 
again, and I can read through many, many different rulings by 
the Speaker, by Speaker Milliken. I can read through many of 
them . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Many of them in the last 
couple years. And if you want us to go back and check on 

others, we can check on others from the Speaker, Mr. Milliken, 
of the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, watch my 
pronunciation, Mr. Milliken of the House of Commons that has 
ruled on this very issue. 
 
But more importantly there has been precedent set in this 
House. There has been precedent set in this building that the 
government for some reason feels that it can, yes agree to this 
technical briefing, but not this one. We’ll let you into this one 
but, oh maybe not this one. And that really brings up a lot of 
suspicion, Mr. Speaker, an awful lot of suspicion. 
 
But the most important part of this I think, and I find it quite 
literally offensive, that the government would stand there and 
try and defend the fact that they’ll let media in to the technical 
briefing, and then they’ll come out, and have the media come 
out and walk down the hallway and stop in front of our office 
and say, as I walk out, well what do you have to think about this 
subject? 
 
The media has had far more information . . . It could be a Bill. It 
could be a technical briefing on a Bill. And the example that is 
used . . . and what is really ironic as I go through the one 
example that is in the different researching notes that I have, is 
the one issue that came forward in the Government of Canada 
in the House of Commons, was a point of privilege put forward 
by the then member from Melville-Yorkton, the then member 
from Melville-Yorkton who, if I remember correct, was Lorne 
Nystrom who has run for the NDP leadership countless times, 
now defeated. But it was an NDP member that raised the very 
point of privilege that this government is trying to defend. 
Avoid — it’s trying to avoid the very thing that their 
brother-in-arms raised at the House of Commons, that the 
minister ruled in favour of, that NDP member, the member 
from Melville-Yorkton, Mr. Lorne Nystrom. And the Speaker 
ruled in favour of him because he felt the government of the 
day at that time was not acting appropriately, just exactly the 
way this government has operated today. 
 
Now it seems like . . . you know and I would have no doubt that 
had the members in the government, the NDP members of this 
government, been patting Mr. Nystrom on the back, attaboy, 
Mr. Nystrom, you did the right thing, you’ve got to make sure 
that that government is open and accountable. 
 
But now that we’re back in Saskatchewan, hold on because 
there’s that double standard. Mr. Speaker, it’s called a double 
standard. What they expect to have operating and what access 
to in the House of Commons, they certainly don’t expect the 
Saskatchewan Party and the opposition to have access to when 
they’re in government, Mr. Speaker. It’s an absolute double 
standard if I’ve ever seen it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I said, and argued probably very well by the member 
from Yorkton-Melville, well probably argued very well, is that 
he did not have access to information that other people did in 
the media or with special interest groups, with special interest 
groups. So I would ask him, the member . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I just understand that the member from 
Battlefords, the minister of Municipal Affairs, was at that time 
in the House of Commons, was a colleague of Mr. Lorne 
Nystrom. 
 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

And I would say then, to that member, to stand up in this House 
and defend what the Minister of Finance has just said. Defend 
the arguments and rationale that the Minister of Finance has just 
said because, you know, I will guarantee that he would have 
been on the same side as that NDP member from 
Yorkton-Melville, Mr. Nystrom . He would have been saying, 
this is not acceptable that the government would not allow me 
as a member, at that time an MP, to have access to information 
that is given to the media. 
 
But he’s sitting in his chair today, and I’ll be very interested 
after I sit down if he’ll stand up and defend what the Minister of 
Finance has just said — that we shouldn’t have access to any 
technical briefing that the media has access to because that 
would be the very same point that was argued in the House of 
Commons. They did not have access . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well okay, let’s play with words now. 
 
The Minister of Finance and the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana is saying, that’s not what we said. What we’re saying is, 
let’s not deal with the issue right now. Let’s send it over a 
committee of privilege where we have a majority on that 
committee, and we can maybe let that just slip right under the 
radar screen because we do have a majority on that committee. 
That’s what they’re saying. That’s what they’re saying. They’re 
saying, let’s just be quiet about this right now and let it slip 
under the carpet so that we can deal with it in a committee, in a 
committee, that, you know, you question when that committee 
has met so very seldom — very, very seldom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This issue could have been dealt with like that. This issue could 
have been dealt with like it’s been dealt with many other times 
in the past, but for some reason — and I’m really, really 
interested to know what was in that technical briefing — 
because there is some reason why all of a sudden this 
government put on the brakes, put on the brakes, put on the 
censor tape. All of a sudden they stopped people from going 
into that technical briefing. 
 
And with the history of some of the issues that SaskWater has 
been involved in — you know, perhaps SPUDCO comes to 
mind — I can see why perhaps they didn’t want opposition 
members and staff in on that technical briefing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I will say that this is a sad day for this House and an 
extremely sad day for that government who has professed open 
and accountable, who has set the precedent to allow people into 
technical briefings, not just media and not just opposition 
MLAs and staff, but third party interest groups allowed into 
those technical briefings, and so they should be. It’s a sad day 
for the House when the Minister of Finance stands up and uses 
that lame arguments that he has used. I will be supporting the 
motion and disagreeing with the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Government Relations.  
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have been listening to the debate for the last hour and 45 
minutes, almost two hours, and it’s a very interesting debate, 
Mr. Speaker. I decided about half an hour ago that I had a few 

words that I wanted to say into this debate because, well I’ll tell 
you why when I explain what I’ve got to say. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting, an interesting debate this 
afternoon. And I think that the fact that there are so many 
members that wish to speak, there are so many bits of 
information that needs to be shared back and forth, that this is 
exactly the reason why we have committees of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and why this is an issue that should go to committee 
where, contrary to what the, contrary to what the member who 
spoke before me said, there is no majority on the committee, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Like so much of the research across the way that’s been 
incorrect in the last little while, Mr. Speaker, the Committee on 
Privileges is three and three plus the Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 
the Committee on Privileges is an ideal forum for the way in 
which matters that relate to the work of this House should be 
dealt with. Three and three plus the Speaker, Mr. Speaker. So I 
do rise to support the amendment raised by the Government 
House Leader and to suggest to members that they poll their 
information together and appear before the committee. 
 
Now that having been said, there has been reference made 
during the debate this afternoon to the fact that I did sit in the 
House of Commons. That’s absolutely correct, Mr. Speaker, I 
was there for two full terms. I served for eight and a half years, 
two different governments — one Liberal and one 
Conservative. Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen the way the Speakers of 
the House of Commons have responded to matters of privilege. 
In fact I raised one or two matters of privilege in my time, and I 
understand the purpose of privilege. 
 
Privilege is raised when members feel that their ability to serve 
their constituents is impeded or they’re prevented from doing 
the work that they have to do on behalf of their constituents. So 
this is an important issue, an important debate and, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we have to recognize and understand that’s 
why we have a committee of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is important, and the precedents that are set have an 
impact for long periods of time. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I appreciate the fact that Speakers in provincial legislatures 
across Canada and the House of Commons share their 
information with regards to rulings and an assessment of 
information. And I value the work that’s been done by Speaker 
Milliken in parliament and by yourself, Mr. Speaker, here in our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And as a result of that information, I think it’s important that all 
members of the Chamber, rather than base their remarks on gut 
feeling and gut response to one event that has occurred in this 
Chamber, that the members through the committee review the 
rulings that have taken place as well as your own ruling, Mr. 
Speaker, and discuss it at that level. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said I did serve in the House of Commons. 
I served under both Liberal and Conservative governments. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve now served for a year and a half in this 
Legislative Assembly. And I can tell you that — whether it was 
five years under a Conservative government, four years under a 



2466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

Liberal government, or a year and a half under this New 
Democratic Party government — Mr. Speaker, I think that the 
way in which this government approaches the accountability to 
the public, the public record information sharing, we take no 
back seat to anyone, Mr. Speaker. This government has 
responded extremely well to the needs of the public and the 
needs of the opposition for being accountable. 
 
One of the first things I thought of when the original motion 
was raised, and why I’m very happy to support the motion to 
amend it, was that the opposition’s original motion was directly 
targeted at one particular department of government, not the 
government itself, Mr. Speaker, because of course as members 
opposite have indicated, that the government has been very 
responsive to this whole issue of sharing. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the first response that I had 
was that this motion was particularly targeting one department 
of this government when in fact, Mr. Speaker, I know my own 
department should be commended for the work that it’s done on 
behalf of sharing information. 
 
I know that the member from Rosetown-Elrose asked for a 
briefing by my department some time ago, and I and my 
department were very happy to respond, to be able to provide 
him with additional information that he needed on a particular 
piece of legislation in front of the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just recently, within the last two weeks, my 
new critic the member from Wood River, has been extended an 
invitation to share information, a technical briefing from my 
own department on legislation that’s about to be introduced into 
the Chamber. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government record on being accountable, 
on being transparent, on reacting positively to the needs of the 
public and the members opposite has been quite commendable, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the issue before us is one of . . . should we be discussing the 
ability of members of this Chamber to have access to 
information at certain periods of time provided by the 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the amendment in 
front of us today refer it to a committee where it can be 
discussed by three members of the opposition, three members 
of the government, with the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly to determine the specifics of the individual case 
referenced and to discuss the go-forward position as to what 
would be agreeable and acceptable to the members in this 
Chamber. 
 
It makes perfect sense, Mr. Speaker, to be pursuing along those 
lines. So I urge all members . . . Well one other thing, Mr. 
Speaker, before I conclude. 
 
I did note during the debate that the opposition members were 
bringing forward, there was an awful lot of reference to what 
they thought the government was doing. And, Mr. Speaker, 
most of what they were thinking the government was doing had 
no reference on this side whatsoever. They were making 
reference to various things that the government was trying to do 
or trying not to do to prevent the members opposite from doing 
their job when in fact, Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of a single 

case where any of that were accurate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is to take our time to work 
our way through this in a way that allows us to move forward 
carefully and thoughtfully, much like the way the government 
has approached the management of this legislative agenda. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I thank the members for the opportunity to 
stand here, respect the privileges of the members of this 
Chamber, and support the Government House Leader’s motion 
to refer it to committee for further discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
enter the debate on the motion to allow opposition members or 
their designated staff to sit in on technical briefings for the 
media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the main gist of what I wanted to 
say, I do want to respond to the member who just spoke from 
The Battlefords who was saying that the proper thing to do was, 
of course, to send this matter to committee. 
 
I would just remind the member and all members present that it 
is my understanding this committee hasn’t met for about 14 
years. So if it happens to be another 14 years before this 
committee does actually hold a meeting, perhaps this whole 
recommendation to deal with the issue may be forgotten or may 
be a moot point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, had the motion, or had the amendment to the 
motion said that this would be referred to the committee within 
a week’s time or something, perhaps it would have been more 
palatable, but the open-endedness of the amendment is certainly 
unacceptable and is very unfair and not proper for this 
Assembly to be dealing with. 
 
In the case of the Parliament of Canada, the issue was referred 
to the Standing Committee on Procedure and House Affairs . 
That committee meets on a weekly basis when the House of 
Commons is in a session and those matters are dealt with very 
promptly, not the way things . . . matters of this type are 
handled within this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to start out in this debate by relating an 
incident that happened to me when I was a Member of 
Parliament and I was the Agriculture critic, and Mr. Goodale, 
also a Member of Parliament from Saskatchewan, was the 
Minister of Agriculture . And Mr. Goodale was going to make a 
fairly substantial agricultural announcement. He was holding 
both a news conference and technical briefing here in Regina. 
And as the critic for Agriculture, I came to the hotel — I believe 
it was the West Harvest Inn — went to the door, and said that I 
wanted to sit in on the briefing and the news conference. 
 
And some of Mr. Goodale’s officials kind of stood in front of 
the door and said, no, Mr. Hermanson, you’re not allowed to 
enter this news conference and this technical briefing. 
 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

The Speaker: — I just would like to remind the member that in 
this Assembly, you’re not . . . members are not to refer to 
themselves even by name. I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. So these 
officials of Mr. Goodale’s sort of stood in front of the door and 
told me that I was unable to enter. And I reminded the members 
that I was an elected Member of Parliament, I was a designated 
Agriculture critic, and perhaps they should change their mind. 
 
Now this occurred before the changes were made in the House 
of Commons that we are using as basis to ask for a change in 
procedure here in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Goodale’s officials, and I think Mr. Goodale himself, had a 
quick little huddle and they recognized that it was improper to 
restrict an elected member from attending a briefing and a news 
conference that the media were allowed to attend. 
 
And they said, as long as you’re not here to disrupt the 
proceedings. And of course, Mr. Speaker, I was not there to 
disrupt the proceedings. I was there to garner the information so 
that when questioned by the media, I would have a base of 
knowledge to answer effectively. I sat in on the briefing and the 
news conference and was able to exercise my responsibilities as 
a Member of Parliament more effectively because the right 
thing was done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t have had to ask permission to 
enter that technical briefing and that news conference. The 
House of Commons under the leadership of Speaker Millken 
has recognized that, and they have changed the rules. They’ve 
clarified the rules so that this is no longer a question. That needs 
to happen here in the province of Saskatchewan as well. 
 
You know the Westminster parliamentary system has a proud 
history, and it’s a history of development, of progression, of 
change, of improvement. Mr. Speaker, it is now time that we 
improve our procedures and our process here in the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan to properly reflect the 
responsibilities of all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
regardless of whether they sit on the government side or the 
opposition side, regardless of whether they are a minister of the 
Crown or a backbencher, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, back when parliaments were trying to become 
established, there was a protocol called the divine right of 
kings. Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone a long ways from 
respecting the divine right of kings. We have come to 
recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the common members and the 
common people should also have a voice and should also have 
rights and privileges in the parliamentary system. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why the federal House is called the House of Commons. 
It’s no longer the House only of lords and the House where 
there’s a divine right of kings. 
 
We have progressed a long ways, Mr. Speaker. It started with 
the Magna Carta, and it’s been a process of refinement and 
improvement of our parliamentary system so that we can do our 
job and do our job well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition members, in doing their job, in 
carrying out their responsibility, need the same rights and 

opportunities as members opposite, as the media, when it comes 
to technical briefings, whether it be briefings on the budget — 
that’s a longstanding tradition — whether it be briefings on 
legislation. 
 
You know we had the very complicated municipal Act, where it 
was amalgamating the urban and rural municipal Acts. A huge 
document came into the legislature last fall. That legislation 
was attempted to be rushed through this House and passed 
prematurely. Mr. Speaker, the opposition had to slow it down 
because the opposition had not had proper briefing and had not 
seen the legislation and hadn’t enough time to do its responsible 
job of reviewing and of testing and of consulting on legislation 
before it’s allowed to pass through this legislature. Mr. Speaker, 
being present at technical briefings, media briefings, is part of 
the opposition carrying out its proper responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you would think that a responsible NDP 
government would want an opposition that was knowledgeable, 
that understood the issues, that understood the reports, that 
understood the legislation to be in place — to improve the 
quality of legislation that comes forward, to improve the quality 
of debate in this Legislative Assembly, and provide better 
service, better legislation, better Crown corporations for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s our job. That’s what we’re paid to do. And I assure you, 
Mr. Speaker, that is the position that the opposition takes. We 
want to do our job. We want to do our job well. We want to do 
our job professionally, Mr. Speaker. We need the privileges that 
we are entitled to, to be able to do that job and to be able to do 
it well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is rather amusing and just a little bit ironic 
that the issue that sparked this whole debate was a report of 
SaskWater . It just happened to remind me that the NDP 
government got into an awful lot of trouble over SaskWater and 
their involvement in the whole SPUDCO fiasco. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we cannot roll back the clock. We can’t go 
back to the ’90s, even though I know members opposite want to 
roll it back even farther and go back to the ’80s. We can’t even 
roll the clock back to the ’90s and look at how the SPUDCO 
issue was dealt with. But I guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, had the 
NDP government been more open, more accountable, had 
opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member to 
confine his remarks to the procedural motion at hand. There 
will be plenty of time, and has been plenty of time, to debate 
other substantive issues. But I’d ask the member to stick with 
the motion or the amendment. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I was getting to that point, I assure you, 
Mr. Speaker. Had the government at the time allowed the 
opposition to attend briefings, technical briefings, media 
briefings, prior to the SPUDCO fiasco, there is a better chance 
— not a sure chance — but there is a better chance that $35 
million of taxpayers’ money in Saskatchewan would not have 
been wasted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the opposition’s job, to prod and to poke 
into what the government is doing. And to be able to do that we 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

need the right, we need the privileges and the rights due an 
opposition party and due opposition members and their staff. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the NDP government 
opposite that if they provide the opposition their proper 
opportunity to attend technical briefings, media briefings, that 
we will do our job better and it will put them on better 
behaviour as well. And they won’t be trying to slide things 
through like the way they deceived the people of Saskatchewan 
over SPUDCO . That is the whole purpose of giving the 
opposition the tools to do their job. And that is why, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition needs to have access to technical 
briefings that media are allowed to attend and that special 
interest groups are allowed to attend. Mr. Speaker, any other 
course of action is not acceptable. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in our House Leader’s presentation to you, 
he talked about the Milliken ruling. Now, Mr. Speaker, when I 
was a House leader in Ottawa, I had the opportunity to work 
with Mr. Milliken who at that time was the parliamentary 
secretary to the government House leader. And I was always 
impressed with the fact that Mr. Milliken was an honest and 
open-minded person. Even though he sat in a different party and 
on the other side of the House, he was prepared to be 
forthcoming and to hear both sides of issues and to try to do the 
right thing. I will give that to Mr. Milliken. 
 
I have a great deal of respect for the Speaker of the House of 
Commons. And I believe Mr. Milliken did the proper thing in 
allowing the improvements to be made in the House of 
Commons. And his position in history will be better. His 
standing in the progress of parliamentary reform and protection 
of democracy and fairness and balance in parliament will be 
enhanced by the position he has taken on this issue when it 
occurred in the House of Commons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was concern mentioned by the NDP 
Government House Leader that the only reason that the 
opposition would want to be present at the media technical 
briefings was so that we could somehow hear the questions that 
the media asked. That is really astounding. Why would the 
Government House Leader be concerned about any questions 
that anybody asks about their report or about legislation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they’ve done due diligence, if they’re convinced 
and confident they’re doing the right thing, they should 
welcome, they should welcome prodding by the media. They 
should welcome questions by the opposition. They shouldn’t 
mind it if the opposition and the media consult one another. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, whether we attend that media technical 
briefing or not, we are still free agents. We’re still able to talk to 
the media. We can talk to Murray Mandryk . We can talk to 
Stefani Langenegger after the meeting. I mean they’re not . . . 
And after the embargo is past, we can eventually get the 
information. 
 
All we’re being denied is we’re being denied the privilege, the 
responsibility, the knowledge that we need to respond 
effectively at the time the issue is most relevant. When the 
reports are tabled, when the legislation is introduced, the 

opposition needs to be knowledgeable and fully understand the 
implications of that legislation or of that report. That is crucial 
to the work that opposition MLAs do. And therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say to you and I would say to the NDP 
members opposite, it is absolutely essential and it is fair and it 
is right that opposition members be allowed to attend the 
technical briefings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you would think that the NDP somehow 
think that the opposition would be irresponsible with this 
information. Well I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that if we agree to 
keep an embargo, we keep an embargo. We have honoured 
embargoes when it has come to budgets and other documents 
that have been provided to us before their public release. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sit on the Public Accounts Committee . I in fact 
am Chair of the committee. And we’re able to work and 
function in a good atmosphere, a fair atmosphere where the 
government members are able to do their job and do it properly 
and where opposition members are able to carry out their 
responsibilities within the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Does the government think that the opposition will not keep its 
word, will not keep the embargo? Is that what they are saying? 
Are they saying that somehow the opposition shouldn’t have the 
right to access to information in a timely fashion, that somehow 
we should have that information withheld from us as long as 
possible? Is that what the NDP is saying? It seems to be. 
 
I mean either they don’t believe we’ll keep the embargo . . . 
And if we didn’t keep an embargo, Mr. Speaker, then they have 
a case. Then there’s a breach of privilege that they can raise in 
this legislature and they would have grounds to be successful in 
raising a point of privilege if we failed to keep an embargo. But 
that hasn’t happened, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve been 
trustworthy, we’ve kept our word, and we’ve done our job well. 
And we would continue to do that if we were given access to all 
technical briefings and media briefings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we need to show proper respect for this 
Legislative Assembly, for the processes, the protocols. We need 
to show respect for all members of the House. You have told us 
many times that there is proper protocol and respect required. 
And I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that part of that proper 
respect is to give opposition MLAs the same access and respect 
that is shown to media and special interest groups by the times 
they are allowed to attend these special briefings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from The Battlefords said, you know, 
this is no problem; the member for Rosetown-Elrose asked for a 
special briefing — and the member is right. He did give this 
MLA a special briefing when I became the critic for 
Intergovernmental Affairs. We’re not arguing about special 
briefings. I appreciated the minister doing that, and I suppose he 
didn’t have to but he agreed to do that and I think it was the 
proper thing. For me, it was a new role that I was playing. 
 
But we’re not talking about special briefings. We’re talking 
about scheduled, technical media briefings with embargoes, that 
will be of interest to all of the public of Saskatchewan, and 
where the opposition are expected to play a knowledgeable, a 
critical role because that is the way our parliamentary system 
works. And to deny opposition members that opportunity is to 



April 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

deny them the privilege that they were intended to have in the 
parliamentary system. And, Mr. Speaker, there is a huge 
difference in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proof will be in the pudding as to where we go 
from here. As has been mentioned by one of my colleagues, the 
NDP has two more members in this House than the opposition. 
We accept that. They are the government; we are the 
opposition. Their job is to provide good legislation, to provide 
good quality service and reports from Crown corporations. Our 
job is to scrutinize those reports and to scrutinize legislation, 
and make sure that the citizens of Saskatchewan have someone 
making sure that the government does due diligence in all that 
they do. 
 
It just so happens, Mr. Speaker, that tomorrow morning there’s 
going to be another Crown corporation report released. And that 
Crown corporation report is going to be an SGI report. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there have already been, there’s 
already been some discussions, I believe, going on between the 
NDP and the opposition about whether or not we can do a better 
job of addressing this situation tomorrow. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, what the government should do. The 
government should have one technical media briefing and the 
government should allow opposition MLAs — if they agree to 
the embargo — to attend that briefing, just as if the media 
agreed to the embargo, they’re allowed to attend that briefing. 
 
Minister of Finance is concerned about resources. He should be 
concerned about resources. And the most prudent use of 
resources, Mr. Speaker, is if there’s one briefing — if the same 
material is presented once, if the opposition is able to be present 
and hear the technical explanations for the report or the 
legislation or whatever happens to be the issue of the day. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we can be confident that there is one set of 
technical briefings being given to the media and another one or 
a shorter one or a modified one being given to opposition 
members. 
 
Now that being said, I’m not sure whether tomorrow morning 
the government will slam the door in the face of the opposition 
and again breach our privilege; whether or not they will insist 
on having two briefings, Mr. Speaker, one especially for the 
opposition — and we don’t know if it’s going to be sanitized or 
whether they’re going to withhold information; it’s hard to 
know — and then a separate briefing for the media. We don’t 
know exactly what is going to happen. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the government members to 
seriously consider, and I would ask the Minister of Finance to 
seriously consider what is the responsible role and what is the 
responsible course of action to take in resolving this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he can take a very partisan, a very critical and 
regressive approach to this issue. He can try to hoard 
information. He can try to make the work and the role of the 
opposition as difficult as possible. Mr. Speaker, he can deprive 
the residents of Saskatchewan of an opposition that is fully 
equipped to do its job, or he can do the right thing, Mr. Speaker. 
He can do what was done in Ottawa in the House of Commons, 
when the opposition was given access to briefings if they 
agreed to the embargo. 

And I would ask the Minister of Finance, and I would ask the 
Minister Responsible for SGI, and I would ask all members on 
the NDP government side to seriously think about the big 
picture — think about what provides good government, think 
about what fairness is, and think about what transpired in 
Ottawa, and why it transpired in Ottawa, and why Mr. Milliken 
ruled in the way he did, and why the House affairs and 
procedures committee of the Parliament of Canada ruled the 
way they did on this issue. 
 
I would ask them to seriously consider — in the morning when 
this briefing takes place — to allow opposition members or 
their designates to attend the embargoed media and technical 
briefing with the media. If other arrangements have to be made 
on a short-term basis to accommodate the briefing, I guess we, 
you know, we’ll understand. We’ll try to be co-operative. We’ll 
try to work with these members because we want to provide 
good government and good representation for the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s our ultimate desire and our ultimate goal. 
 
Therefore in the hopes that the government will change its 
position and come to its senses and think about the big picture 
rather than narrow-minded, partisan politics, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move that we give this some sober thought. And I would 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that debate on this motion be now adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of a very open and 
accountable government to respond to questions 954 through 
972 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions 954 through to 972 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2005 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:42.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2441 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2441 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2441 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2441 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2441 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2441 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2442 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2442 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2442 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2442 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2442 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2442 
  Wartman........................................................................................................................................................................2442, 2462 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2442 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2443 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Centenarians 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2443 
 Youth Means Business Workshop 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2443 
 Centenarians Awarded Centennial Medals 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2443 
 Centennial Peace Legacy 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2444 
 Watrous Resident Named Citizen of the Year 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2444 
 Mortlach Commemorates Empress of Ireland Disaster 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2444 
 Rocanville Tigers Win Championship 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2445 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Revenue-Sharing Agreement with Municipalities 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2445 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2445 
 Funding for Centennial Celebrations 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2446 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2446 
 Forecasting Oil Prices 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2447 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2447 
 Collective Bargaining with Public Sector Workers 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2448 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2448 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Incentives for Potash Industry 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2449 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2450 
 Saskatchewan Government Insurance Injury Income Benefits 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2451 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2451 
PRIVILEGE 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2452 
  Van Mulligen .................................................................................................................................................................2452, 2457 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2452 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2455 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2458 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2461 
  Thomson (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................2462 
  Morgan (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................2463 



 

  Van Mulligen (point of order)................................................................................................................................................2463 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2465 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2466 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2469 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2469 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


