

















































Hansard: May 12, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 111A  THURSDAY, MAY 12, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3027 
 May 12, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
condition of Highway 32 is leaving an irreparable image on the 
blight of the landscape I guess of the area down there in 
southwest Saskatchewan. And this petition today represents the 
signatures of a number of my constituents, but also signatures 
from many people who have travelled that road from out of 
province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition come from 
communities such as Sceptre, Spiritwood, Leader, Calmar, 
Alberta, Gravelbourg, Lafleche, Liebenthal, and many, as I 
indicated, from Alberta such as High River and Stirling. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again on behalf of constituents who are concerned about the 
lack of residential support for people with long-term disabilities 
in my constituency. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary steps to provide funding required for 
additional spaces for Swift Current residents with lifelong 
disabilities. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of 
Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine who are 
very concerned about the assistance or lack of assistance to 
autism affected families. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to improve access to resources for 
families who desperately need help for their autistic 

children. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise once again to present a petition from parents in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much 
needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Buckwold, Adaskin, and Wright 
Crescent and Kenderdine Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I also have a petition here with citizens that 
want to terminate the contract of Jim Fergusson: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson, Saskatoon, Regina, and 
Estevan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents opposed to the possible 
reduction of health care services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie health centre 
and special care home maintain, at the very least, their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 



3028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

today to rise in the Assembly on behalf of citizens of west 
central Saskatchewan to present a petition concerning the 
rerouting of Highway No. 51. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 51 is rebuilt to 
go through the town of Kerrobert so that local businesses 
may be given the opportunity to promote themselves to 
and gain business from patrons passing through Kerrobert. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens all 
from the town of Kerrobert. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) they are hereby 
read and received: addendums to sessional papers nos. 106, 
107, 639, 666, 716, and 800. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 80, The 
Education Amendment Act, 2004 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be referred, considered in 
Committee of the Whole, pardon me. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Government 
House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004/ 
Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill 80 be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 114, The 
Education Amendment Act, 2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been requested by the Minister of 
Learning that the referral to Committee of the Whole on Bill 
114 be waived. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005/ 
Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill 114 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3029 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 115, The 
Education Property Tax Credit Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I request least to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole of Bill 115. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill 115 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 93, The 
Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 
2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation has requested leave to waive consideration of Bill 93 
in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 93 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 
Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 93 be moved a third 
time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 116 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Crown Management 
Board: how many application forms were received by 
Crown Investments Corporation requesting the utility 
rebate be applied to power or energy bills? How many of 
these applications were approved? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly four members of the Saskatchewan Business Council 
who have joined us in your gallery. I’d like to introduce them to 
you and to the members now. 
 
Joining us today is Marilyn Braun-Pollon and Gaylene Simpson 
of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business; Don 
Richardson from the Restaurant Association; and Michael 
Fougere, a city councillor here in Regina and executive director 
for the Saskatchewan Construction Association. I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these guests to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place and Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 



3030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Minister 
of Industry and Resources I’d like to join with the Leader of the 
Opposition in welcoming the representatives of the business 
council. Certainly as each of them know, I and my colleagues 
have spent many meetings with them, consulting over the years 
about many matters and it is always a pleasure to do so. And we 
will continue to do so as we continue to build the vibrant 
economy that we enjoy in this province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly I would like to 
welcome 41 students from the Naicam School in Naicam, 
Saskatchewan. They’re here with their teachers, Catherine 
Smith and Ed de Gooijer. They are here for a tour of the 
legislature. 
 
And as well, I would like to point out in particular Christina 
Boobyer, who has also been selected in an interprovincial 
competition to represent Saskatchewan, one of six or seven 
Saskatchewan students that are going on a seven-day 
interprovincial entrepreneurial seminar in Medicine Hat. And 
part of the highlight of that trip is to also have dinner with 
Premier Ralph Klein. So I know the whole school and the 
whole constituency are very proud of these young people, and 
on behalf of all of the members in the legislature would you 
please welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislature eight 
people who are walking from Vancouver Island to Ottawa to 
raise awareness of the very serious issue of teen suicide in 
Canada. The youth suicide prevention walk is a four-year 
project which originated in 2003 and will be completed next 
year. 
 
There are eight people, and they are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They are leader Vincent Watts, from BC [British 
Columbia]. Maybe he could wave. Reno Trimble and his sister 
Elise from Port Simpson, BC; Nancy Saunders and Charlotte 
Qālmanick-Meson. They’re from the Canada’s Arctic where 
youth suicide rate is seven times the national average. Emily 
Williams, from Duncan, BC, a community with the highest rate 
of suicide in British Columbia. Darnel Crewco, Yellowknife, 
Northwest Territories, and Angela Veen from England who is 
acting as secretary for the walk. 
 
The group is due to arrive in Ottawa on National Aboriginal 
Day which is June 21. Please join me in welcoming the 
members of the Youth Suicide Prevention Walk. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation on behalf of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition and welcome the eight young 
people that are travelling to Ottawa to bring to the attention of 
officials the matter of teen suicides. It’s an honour to have these 
young people with their commitment to their friends and peers 
in our Assembly today. 
 
The future of our country is indeed bright when our youth are 
prepared to send the message that all teenagers are loved and 
valued. God bless you in your journey. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, through you and to all members of the Assembly, two 
guests that are seated in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 
Perhaps they can wave as I mention their names. Frank Mentes 
who is with CUPE and that’s Canadian Union of Public 
Employees — we should use the full names instead of 
acronyms — and Terry Zahorski who is the recently elected 
president of the Regina District Labour Council and also a 
Canadian Union of Postal Workers employee. And I’d like to 
welcome them to the House today and thank them for joining us 
in the proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Meadow Lake’s New Saskatchewan Party Candidate 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you. Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the 
privilege of travelling to Meadow Lake, Canada where I was 
able to meet with a number of people in that community; 
business people, community leaders, First Nations leaders. 
 
And then later that evening, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
announce that the local members of the Saskatchewan Party 
nominated as their candidate in the next provincial election, 
whenever that comes, Mr. Ty Rutzki. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Rutzki was very pleased to let his name stand 
under the Saskatchewan Party banner during the next election. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House, 
Saskatchewan Party members from across the province and 
indeed the people of Saskatchewan are grateful that he has let 
his name stand for our party in that constituency. 
 
Mr. Rutzki is currently the general manager of Mistik 
Management Ltd., a woodlands management company. Prior to 
this, Mr. Rutzki was the director of finance and administration 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3031 

for the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. He is very community 
minded. He’s held a number of positions on boards in his 
community; for the local golf course, for the curling rink, for 
the 4-H club. He also played on the senior hockey team there, 
Mr. Speaker, and served as an alderman on the town council of 
Meadow Lake as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ty is energetic. He is eager to serve the people of 
his community. And many, many people in that constituency 
are eager to have him represent their concerns here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Rutzki is a quality candidate. He is 
representative of the kind of men and women, the calibre of 
men and women that the Saskatchewan Party is attracting as 
potential candidates across this province. We look forward to 
being able to introduce him in this Assembly soon, Mr. 
Speaker. And we look forward to the day that he is an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Meadow Lake on the 
government side of the House in a Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

International Nurses Day and National Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day nurses work 
tirelessly to provide their patients with safe and quality care. 
They are committed to improving the health and well-being of 
all people and play an important and valued role in our health 
care system and in our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is International Nurses Day, celebrated 
annually throughout the world every year on the anniversary of 
Florence Nightingale’s birthday. This is also National Nursing 
Week in Canada, a time set aside to recognize the significant 
contributions that nurses make to the health of Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of National Nursing Week this year is 
Patients First, Safety Always. Saskatchewan nurses believe that 
patient safety is of the utmost importance. They provide their 
patients with the best, safest, and most effective care, and are 
continually working to expand their roles and increase their 
contribution to the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that nurses are currently in short 
supply around the world. Here in Saskatchewan we are 
addressing the issue in our action plan which was released in 
December 2001. In partnership with nursing organizations and 
health regions, we have made significant progress in 
implementing the plan’s recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a registered nurse and as the first nurse elected 
to this legislature, I extend my sincere appreciation to all 
Saskatchewan nurses for their hard work, commitment, and 
compassion. I ask all my colleagues to join me in thanking our 
nurses for their ongoing contributions to the health care system 
and in wishing them the best on this International Nurses Day 
and Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 

Eatonia’s Eaton Catalogue House 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. My home 
town of Eatonia, Saskatchewan has a heritage society that is 
undertaking a very interesting project. Back at the town’s 
founding, the town was known as Eaton, and it was named after 
the Timothy Eaton family. However our nearby Eston down the 
road caused concerns with getting the mail mixed up so the 
town name was changed to Eatonia. 
 
What’s happening for the heritage society is that they are taking 
an Eaton’s house and putting it in the former town of Eaton 
down by the railway tracks next to the museum/library, which is 
the original 1925 station. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Canada celebrates Saskatchewan, this is a 
fitting testimony to many of the pioneers who did order their 
homes from catalogues. My family was included in that. And 
it’s in very good condition. The house was built in 1917 and has 
been donated by the King family whose great-grandparents 
built the house. And now that they have a new residence, they 
have moved it into town. We’re looking forward to its complete 
restoration and there will be a chance for the community to use 
this space for art classes and things of this nature. 
 
I would be amiss if I didn’t mention Ms. Anne Reinhardt who 
won the volunteer’s medal, who is once again spearheading this 
initiative. And we look forward to having the house actually 
moved in July. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Centenarians Honoured 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
this centennial year I have the honour of presenting medals to 
six centenarians and today I would like to acknowledge three of 
them. 
 
Helen Swedberg’s life has taken her from Kansas to the 
Marchwell district near Yorkton to Big River. She raised four 
sons and she and her husband helped one of them run a hunting 
and fishing lodge at Dore Lake. After her husband died in 1962, 
Helen was the main wage earner in her family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at 102 years old Helen’s mind is still sharp. When 
the Minister of Health recently visited, she recognized him 
immediately and warmly welcomed his visit. 
 
Josephine Olenchuk immigrated to Canada from the Ukraine in 
1929 and homesteaded with her husband Peter at Timberlost, 
just west of Big River. Josephine always had a big garden so 
when she moved into her seniors housing unit she cut strips of 
grass with a paring knife and lifted them out with a small shovel 
so she could keep on gardening. 
 
And Laura Matz was born and raised just north of Shellbrook. 



3032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

She attended normal school and taught in the Shellbrook area 
for 19 years in all. She farmed with her husband Harvey in the 
Sturgeon River Valley and was active in her community. And, 
Mr. Speaker, Laura’s a terrific singer. At her birthday party 
there was lots of music, and Laura knew the words to every 
song. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the staff of the Big River Health 
Centre and the Shellbrook seniors club for the wonderful 
celebrations they provided. And I ask all members to show their 
appreciation for three women who are still a very young 
100-plus years old — Helen Swedberg, Josephine Olenchuk, 
and Laura Matz. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Women Entrepreneurs Week 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
Women Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan. It’s a week 
where we celebrate the achievements of women entrepreneurs, 
women whose hard work and dedication to building better lives 
for themselves and their families create strong communities. 
 
Women entrepreneurs make a major contribution to the 
Canadian economy. Four out of five new businesses in Canada 
are started by women. There are 821,000 women entrepreneurs 
in Canada. Women entrepreneurs add $18 billion to the national 
economy, and women-owned businesses employ 1.7 million 
people in Canada. 
 
Women have consistently demonstrated that they can overcome 
any obstacle to build a successful business — even an NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government. Despite the NDP 
government’s failure to create long-term economic growth and 
provide entrepreneurs with a business environment that 
encourages investment, women are getting the job done. 
 
While the number of Saskatchewan men self-employed 
declined between 1991 and 2001, the number of self-employed 
women actually grew by 24 per cent. And last year, 33 per cent 
of Saskatchewan businesses were owned and operated by 
women entrepreneurs. 
 
A lot of credit for that can go to organizations like the Women 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan that assist women with new and 
existing business through a wide range of programs and 
services including business advising, mentoring opportunities, 
and seminars that teach business skill development. On behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party, I want to extend my congratulations 
to all the women entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

University of Regina Receives Major Donation 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the pleasure of 

attending a very important day in the history of the University 
of Regina. Today the Building Dreams and Futures fundraising 
campaign at the university received the largest donation from an 
individual in the university’s history. 
 
Former Regina businessman and philanthropist Kenneth Levene 
made a $4 million donation which will be used to develop, 
advance, and promote the Faculty of Business Administration’s 
graduate school of business. In recognition of the donation, the 
graduate school of business will now be known as the Kenneth 
Levene graduate school of business. As Mr. Levene has said: 
 

. . . it is my fervent wish that this graduate school of 
business and its quest for excellence serve as a catalyst in 
creating an exciting new climate for the economic growth 
of this province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, while the contribution of Mr. Levene to the future 
economic growth of the province is certainly unique, the 
sentiment that he expressed is not. Every day across this 
province, thousands of businessmen and women make personal 
and financial contributions to their community above and 
beyond the taxes they pay to support health care and education 
and other public services. It’s a generosity that often goes 
unrecognized and unappreciated by a segment of society that 
considers business to be nothing more than an expression of 
greed. 
 
And so today, as the University of Regina celebrates a major 
private investment in education in this province which will 
benefit students and businesses across the province for decades 
to come, I want to recognize the major contributions made by 
Kenneth Levene to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Von Imhoff Exhibition at Neutral Ground Art Gallery 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is an art 
exhibition currently at the Neutral Ground Art Gallery here in 
Regina featuring the work of a renowned and at the same time 
little-known Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Count Berthold John Von Imhoff was born in 
Germany in 1868. He studied art at a number of prestigious 
European schools before emigrating to the United States in 
1892 and eventually moving to Saskatchewan in 1913. Even 
before moving to Saskatchewan, Count Von Imhoff was 
well-known for his religious art and frescoes. He moved to 
Saskatchewan and set up his studio just outside the town of St. 
Walburg in order to work in an area of peace and tranquility. 
 
By the time of his death in 1939, Count Von Imhoff had 
completed the interior decor of over 100 churches of all 
denominations. Many of the parishes that commissioned him 
were poor and he often worked for little financial gain. In 1937, 
at the request of bishops and priests across Western Canada, he 
received the knighthood of St. Gregory the Great from Pope 
Pius XI in recognition of his achievements. 
 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3033 

Today in his St. Walburg studio, over 200 of his paintings still 
remain. Mr. Speaker, the Neutral Ground Art Gallery exhibit of 
Count Von Imhoff’s works runs until May 20. It is part of 
Saskatchewan’s centennial as well as part of the 50th 
anniversary celebrations of Regina’s German-Canadian Society 
Harmonie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Count Von Imhoff is a significant and 
extraordinary figure in Saskatchewan’s cultural heritage. I urge 
everyone to take the opportunity to view this exhibit of his 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Commission on First Nations and Métis Peoples 
and Justice Reform 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in November of 2003 
Saskatchewan’s Commission on First Nations and Métis People 
and Justice Reform released an interim report. It called for a 
comprehensive review of the justice system — a review that 
was to happen in partnership with Aboriginal people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Justice minister announced his action 
plan this morning, there was an obvious omission. If there was a 
true buy-in from Aboriginal people, they would have been at 
the table. Where was the minister of First Nations and Métis 
affairs? Where was the members of the FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations], and where the reps from the 
Métis association? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does this government always believe it can 
do things better on their own, instead of including all the people 
directly affected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question, 
particularly because it gives me an opportunity to quote from a 
document that I didn’t have this morning. And it is the press 
release of the Chair of the Commission on First Nations and 
Métis Peoples and Justice Reform, Chief Willie Littlechild. And 
he says, quote: 
 

“There is a reason to celebrate and be optimistic about the 
future as a result of the response to the Commission on 
First Nations and Métis People on Justice Reform,” said 
former Chairman, Chief Willie Littlechild. The Action 
Plan that increases the number of partnerships is a very 
pro-active strategy. 
 
In congratulating Premier Lorne Calvert, Minister Frank 
Quennell and Minister Peter Prebble for the Government’s 
expressed commitment, Littlechild calls and encourages 

all partners to continue working together to ensure the 
three year strategy achieves the desired outcomes . . . [so 
to] create the desired healthy, just, prosperous, and safe 
Saskatchewan. 

 
“I am personally very encouraged by the serious 
consideration and planned implementation of our 
recommendations . . . ” said Littlechild. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister hasn’t 
heard the comments from Chief Lawrence Joseph this morning. 
Saskatchewan’s Commission on First Nations and Métis People 
and Justice Reform talks about the underlying causes of crime. 
 
One of them called for a significant investment in nutritional 
programs. In his last budget, the government increased the basic 
food allowance by $10, the first increase in 20 years. That 
amounted to 30 cents a day, Mr. Speaker. It also failed to index 
that allowance to the rate of inflation. That means those on 
social assistance will always be significantly behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did this government ignore the commission’s 
recommendation to make significant investments in nutritional 
programs? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I want to say very clearly — and I spoke to this, this morning at 
the news conference that the member was at — that this 
government, Mr. Speaker, is significantly increasing dollars that 
are available for nutritional meals that are served in our school 
program. In this budget is an increase of over 50 per cent in the 
number of nutritious meals that will be served in our 98 
community schools, Mr. Speaker, in which about half of the 
school population is First Nations and Métis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also in this budget, Mr. Speaker, which the member does not 
acknowledge, is a very significant investment in a rental 
supplement both for families with disabled members and for 
families with children. An increase of $131 a month, Mr. 
Speaker, for 10,000 families, Mr. Speaker, with children 
through this rental supplement and an increase of up to $150 a 
month for families with disabilities. The member should 
acknowledge those increases . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, maybe the 
government should also indicate that they acknowledge that 
Saskatchewan had the second highest growth in food bank 
usage in Canada last year. And maybe the government should 



3034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

also acknowledge that food banks gave money to the schools 
last year in Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Commission on First Nations and Métis 
Peoples and Justice Reform issued a final report in June 2004. It 
recommended that emergency detox centres be immediately 
built in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and La Ronge. Mr. 
Speaker, other than the re-announcement of renovations to 
Regina’s jail today, the action plan says nothing about the 
immediate construction of detox centres in these communities. 
When will these words become actions, and why was this 
recommendation ignored? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this particular question has 
been asked a number of different times. In this particular 
budget, we’re moving forward with a plan to provide further 
detox places in the province, also further longer treatment 
spaces. And we’re going to continue to do that in light of the 
information that we have from the experts. And we’re also 
going to be using the information that will be provided by our 
Legislative Secretary looking at the issue of addictions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the commission’s report also 
called for the appointment of someone to make sure its 
recommendations were not ignored — an implementation 
commissioner. Well the minister told the media this morning 
that he’s ignoring that recommendation. 
 
In October 2004 the Premier said the commission’s report was 
not an exercise to go on any kind of library shelf. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this didn’t go on a library shelf; it went right to the 
garbage can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government betraying Aboriginal 
people in Saskatchewan? Why is the minister perpetuating 
racism and mistrust in the justice system, and why is he 
ignoring so many of the recommendations in this report? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe anybody 
in the Aboriginal community believes that this government or 
this Justice minister is purporting racism or promoting racism in 
this province. 
 
And if I may continue with the quotation from the Chair of the 
commission, the Chair of the commission: 
 

“I am personally very encouraged by the serious 
consideration and planned implementation of our 
recommendations . . . ” said Littlechild. The thematic 
approach adopted by the Government of Saskatchewan 
response is a very effective way to address the challenges 
and dealing with the underlying causes of crime as a 

priority. It will secure increasing involvement, use of 
alternatives and improve justice system responses. 
 

End quote, Mr. Speaker. I accept the characterization of Chief 
Willie Littlechild, Chair of the commission, as to our response, 
not the characterization of the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Vacant Nursing Positions 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
month the Minister of Health told nurses at the annual 
convention of the Saskatchewan registered nursing association 
that the nurses’ vacancy rate is less that 1 per cent. Right now 
there’re about 11,500 nurses in Saskatchewan. A nursing 
vacancy rate of 1 per cent is about 100 vacant positions. A year 
ago though, Mr. Speaker, according to the information provided 
by this minister, there were 203 vacant positions. That’s a 
difference of 100 positions, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister tell 
us what happened to those 100 vacant positions? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think there are about 8,300 
registered nurses in this province, and so we end up working 
with that particular number of people. The information that we 
compile weekly comes from all of the regional health 
authorities across the province, and we rely on that information 
that comes from the SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations] employee database. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
stand by the previous information I’ve provided. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 
difference of 100 vacant positions this year over last year. He 
failed to answer the question completely. He didn’t say one 
word on what happened with those 100 positions. Because if 
you ask SUN, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, or SRNA 
[Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association], they believe 
that this minister has chopped those 100 positions. He hasn’t 
filled them; he’s chopped them, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister 
tell me how many vacant positions has he eliminated in the 
2004-2005 year? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say to that 
member is that this budget this year provides 7.1 per cent 
increase in health budget up to $2.9 billion. And 1.8 billion of 
that money goes to the regional health authorities with 80 per 
cent of that going to staffing costs and compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased the amount of money available 
each year, and we have provided for the ongoing operation of 
the whole health care system. And, Mr. Speaker, decisions 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3035 

around staffing are made in regional health authorities at the 
appropriate places. And, Mr. Speaker, we are supporting a 
continued provision of the services that we have as well as 
adding new services where those are required. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, last year there was 203 vacant 
nursing positions in the province. This year, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister’s saying there are about 100. That’s 100 positions less. 
 
But according to SUN, if you talk to SUN, what they think this 
minister is doing is just a bargaining play. He’s limiting the 
number of vacant positions to show that they are addressing the 
problem, Mr. Speaker. They are not addressing the problem 
because I would say the last two answers to the question simply 
tells the story. They have eliminated the positions, but he has 
not the nerve to tell the House that’s exactly what happened, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is SUN correct? To the minister, is this simply a 
bargaining ploy by this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we know better in this 
House and in this province to trust the research that those 
people across the way do. We know that consistently day in, 
day out that there are problems over there. And this opposition 
critic is continuing in the same long tradition that we’ve had 
before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with the regional health 
authorities, provide the funding that’s needed for them to 
expand and work with the facilities that they are working at. 
And we will rely on the information that we get out of our 
weekly reports and out of the SAHO employee database. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to make sure that we can provide 
services for everybody in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know there was 203 vacancies last year. The minister has said 
that. He’s gone on to say this year that there’s only 100 
vacancies. The numbers are his own numbers, Mr. Speaker — 
his own numbers. Now if he chooses to attack SUN for what 
they’re saying they feel that this minister is doing, I find that 
very strange, Mr. Speaker — very strange. 
 
You know, nurses around the province continue to express their 
concerns with the health care system. Nurses continue to talk 
about low morale in the workplace. They continue to talk about 
poor working conditions. Mr. Speaker, nurses have an 
increasing amount of sick leave and WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board] claims. Nurses are being denied 
vacations because of a shortage of personnel. 
 
When will the minister address the real issue and start hiring 
full-time nurses to address the problems that nurses are saying 
are happening in every work site that they’re at? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the nursing positions in this 
province are about 54 per cent, little higher than 54 per cent, 
full-time positions. This is higher than the Canadian average of 
51 per cent, and it’s higher than all of our Western provinces. 
So we have more full-time nurses in Saskatchewan than 
Manitoba, Alberta, or British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have been doing very consistently is 
hiring nurses to fill positions that are available across the 
province. And in fact there are not as many positions that are 
open because we have new graduates. We have people who are 
quite willing to work in our health care system. We are going to 
continue to train more people. We are going to continue to work 
to provide more nurses because we know that over the 5- and 
10-year period, there are many people who will retire, who will 
require replacement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 

Prosecutions Under The Election Act 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions today are about the role of the Attorney General’s 
office in prosecuting violations of the elections Act. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, our office spoke to the Chief Electoral 
Officer. He told us that he identifies a violation of the Act that 
could potentially result in charges being laid. He is then 
required — required, Mr. Speaker — to refer the matter to the 
Attorney General’s office. The Electoral Officer does not 
decide whether or not to prosecute under the Act. That is up to 
the Department of Justice, according to the Chief Electoral 
Officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question, to the Minister of Justice, how are 
potential prosecutions under The Election Act handled? Would 
the decision be made by someone in the public prosecutor’s 
office, or would it be referred to an independent prosecutor to 
make that decision? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this question is asked in 
the context of a particular circumstance in Saskatchewan. I 
understand that the member has raised the question before, of a 
political party in Saskatchewan failing to file its returns within a 
period of time. 
 
The Chief Electoral Officer who’s an independent officer, an 



3036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

officer of this legislature, has expressed an opinion as to how 
they should proceed under the legislation, has provided that 
opinion to me, has provided that opinion to the member, Mr. 
Speaker. We respect the independence of the independent office 
of the legislature. And I trust that all members of the legislature 
do. And in this particular context, it’s not a hypothetical 
question, Mr. Speaker, and I think we should let the Chief 
Electoral Officer do his work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Chief Electoral 
Officer has been doing his job, and it will soon be the job of our 
Justice minister to make a decision on that. And that’s what the 
question was about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Chief Electoral Officer issued a 
news release confirming that the Karwacki Liberals missed the 
filing deadline for their annual return and could be deregistered 
as a provincial party. He also informed our office that he’ll be 
referring this contravention of the elections Act to the Attorney 
General’s office to determine whether the charges should be 
laid. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please, members. Order. The 
member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the question is, how will the 
Department of Justice handle this referral? Will they make the 
decision on prosecution themselves, or will they refer it to an 
independent prosecutor to remove any perception of political 
interference? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Again, Mr. Speaker, when we have, or 
when public prosecutions has a referral or a request from the 
Chief Electoral Officer, they’ll make a decision. And they’ll 
make it independent of the Minister of Justice. 
 
I’m sure the member opposite, I’m sure none of the members of 
this House, I don’t think the citizens of Saskatchewan want a 
politician deciding when a political party is prosecuted, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
today I wrote the Chief Electoral Officer asking him to 
investigate another violation of the elections Act by the 
Karwacki Liberals. In 2004 the Karwacki Liberals accepted 
$92,833 in donations from the federal Liberals without 
disclosing the names of the original donors as required by 

section 250 of The Election Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan taxpayers would have some 
pretty serious questions about any money received from the 
federal Liberals these days, especially when Mr. Karwacki fails 
to disclose who sent them those envelopes of money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this violation by the Karwacki Liberals also gets 
referred to the Attorney General’s office, can he assure us that 
the Liberals will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law, or 
will the NDP, Mr. Speaker, continue to prop up the Liberals as 
they’re doing in Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan enjoy all their democratic 
freedoms. I’m sure that the member opposite, the member from 
Martensville is enjoying his use of qualified privilege right 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is a Chief Electoral Officer. 
He’s an independent officer of this legislature. I have been 
called upon by members of the opposition to interfere with 
independent commissions in the operation of their work. 
 
This goes beyond that, Mr. Speaker. I think the Chief Electoral 
Officer should be allowed to do his work. The member from 
Martensville campaign against the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan could very well proceed outside of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today the 
Saskatchewan Party will be moving a motion in this Assembly 
to refer labour Bills 86 and 87 to public hearings over the 
course of the summer. The result of the motion, if passed, will 
not be the defeat of those Bills, Mr. Speaker. The result of that 
motion, if passed, would only be consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the Premier, the Leader of the NDP 
promised in the election campaign that he would not undertake 
major labour legislation changes without extensive consultation. 
We also know, based on verification from stakeholders in the 
economy and any fair measure of what extensive consultation 
is, we know that those consultations have yet not occurred. 
 
The question to the Minister of Labour is this. It’s reasonable. 
Will she vote with our motion to refer these Bills to public 
hearings? Will she ensure that there is time for extensive 
consultations with all the stakeholders on the labour side and on 
the business side on these two important Bills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3037 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, after preparation these Bills 
were tabled in the House last fall. Since then we have had many 
conversations with many interested stakeholder groups. 
December 10 we had a meeting with the Saskatchewan 
Business Council. They were very clear in their demands, Mr. 
Speaker. Since then, Mr. Speaker, we have had written 
submissions from the chamber of commerce. I’ve met with their 
human resource committee, also the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business which, Mr. Speaker, has the same 
spokesperson as the Saskatchewan Business Council. 
 
And also we have received a written submission from the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and many comments from 
the legal community throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, most people in the province 
of Saskatchewan would subscribe to the radical notion that 
introducing a Bill and then waiting for your phone to ring does 
not constitute extensive consultation. Mr. Speaker, that seems 
like eminent good sense that a government would consult ahead 
of introducing a Bill in this Legislative Assembly. Even if you 
accept the minister’s definition, ludicrous as it is, that waiting 
for the phone to ring does constitute consultation, her phone has 
been ringing and the input from the stakeholders is further 
public hearings. 
 
So if she says that she is willing to listen to their input and the 
input from those stakeholders is public hearings, will she agree, 
will she support our motion and facilitate those public hearings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, now here we see where the 
opposition hops from one side of the fence to the other because 
it was this opposition that tabled a fairly lengthy Bill on 
whistle-blowers — no notice, no consultations, no nothing. Mr. 
Speaker, they say one thing and they do another. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the election campaign in 2003, 
the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce wrote to the Premier, 
wrote to the Leader of the NDP. They asked him point blank, 
do you have any labour legislative changes planned if the 
people of the province elect you to be the government? The 
letter comes back from the Premier of the province whom 
people should be able to trust, to take at his word. The letter 
comes back under his signature and it says, there will be no 
major labour legislative changes without extensive consultation. 
That consultation has not happened, Mr. Speaker, by any fair 
measure. 
 
Will the minister explain to the people of this province — to all 

the stakeholders, labour and business — why they have broken 
the Premier’s promise from the campaign in ’03? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this government takes a 
great deal of time and effort to deal with all stakeholders across 
the province. Mr. Speaker, as government we are responsible 
for the situation, the province as a whole. We look at all 
situations. We receive input from all stakeholders. Because 
there’s one stakeholder group that doesn’t like the results of the 
consultations, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t mean they didn’t 
happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government spends a great deal of time and 
effort and puts a great deal of value in the comments back from 
stakeholders. This is good legislation. It deals with a situation 
that needs to be addressed and, Mr. Speaker, we will carry on 
with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that’s amazing. The minister said 
because there is one stakeholder group that doesn’t like the Bill 
they’re just going to plow through and avoid any more public 
hearings. 
 
That one group that that minister is referring to are the men and 
women and the co-operatives of this province that create jobs 
for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. That’s who that one 
group is — men and women who create a tax base so we can 
afford health care and education and all the things that we prize 
in the province. If not for that one group we have no health 
care. There is no education. There is no ability to help people 
who need help through Social Services. That’s the one group 
that the minister marginalizes. 
 
Now they’re asking quite simply for public hearings on this 
Bill. The minister will not agree. But we want to give her 
another chance, one last chance to do the right thing, to show 
that she has at least a vague notion of who is creating jobs and 
who is paying for the public services we prize. Will she agree to 
public hearings with the stakeholders affected by these Bills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, here we see again the kinder, milder Saskatchewan 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. They say one thing when 
someone’s in the gallery. They say something else when 
someone else is in the gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was no more than a couple weeks ago the 
Leader of the Opposition said that we don’t want anything 
unique in Saskatchewan labour legislation. We don’t want 
anything unique. So here we’re bringing in changes that bring 



3038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

Saskatchewan’s Labour Relations Board in line with six other 
jurisdictions in the country. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want that either. They don’t want 
it to be the same. They don’t want unique. And if he doesn’t 
want anything unique, would he get rid of three weeks holidays 
for workers in Saskatchewan? Would he get rid of parental and 
maternity leave, which is better in Saskatchewan, and would he 
get rid of compassionate leave because there’s no 
compassionate leave in the province of Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle . . . Order please. Why is the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Qu’Appelle has 
asked leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly a guest who is in your gallery — a member of my 
constituency who works hard both for his union, the 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union, and in the 
community — Gary Schoenfeldt, who is sitting up here in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to join in welcoming Gary to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Action Plan for Improving Health, Justice, Prosperity, and 

Safety in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House to inform members that earlier today my colleague, the 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, and I released our 
government’s action plan which responds to the 
recommendations of the Commission on First Nations and 
Métis Peoples and Justice Reform. Our action plan is entitled, 
Creating a Healthy, Just, Prosperous, and Safe Saskatchewan. 
 
This is our goal, Mr. Speaker — to create a province where all 
Saskatchewan citizens enjoy good health, prosperity, justice, 
and safety. We are especially committed to working to achieve 
this goal as we celebrate our province’s centennial and as we 
focus on the future of our province. Our action plan is 
consistent with the goals of this year’s provincial budget — 
strong and vibrant communities and healthy and self-reliant 
families. 

In response to more than 100 recommendations made by the 
commission, our government has developed a long-term, 
integrated approach that combines initiatives to reduce crime 
and improve social and economic development in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will be investing more than $48 
million this year to respond to the commission’s 
recommendations. While some of this funding is directed to 
new initiatives, some will be directed to enhancing or 
expanding existing programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many important steps have been already taken in 
Saskatchewan to reduce the incidence of crime and violence in 
our communities. We will build on these successes by working 
to keep all Saskatchewan communities safe. I would like to take 
this opportunity to provide this House with some highlights 
from our action plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial alcohol and drug strategy will focus 
on youth, Aboriginal people, street people, and northern 
communities to help them and their families deal with the 
serious problem of substance abuse. Initiatives to combat 
crystal meth are included in our alcohol and drug strategy. 
 
Funding for 2005-2006 in the Health budget . . . [inaudible] . . . 
supports the families and children in poorer communities with 
the highest number of children and youth with cognitive 
disabilities, including FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder]. 
This includes direct supports, diagnosis and assessment, and 
prevention and early intervention. Social programs are 
significantly enhanced and will continue to help those who need 
it most. 
 
The budget contains an increase to the social assistance 
payment adult basic allowance as well as an increase in shelter 
rates. This year 600 new housing units will be added and up to 
700 homes will be renovated for low-income families. The new 
rental housing supplement will help up to 10,000 low-income 
families and up to 3,000 households of people with disabilities 
find adequate housing. 
 
Quality child care helps our young children get a good start in 
life. This year 500 new child care spaces will be created, and 
families of children with special needs will no longer wait for 
child care. We will continue to work with First Nations to 
address the recommendations of the Baby Andy Review of July 
2003. 
 
This year Saskatchewan Learning will work with the FSIN to 
develop shared educational standards to create a smoother 
transition for students going from a provincial school system to 
First Nations schools. The student data system launched in 
October 2004 is an important tool to identify young people not 
attending school and develop initiatives to improve attendance. 
All students in grades 10 to 12 in provincial schools are 
included in this registry. 
 
[14:30] 
 
About 1,000 new training opportunities will be provided to help 
young people gain skills for tomorrow’s job market. 
 
In this year’s budget we announced some very exciting 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3039 

educational opportunities for Aboriginal students including the 
Aboriginal bursary program for students enrolled at the First 
Nations University of Canada or the University of Regina; 
Gradworks; the University of Saskatchewan math and science 
enrichment program for Aboriginal students; and the Aboriginal 
apprenticeship program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue our efforts to increase the 
number of Aboriginal persons working throughout our criminal 
justice system as judges, lawyers, police officers, and 
correctional workers. 
 
This year we are funding 18 new policing positions. The 
funding includes 11 positions for the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] — nine policing positions for northern 
communities, one position to develop an Aboriginal recruitment 
strategy, and one to support the RCMP cadet program. We are 
also funding five new municipal police positions. 
 
Justice officials will work with municipal police services to 
ensure their participation in the development of a recruitment 
strategy. They will look at ways to attract Aboriginal candidates 
into policing and ensure Aboriginal recruits are provided with 
the necessary supports to achieve career success. 
 
In 2005-2006, Saskatchewan Justice will establish a police 
affiliated victim services program in northern Saskatchewan to 
serve Stony Rapids and Black Lake. We will also establish a 
victim witness coordinator position in La Ronge to serve 
children and other vulnerable victims and witnesses in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This year targeted, integrated crime reduction strategies will be 
implemented at Meadow Lake and Prince Albert, as well as in a 
selected northern community. We will be consulting with our 
partners in the North to select that location. 
 
Funding is being provided to enable the Domestic Violence 
Treatment Option Court in North Battleford to enhance 
counselling, provide child counselling, and offer prevention 
information. We are also providing funding to support a 
coordinator position in Saskatoon to implement a specialized 
domestic violence court. 
 
Programs to reduce violent behaviour among inmates will begin 
in our province’s correctional centres this year. This will help 
reduce the risk of reoffending when the inmate returns to the 
community. 
 
We will enhance cultural programming in our correctional 
facilities to help offenders, especially youth, reconnect with 
their heritage in a positive way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, work continues on the replacement of the 1913 
portion of the Regina Provincial Correctional Centre. 
 
This year we will establish a video link between the Saskatoon 
Correctional Centre and Saskatoon Provincial Court, and we’ll 
implement two video conferencing projects in northern 
locations to reduce the need for prisoner transportation for first 
appearance. 
 
Following the success of the Cree Court, the Provincial Court 

will establish an Aboriginal provincial court party in Meadow 
Lake which will travel to a number of court points in 
northwestern Saskatchewan. The court will include a full-time 
translator. 
 
A Cree-speaking Justice of the Peace was recently appointed to 
work in a northern Cree-speaking community. A Dene-speaking 
Justice of the Peace will soon be appointed to work in a 
northern Dene-speaking community. A key objective of this 
action plan is to use effective alternatives to court and 
incarceration whenever possible. This year we will increase the 
number of adult alternative measures by about 1,000. 
 
The Police Act amendments introduced last week are the 
foundation of a new police public complaints commission. This 
new commission will include First Nations and Métis people 
and will handle all public complaints against municipal police 
members. 
 
Our province’s coroners’ program will undergo significant 
growth over the next three years. This year we will recruit a 
provincial forensic pathologist. And in coming years we will 
increase forensic pathology services, enhance support for 
community coroners, and establish regional coroners’ offices in 
Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
The recruitment of Aboriginal people into policing, the 
establishment of a new police complaint’s process, and changes 
to the province’s coroners’ program are initiatives that also 
respond to the recommendations of the commission of inquiry 
into matters relating to the death of Neil Stonechild. Both 
reports also talk about the need to build bridges of 
understanding in our communities. 
 
Over the coming year our government will develop a strategy to 
promote intercultural understanding, to eliminate racism, and 
encourage mutual understanding and respect in our province. 
 
The Commission of First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice 
Reform recommended the establishment of an implementation 
commissioner. We prefer to focus resources on implementing 
reforms, establishing new programs and initiatives, and 
enhancing existing community-based programs. To put our plan 
to action, Mr. Speaker, we have developed an implementation 
mechanism that involves our partners — the federal 
government, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 
and the Métis community. 
 
Currently we are working separately with the FSIN and Métis 
representatives as we recognize these groups have unique needs 
and circumstances that we wish to address in a collaborative, 
respectful way. I am certain we will maintain our positive 
working relationship with these groups as we move forward 
with our plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 
working with individuals, groups, and communities across our 
province to continue along the path of creating a health, just, 
prosperous, and safe Saskatchewan for all as we begin our 
second century. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may again, a quote from the Chair of the 
Commission on First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice 



3040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

Reform. To quote Chief Willie Littlechild: 
 

“There is reason to celebrate and be optimistic about the 
future as a result of the response to the Commission on 
First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform,” said 
former Chairman, Chief Willie Littlechild. The action plan 
that increases the number of partnerships is a very 
proactive strategy. 
 
In congratulating Premier Lorne Calvert, Minister Frank 
Quennell and Minister Peter Prebble for the Government’s 
expressed commitment, Littlechild calls and encourages 
all partners to continue working together to ensure the 
three year strategy achieves the desired outcomes that will 
create the desired healthy, just, prosperous and safe 
Saskatchewan. 
 
“I am personally very encouraged by the serious 
consideration and planned implementation of our 
recommendations.” . . . said Littlechild. The thematic 
approach adopted by the Government of Saskatchewan is a 
very effective way to address the challenges and dealing 
with the underlying causes of crime as a priority. It will 
secure increasing involvement use of alternatives, and 
improve justice system responses. 

 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the members of 
the commission for their important work which contributed to 
increasing our understanding of the issues of offending and 
victimization in Saskatchewan. As well I also express our 
appreciation to all those who shared their experiences and 
advice with the commission. 
 
I invite all members of this House to show their appreciation to 
these individuals and organizations, whose efforts will help 
shape a province that remains an ideal place to live, work, and 
raise a family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Copies of this important action plan are 
available on the Saskatchewan Justice website at 
www.saskjustice.gov.sk.ca. Thank you, Mr. Speaker 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thank you to the minister for giving us a copy of his statement. 
 
Last June, Mr. Speaker, the Commission on First Nations and 
Métis Peoples and Justice Reform put forward a report 
containing recommendations for reforming the justice system. 
Today the government responded. 
 
This government had the opportunity to undertake a meaningful 
and comprehensive strategy to review the justice system. It had 
the opportunity to undertake measures to restore the confidence 
of all Saskatchewan citizens in the justice system. 
 
Today the NDP responded. It was a poor mixture of rehashed 

budget announcements. It lacks a comprehensive strategy for 
change, it lacks a clear accountability mechanism, and it lacks a 
commitment to a renewed partnership with First Nations people 
to follow through on their recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations and Métis people want a justice 
system that reflects their hopes and demands for a justice. And 
instead they got a response from this government that fails to 
address the realities that they live with every day. The failure is 
clear in this NDP’s response to the commission’s report. 
 
First of all the NDP failed to act on the most important 
recommendation, that of an independent implementation 
commissioner to hold the government accountable for their 
actions on justice reform. What we need is for someone outside 
of this government, someone that actually holds the 
government’s feet to the fire and ensure that they look at all the 
recommendations in a timely manner. That recommendation 
was totally ignored. The response restated the previous budget’s 
commitments rather than rethinking the justice system in the 
province. That’s what the First Nations people called for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It promised 18 new police positions which were previously 
announced in the budget, but it fails to note that the NDP has 
not even come close to fulfilling their promise from the 1999 
election to hire 200 new police officers. People have to ask, if 
the government can’t keep its old promises, why should they 
believe that they’ll keep any future promises? It does nothing to 
correct the previous failure of the NDP to deal with the actual 
underlying causes of crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the big problems people have that are 
involved in the justice system is the need for food, for the 
nutrition that we need to be able to operate in our daily lives. 
This calls for enhanced nutrition programs, but it does nothing 
to address the fact that food bank usage continues to grow under 
this NDP government as children and adults continue to go 
hungry. 
 
We have a housing element. It talks about the rental supplement 
program, but it fails to acknowledge that the disabilities 
component of this program does nothing for people facing 
intellectual disabilities or difficulties with addiction. It also fails 
to make home ownership a cornerstone of neighbourhood 
stability and renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, child services. This report talks about increased 
spending on KidsFirst, but it fails to mention this government is 
sitting on an additional $22 million from the federal 
government that . . . [inaudible] . . . the First Nations family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about detox beds, but there’s 
commitments that this government has made for the last number 
of years about detox and treatments — especially for youth — 
that they have failed to fulfill. The provincial drug strategy that 
focuses on drugs like crystal meth — that this government is 
only now starting to acknowledge — but it isn’t acknowledging 
the fact that, besides government, there is a right and 
responsibility of parents to become involved with their 
children’s addictions and with addictions of people right across 
the province, and that only government can be the people that 
deal with problems. 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3041 

Mr. Speaker, government does not have the answers for 
everything. They have to rely on individuals and families to do 
some of the work. 
 
They talk about FASD. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that everyone in 
this Assembly is well aware that this is an issue we brought 
forward from this side of the House for 10 years. We have 
heard in three consecutive budgets this government talking 
about a diagnostic centre and treatment programs and their 
whole framework for cognitive disabilities that we have not 
seen. It was supposed to be released in September 2003. And 
today we still have not seen this framework that we’ve been . . . 
that the government has promised us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, First Nations employment is another issue. The 
government’s at least recognizing that ensuring First Nations 
and Métis people have training and employment is important. 
But what it doesn’t talk about is this government’s failure to do 
that. In 2001 only one-third of First Nations people were 
employed compared with 59 per cent of Métis people and 78 
per cent of non-Aboriginal population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly this government’s failure to create a 
meaningful partnership with First Nations and Métis people to 
create economic opportunities has created the underlying causes 
of crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document that was released today is 
something that has been well . . . has been waited for by many 
people for a long time. I’m sure by the end of the day the 
government will understand there are many people find this 
document very lacking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to make 
a ruling unless the member would . . . Would the member just 
state his purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might 
have leave to introduce a motion with respect to the referral of 
estimates for the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. That is the further 
estimates which were referred to the Committee of Finance, but 
to refer those to the policy field Committee on the Economy 
where other Finance department estimates are being considered. 
I believe that this was agreed to by the opposition. I wonder if I 
might have leave to move that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion with respect to transfer of certain 
estimates. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader is recognized. 
 

Referral of Estimates to Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

That vote 71, further estimates for the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and 
referred to the policy field Committee on the Economy. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Yorkton. 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly it has been moved 
by the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the 
member for Yorkton: 
 

That vote 71, further estimates for the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and 
referred to the policy field Committee on the Economy. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
[14:45] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day I wish to bring down a ruling. 
 
Yesterday the member for Melfort raised a point of order 
regarding . . . requesting the Speaker to review the record of 
proceedings and tapes for the purpose of identifying whether 
unparliamentary language or phrases were recorded during 
yesterday’s session. I did listen to the tapes and did review 
Hansard, and I wish to respond to the point of order in the 
following manner. 
 
Disorder in the House was obvious following the member’s 
statement by the member for Kelvington-Wadena and also 
following a response by the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation to a question from the member for Batoche. 
 
The review of Hansard did not reveal any record of 
unparliamentary language. No discernible unparliamentary 
remarks were recorded on the tapes for these incidents. I do 
wish to comment on the source of disorder. 
 
Disorder in the House is of concern because it impedes the 
ability of members to perform their duties as elected members. 
 
Order. Order please, members. Order. 
 
I’ll repeat. Disorder in the House is of concern because it 
impedes the ability of members to perform their duties as 
elected members when the House is convened. The fact that a 
point of order was raised indicates a concern on the part of one 
or more members. 
 
Members’ statements are a routine proceeding specifically to 
allow for members to speak unimpeded on issues of the 
member’s choice. Question period is a routine proceeding 
specifically for private members to hold government members 
accountable and for ministers of the Crown to account for 



3042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

government policies and processes. 
 
Use of unparliamentary language and personal attacks spoken 
on the record or heckled across the floor tend to cause disorder 
and to shift the focus of routine proceedings away from their 
intended purpose of clarifying positions on issues and debating 
the merits of political positions. 
 
It is the member’s individual and collective responsibility to 
respect the written and traditional rules of this Assembly. This 
has been interpreted as using language and tone that is 
respectful to the Assembly while debating and questioning and 
responding. I also wish to quote citation 491 from 
Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition; 491 reads: 
 

The Speaker has consistently ruled that language used in 
the House should be temperate and worthy of the place in 
which it is spoken. No language is, by virtue of any list, 
acceptable or unacceptable. A word which is 
parliamentary in one context, may cause disorder in 
another context, and therefore be unparliamentary. 

 
I ask that all members keep in mind these guidelines during 
proceedings of this Assembly so that members are able to 
exercise their privileges and are not impeded from performing 
their duties. 
 
On a second and unrelated point of order, I wish to bring to the 
attention of the member from Martensville that an 
off-the-record comment he made today was clearly audible to 
the Speaker and was directed at a visitor in the gallery, and that 
the members in this Assembly ought not to engage visitors in 
the gallery in debate. 
 
Why is the member from Regina Rosemont on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — With leave to make a statement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont is 
requesting leave to make a personal statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I value very much the 
democratic processes of this House and the need for 
parliamentary language. And whether intended or not intended, 
I wish to apologize for any unparliamentary remarks I may have 
made in this House yesterday. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes . . . Order 
please. The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
government and table responses to written questions 1,236 
through 1,249 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,236 through to 
1,249 inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 87 — The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I will attempt to put some words on the record if the 
gentlemen opposite would listen and refrain from, you know, 
the comments that have been coming across this floor for the 
last five minutes. The Deputy Premier doesn’t seem to quite 
understand about the fact that things do get out of order. And in 
fact there was an apology made and it’s been accepted and that 
will be the conclusion to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 87, Bill No. 87 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to talk for a moment about the circumstances 
leading up to Bill No. 87 specifically, even though we know 
that Bills 86 and 87 have been put forward in this legislative 
session as Bills that have been linked together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 87, according to the Votes and 
Proceedings of this Legislative Assembly, was introduced on 
November 19, 2004. And, Mr. Speaker, the most important 
point that has to be made about the introduction of this Bill is 
that usually when a Bill that may be deemed to be controversial 
or will affect various sectors — in this case employers and the 
various businesses in this province as well as labour and the 
various workers in this province — that there would be, Mr. 
Speaker, the least that could be expected, that there would be 
consultation prior to the introduction of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have witnessed in many instances in being 
involved with the School Boards Association of this province 
where there were Bills that were put forward that affected 
trustees, that affected teachers, that affected school divisions. 
There was consultation to begin with. Yes in some instances 
there was disagreement about what a particular section of the 
Bill would include. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what 
consultation is all about. It’s to put forward a plan that is best 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3043 

And that’s what I think is lacking here. We have not had the 
kind of consultation by the Minister of Labour and the 
Department of Labour with all stakeholders. We have Bill No. 
87 that identifies a number of clauses that I will get into shortly 
that are not in the best interest of the province of Saskatchewan. 
There is a need for compromise. There is a need to develop 
something that just is a bit better. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a very clear example of this 
right here in this Legislative Assembly. The minister 
responsible for The Municipalities Act and the miscellaneous 
municipalities Act introduced those Bills coincidently on the 
very same day, November 19, 2004. And we heard very 
quickly, as we have heard from businesses, that those Bills were 
flawed, just like we’re hearing that Bill No. 87 is a flawed Bill. 
And after an outcry, the Minister Responsible for Government 
Relations looked at the concerns, listened to the concerns, and 
on March 21, 2005, those two Bills were withdrawn from the 
order paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they weren’t withdrawn to be never seen again. 
And in fact the minister has stood in this House — and we have 
congratulated him for that — he stood in this Assembly, and he 
indicated a number of public meetings that he held across the 
province where he had the opportunity to hear from community 
leaders. Those people who are elected at the various community 
levels — whether they be with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities or the Saskatchewan Association of Urban 
Municipalities — but there were people that came forward and 
expressed their concerns. 
 
The minister said he listened. He built a team together that 
produced a new set of Bills. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on April 
18, 2005, we have Bills numbered 106 and 107, The 
Municipalities Act and The Municipalities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2005 reintroduced into this Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not unheard of for a government to 
look at a Bill that’s flawed, look at a Bill that was put through 
in a hurried fashion. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recall last fall 
when the municipal Bills were introduced, there was a great 
rush. There was almost a push on every member on this side 
from various people to say we must get this through. This has to 
be passed before we recessed for Christmas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that would have been the wrong thing to do. It was 
clearly shown that these Bills needed to be improved. And in 
fact now that they are in the . . . again on the order paper, we 
find very little concern expressed by the people in the province 
of Saskatchewan whether they be elected officials or whether 
they be administrators or whether they be in fact the 
government opposite. So there is clear example that this kind of 
situation should be looked at. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour has stated numerous 
times in her responses to questions that I’ve asked her, she says, 
I am listening. I received input from the Saskatchewan Business 
Council. I have received written writs from the chambers of 
commerce in this province. I have received individual letters 
from businesses expressing their unhappiness, their concern, 
their position about the fact that Bill 87 is not going to be good 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, if this is in fact true that the Minister of 
Labour has heard these concerns, I think she should be able to 
do the right thing. And the right thing at this time is not to, not 
to cancel the Bills or leave the Bills on the order paper. The 
right thing to do, Mr. Speaker, is to move the Bill into 
committee and direct the committee to have public consultation 
because that’s what needed. We need to build a partnership — a 
partnership with labour and a partnership with business and a 
partnership with government that in fact will build the province 
of Saskatchewan and create an environment that is good for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the minister knows that 
section 18 of this Bill gives board members the same privileges 
and immunities as judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a tremendous power to be given someone, some 
group who are not judges, who do not follow the same training, 
who do not follow the same regulations as do magistrates in 
this, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
One day we asked the Minister of Labour, could she clarify 
whether or not particular sections of this Bill do in fact grant the 
Chair of the Labour Relations Board or his designate to in fact 
search and seize. And the response by the minister on one day is 
yes, it does. It will give, it will give the ability to search and 
seize. Two days later, Mr. Speaker, two days later when she’s 
asked the same question, the Minister of Labour says well no, in 
some circumstances it might; those are pretty broad powers. I’m 
not sure. And she goes on and on in a very uncertain manner, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we are saying to the minister is if we don’t have a clear 
path, if we don’t have a clear decision about what this Act 
really is going to do, then let’s delay it. Let’s hold it up so that 
indeed there can be consultation with all affected stakeholders. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that the clause that is being put 
forward in Bill No. 87, it is not the norm across the country, in 
all of Canada. It is not the norm that we will see. In fact it will 
be the exception. The only other province that has this type of 
seizure power is the province of Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Industrial Relations Board does not 
even have the powers of the court. And that was what is 
referenced in this Bill. It says that the CIRB [Canada Industrial 
Relations Board], which is an adjudicative body that rules on 
disputes between very large employers handling up to 10,000 
grievances at any given time, does not have the power of search 
and seizure. They have to, Mr. Speaker, get a court order. They 
must get a court order to search and seize documents. But in 
clause number . . . Bill 87, the LRB [Labour Relations Board] is 
given the right to search and seize if it chooses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill No. 87 and the power that it 
is going to give to the LRB, this has huge implications for small 
business in this province. Mr. Speaker, granting the rights to the 
LRB that police and safety offence regulators would only use in 
limited circumstances sends a chill throughout the entire 
business community. 



3044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not only the business community in this 
province that we’re very concerned about. It is the business 
community outside of this province that looks at Saskatchewan 
and assesses it, analyzes the environment that is present, and 
then decides whether or not they should expand to this 
province. With this type of legislation, Mr. Speaker, this will 
not influence a business to come to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked the minister to explain a number of 
times why does Saskatchewan’s LRB need broader powers than 
the Canadian Industrial Relations Board, which is under federal 
jurisdiction. And the minister has not explained that. She has 
not explained what problems they are trying to fix by 
introducing Bill No. 87. 
 
We’ve asked the minister to explain who requested this change. 
We asked the minister to explain what consultations she had 
prior to November 19. We’ve asked the minister to explain who 
was responsible for drawing up this Bill. And at no time have 
we had an answer in any shape or form, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister claims that the power that Bill No. 87 
will give to the LRB will speed things up so the board can 
render decisions quickly. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at 
what the current LRB is doing. When we look at section 4.1 of 
the Bill as introduced, section 4.1 indicates that the chairperson 
of the board may make regulations. Mr. Speaker, the 
chairperson of the board, not this body, not this body which 
makes regulations and reviews regulations, will now be in 
charge of making its own regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at the decisions of the LRB 
in responses to written questions, I want to indicate that from 
the year 2001 there are still two cases that are pending 
regarding a decision from the LRB. From 2003 there are 10 
outstanding decisions. And from 2004, there are 20 outstanding 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the clauses in this Bill is a clause that will 
extend the term of a board member who is leaving the board 
and allow that board member to continue in that role until a 
decision is rendered on the cases that they are involved with. 
Mr. Speaker, can you imagine? 
 
We have cases from 2001 that a decision has not been rendered 
yet. And now we’re going to allow members of the board to 
remain, I guess, on the payroll until a decision is rendered. Mr. 
Speaker, I think that this will create tremendous concern. How 
can we have a system that both business and employers and 
employees as well will see as being fair if in fact a chairperson 
or a board member may — and I say may, Mr. Speaker — may 
be looked at as unnecessarily delaying a decision because they 
know then that they can stay on that particular file for as long as 
it takes to render a decision. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that that 
is a decision that we need to have in our Trade Union Act at this 
moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 4 of this Bill also gives the chairperson 
and vice-chairperson the ability to hear fair representation cases 
alone. Mr. Speaker, this is a power that is given to one person to 
in fact adjudicate a case alone. And I think that for employees, 
this should be of serious concern — and not only for the 
employers that are expressing their concern but also for workers 

— that in fact one person will determine whether or not they 
will have the ability to hear a particular case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think very clearly it needs to be shown by any 
changes that we make to The Trade Union Act that there needs 
to be a balance. There needs to impartiality so that all decisions 
are seen in that light. They must be impartial, and they must be 
balanced to ensure that the rights of people have been 
maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at section 17 of the Bill. Section 
17 will give the chairperson of the LRB the ability to make 
regulations of procedures for proceedings before the LRB. This 
power, as I indicated already in my comments, is normally 
reserved for the Lieutenant Governor in Council or in other 
words cabinet. Cabinet makes the regulations that should 
determine the course of action of the LRB. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this question which is before us needs 
to be looked at very seriously. It needs to be looked at by public 
input. It needs to have stakeholders consult and see what is best 
for the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that very clearly you can see how this may 
disrupt the LRB’s ability to in fact be seen as fair and impartial. 
I think what you’ll see happening is that there may be examples 
of whether or not the rights of individuals are protected, 
whether or not in fact the LRB is acting in a fair and judicious 
manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns about introducing clauses that 
pertain to Canada’s Labour Code is that when the powers 
granted to the Canadian Industrial Relations Board under this 
Act are set up to deal with federal companies that operate from 
coast to coast, not your average small-business owner in 
Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, when we have reference to the 
Canadian Labour Code, we are also bringing into play the 
concerns and the cases of the Canadian Labour Code and how 
they may be interpreted in this province. 
 
Section 18.1, Mr. Speaker, grants the minister certain powers, 
and the minister indicates that privileges will be included in 
section 18.1. Mr. Speaker, power is a privilege. And when you 
have a situation where the LRB has been granted privileges and 
immunities similar to the judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench, 
you have now given the LRB a very, very strong power. You 
have given them the ability to act as judges, but yet they are not 
obligated to follow the same rules as magistrates and judges. I 
think very clearly that when people take a look at this, they will 
understand that this is not in the best interests of the 
environment of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the clauses that is contained in Bill 87 talks 
about first contracts and the ability to achieve a first contract. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to a number of labour lawyers about 
first contracts and in fact, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that a 
number of years ago when I was involved with the Canora 
school division as the board Chair, I had the, I had the privilege 
of negotiating the first contract of a new union that was created 
in that school division. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you with 
sincerity that it is not easy to get everybody together at the table 
in a short period of time. It takes months in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
because when you look at the leaders that are negotiating on 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3045 

behalf of the union, they’re coming from Saskatoon or they’re 
coming from Regina. There’s difficulty ensuring that you have 
the ability to get together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this clause is suggesting that after 90 days from 
the time that a union has been created that one side or another 
may apply to the LRB for its first contract. Mr. Speaker, the Act 
also is indicating that they must begin the actual negotiations by 
20 days after an order is made, that it created that particular 
union group. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, really what you have now is 70 days of 
bargaining — two months. That will be virtually an 
impossibility. And talking to various union groups and various 
labour lawyers across the province, when you look at the 
contracts that have been signed, the first contracts for a newly 
created group, average time, Mr. Speaker, is about 10 months. 
That’s what it takes if you’re going to be sincere about 
negotiating a first contract. 
 
And a first contract is very important, Mr. Speaker, because 
you’re starting with zero base. You don’t have, you don’t have 
an establishment of what clauses you will be including in your 
contract, you don’t have a base at all. And it’s virtually 
impossible to get that through within 90 days. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I think you have an example where this 
government is trying to interfere in the normal negotiating 
process. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that when I asked the 
Minister of Health about negotiations and interventions by 
government, he said very clearly that it is the intention of the 
NDP and the Minister of Health that political interference 
would occur in a collective bargaining situation if needed. And 
we saw that, Mr. Speaker. We saw an example of that prior to 
the 2003 election when in fact, near the last few days prior to 
the calling of an election, we saw the actual intervention by the 
NDP into the collective bargaining process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the right of all labour organizations to 
collectively negotiate the terms of their contracts. They must 
not have these contracts imposed by government. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that another example of a Bill that is flawed, a 
Bill that has not been thought out. 
 
If there would have been consultation on this section, I’m sure 
that the minister and her officials would have heard clearly from 
union groups, from business groups, to say 90 days is just not 
workable and that it should be something different. But without 
consultation, you have a clause in the Bill now that is flawed, 
that is impossible to be upheld. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister, this minister has once again failed to 
practise due diligence by consulting with all stakeholders prior 
to writing this legislation. There needs to be consultation, 
sincere consultation with all stakeholders. There may be a 
situation where the minister, as I’ve indicated before, needs to 
move a Bill forward, but after consultations with all groups at 
the table. And the minister then can say clearly that there is no 
compromise but I believe that in the best interests of the 
province of Saskatchewan, this is what’s going to move 
forward. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a surprise then to 

the stakeholders because they’ve been at the table. They have 
heard the discussion. They have had the debate. They have all 
put forward their thoughts and their ideas about improving the 
Bill. And in the end, the minister then will make that decision. 
 
But it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that this consultation has not 
occurred on Bill No. 87. Mr. Speaker, I feel that without proper 
public consultation, we are sending a very negative message to 
the community, to the business communities within this 
province, and to businesses that are looking at Saskatchewan 
and trying to determine whether or not there is an environment 
that is receptive to expansion of their business. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I think that today’s decision will affect the future of this 
province in a profound way. And, Mr. Speaker, it is for these 
reasons that I have no other option but to move the following 
motion. I move: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be not 
now read a second time but that the order be discharged, 
the Bill withdrawn, and the subject matter thereof referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the motion is seconded by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, with respect to 
item 3 on the blues, Bill 87, it has been moved by the member 
for Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004, be not 
now read a second time but that the order be discharged 
and the Bill withdrawn and the subject matter thereof 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a privilege to enter into this debate this afternoon to talk 
about Bill 87 which in fact is a Bill to amend The Trade Union 
Act and deal with powers of the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we have public dialogue on 
important public issues. Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened with interest 
to the comments that have been made by the members opposite. 
And one of the things I do want to put on the record — and I 
think it’s important to have factual information on the record — 
is that the province of Saskatchewan is not a police state, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the rhetoric escalate about this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, and I want to say this. We have had an 
opportunity to review the legislation that is presently provided 



3046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

in the Alberta Bill, the Alberta Labour Relations Code. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important given that we have the two 
chambers of commerce, the Alberta Chambers of Commerce 
and the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce meeting in 
Lloydminster yesterday, today, and tomorrow, for there to be 
understanding about what this government is trying to do. 
 
And I want to read the provisions of that Bill, the Alberta Code, 
into the public record so that people will understand the 
similarities between these amendments. And I’m going to read 
section 13(1) into the Bill, and it says: 
 

The Board or an officer may 
(a) inspect and examine all books, payrolls and other 
records of an employer, an employee or any other person 
relating to employment or terms or conditions of 
employment; 
(b) by notice in writing demand the production of any 
books, records, documents, papers, payrolls, contracts of 
employment or other records relevant to employment or 
terms and conditions of employment or relevant to the 
membership or constitution of a trade union or employers’ 
organization, either forthwith or at a date, place and time 
specified in the notice; 
(c) take extracts from or make copies of books, records, 
documents, papers, payrolls, contracts of employment and 
any other records . . . [related] to employment or terms or 
conditions of employment; 
(d) require an employer, employee or any other person to 
make, furnish or produce full and correct statements either 
orally or in writing respecting . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. I’m just finding it a little 
difficult to hear the member, and I would ask members to allow 
the debate to proceed in an orderly fashion. The Chair 
recognizes . . . Order please. Order please. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — 
 

. . . or terms or conditions of employment. 
(d) require an employer, employee or any other person to 
. . . furnish or produce full and correct statements either 
orally or in writing respecting employment or terms and 
conditions of employment, and may require the statements 
to be made on oath or to be verified by statutory 
declaration; 
(e) post or require any employer, trade union, employee or 
other person to post any notices or other communications 
of the Board at the locations that the Board . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. It is not helpful to 
the debating process if we have members trying to converse 
across the floor. And if members do have comments they want 
to make to each other, I invite them to take the usual 
procedures. The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — 
 

. . . [or] post any notices or other communications of the 
Board at the locations that the Board or officer, as the case 
may be, considers advisable. 

(2) For the purposes of this Act, an officer may, in the 
execution of the officer’s duties, 
(a) enter, inspect and examine at all reasonable times any 
premises or other place, other than a private dwelling, in 
which the officer has reason to believe that a person is 
employed, 
(b) make any examination and inquiry necessary to 
ascertain whether the provisions of this Act or any order, 
decision, directive, declaration or notice of the Board or 
any written instructions of [a] . . . Chair, a vice-chair or an 
officer have been complied with, and 
(c) question an employee, without the employee’s 
employer being present, during the employee’s regular 
hours of work or otherwise. 
 

And 
 
(3) An employer’s organization, employer, trade union and 
employee, and any person acting on their behalf, shall give 
reasonable assistance to the Board and officers to enable 
them to do any of the things referred to in this section. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please, members. Let us just 
allow the debate to proceed and we’ll take turns. Member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
have said that the Labour Relations Board and this legislation 
will have the powers of search and seizure, have more powers 
of search and seizure than the police. And that simply, Mr. 
Speaker, is not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Speaker has made a ruling 
and there are to be no comments on the Speaker’s ruling 
whether it’s on the record or off the record. Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My point is, 
Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite have said that these 
amendments to The Trade Union Act give the Labour Relations 
Board more powers of search and seizure than the police. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this is not true. It’s not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Labour Relations Board will have reasonable access to 
workplaces and union offices to interview staff and review 
records. This authority, Mr. Speaker, is in keeping with the 
powers accorded regulatory agencies across the country. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think the members know it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Public Health Act, which I know that people 
from the restaurant industry know about, gives the public health 
inspectors the power to make any inspection, investigation, or 
inquiry that they consider necessary. This has been the practice 
in the province for some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you are a small-business person you know that 
under The Revenue and Financial Services Act, when we’re 
dealing with taxes, a person can enter without a warrant into 
any premises or place where business is carried on, any 
property is kept, or anything is done in connection with a 
business, or any books or records are kept or should be kept, 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3047 

pursuant to this part or any revenue Act for the purpose of 
carrying out an audit or inspection. So, Mr. Speaker, even the 
provincial revenue auditors have this authority and, Mr. 
Speaker, they can enter a business premise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those people in the construction industry, in 
the construction industry under The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Act, 1999, a commission representative from the 
apprenticeship branch can enter any premises or place where 
work in a designated trade or designated sector is performed for 
the following purposes, to ensure compliance with the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my point is this is not groundbreaking legislation. 
The Government of Alberta has given their Labour Relations 
Board the powers that are contained in this amendments to the 
Act. And, Mr. Speaker, we have several examples in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Under the authorities of various 
pieces of legislation, various public people can enter premises 
to deal with public health, with taxation, with apprenticeship, 
with an electrical inspection for instance, Mr. Speaker, and gas 
inspection, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the member from Canora, he says that no 
other group has regulatory-making authority. And I would say 
take a look at the following pieces of legislation. The 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission allows the 
commission to make regulations to designate or remove the 
designation of a trade or a sector. The Highway Traffic Act can 
. . . the Highway Traffic Board, they too can make regulations 
under The Highway Traffic Act, The Motor Carrier Act, and 
The Railway Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Labour Relations Board at present has 
regulation-making authority as outlined in The Construction 
Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992 which I know once again 
people in the construction industry know about. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner has 
regulation-making authority as outlined in The Members’ 
Conflict of Interest Act. And, Mr. Speaker, the Public Service 
Commission, the commission has regulatory-making authority 
as outlined in The Public Service Act. And, Mr. Speaker, under 
The Regional Parks Act, the authority has regulation-making 
powers. Now, Mr. Speaker, what these regulations have to do 
with is the process of the board. That is what they have the 
authority to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, then I heard the member from Canora talk 
about judges, that the Labour Relations Board and the members 
shall have the same privileges and immunities as a judge of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench. Mr. Speaker, what this Bill does not 
give the members of the Labour Relations Board is the same 
powers as a Court of Queen’s Bench judge. It gives them the 
same privilege and immunities, and there is a difference, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My point, Mr. Speaker, is that there has been a great deal, a 
great deal of information that has been provided to the public 
that does not accurately reflect the content of the Bill. And if 
this province is to make progress, we need to have an 
environment in this province where we can have good public 
debate without unnecessarily escalating rhetoric that does not 
represent the real facts contained in the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 

[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said about the Bill; much has been 
said about the Bill from the members opposite. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill is not groundbreaking. It’s not revolutionary. 
It’s not radical. It gives the Labour Relations Board powers that 
are available in six other jurisdictions in this country, including 
the federal jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are engaged in a great deal 
of mischief, a great deal of mischief, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the members of the legislature representing the 
government have determined that this Bill is not a radical piece 
of legislation. It is not revolutionary. It simply gives the powers 
to the board that they would experience in several other 
jurisdictions if those boards were in Alberta or British 
Columbia or Manitoba or the federal Government of Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour entered this Bill into this 
legislature in November. It’s called . . . December, January, 
February, March, April, May — six months later we are going 
to pass this legislation. We have had lots of opportunity to have 
our input. And, Mr. Speaker, consultation does not mean at the 
end of the day that the people who are opposed to certain 
sections of this Bill will get their way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a balanced piece of legislation. It’s a piece 
of legislation that needs to go forward. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
piece of legislation that will go forward because it is not 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, breaking revolutionary new ground. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Canora-Pelly on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Canora-Pelly has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
indeed a privilege and an honour to introduce a group of 
students and teachers and chaperones that are seated in the east 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon from the Preeceville School we 
have 16 students and from a school in Papineauville, Quebec 
we have 18 students, for a total of 34. These are grade 10, 11, 
and 12 students from the province of Saskatchewan and the 
province of Quebec. 
 
The Quebec teachers that are with this group are Liette Schreyer 
and Francine Lemon. And with the group from Preeceville of 
course is a person who has been in this Legislative Assembly a 



3048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

number of times, she continues to bring students to the 
Assembly, which is of course Sheila Ivanochko. And chaperone 
is Leanne Jakubowski. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome not only our 
Saskatchewan students to their Legislative Assembly but to the 
Quebec visitors. And I hope that you have a great time in the 
province of Saskatchewan until your return to Quebec. 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
amendment to the second reading motion made by the member 
for Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 

 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be not 
now read a second time but that the order be discharged, 
the Bill withdrawn, and the subject matter thereof referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
amendment? Those who favour the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the amendment say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe the nos have it. Call in the 
members for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:35 until 15:44.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the amendment to the motion as moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004, be not 
now read a second time but the order be discharged, the 
Bill withdrawn, and the subject matter thereof referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Those who favour the amendment please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 23] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner Krawetz Draude 
Bjornerud Stewart Wakefield 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Merriman Dearborn 
Hart Kirsch  
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, the amendment, 
please rise. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Addley Lautermilch Hagel 
Van Mulligen Serby Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
23; those opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment defeated. Debate 
resumes on the main motion. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
the opportunity to join the debate. 
 
The Minister of Labour talked about one group, and a reference 
to that would be that it’s a very small group. This one group 
represents 58 different associations within the province. And 
that one group represents thousands of businesses. And that 
group and the businesses also represents tens of thousands of 
both unionized and non-unionized workers in this province. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t say that it is just one group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Nutana talked about different 
areas in her reading about the ability to seize or not to seize, but 
also used a word in that discussion of copy. So, Mr. Speaker, if 
you’re coming into a business and you are copying documents 
— I guess you can call it by a different word — but if they 
leave my premises, I would assume that you’re seizing them. 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I assume if you’re copying the documents, 
you’re using my equipment to copy them with, which we may 
have a discussion at that point in time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Why is the member from 
Meadow Lake on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3049 

The Speaker: — The member from Meadow Lake has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Member from Meadow Lake. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to my colleagues and the members opposite for 
granting leave. 
 
I want to introduce, Mr. Speaker, seated in the west gallery first 
of all, a constituent of mine but also a Vice-chief with the FSIN, 
Vice-chief Delbert Wapass. And also with him are Irene Oakes 
and Trish Watson. 
 
We just finished a meeting and they had asked to come down 
and have a look in the Chamber here as well, to see how the 
legislature works. So we are pleased to have them join us here 
today. To all of my colleagues, please join me with me in 
welcoming Vice-chief Delbert Wapass and Irene Oakes and 
Trish Watson as well. Thanks very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 
the ability to enter into my business, as I believe the wording 
says, at the time of day or convenience, first of all, Mr. Speaker, 
without prior notice, I would certainly want as a business 
person my counsel to be there in order to make sure my rights 
are observed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague had pointed out and I’m just 
going to reiterate some of these points because I think they’re 
crucial to the point. Number one is, Mr. Speaker, in researching 
this, I could find no cases that were before the board where this 
legislation would be warranted or required. There doesn’t seem 
to be a need and even if there is a need, there is certainly no 
need to expedite or to force this through without consultation. 
Now the minister may argue about consultation and I’ll 
certainly get into that from my perspective. 
 
One of the concerns, Mr. Speaker, is that in section 18, this Bill 
gives the board members the same privileges and immunities as 
a judge from the Queen’s court bench. The difference, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the Queen’s court bench is a lawyer who’s gone 
through training, through different various sections of legal to 
understand the implications of the decision. Members to the 
labour board are appointed by governments in power. There is 
no prerequisite that I’m aware of for training or structure or 
understanding of the issues that are before them. 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when the minister from Nutana talked 
about these being in the same legislation as in other provinces, 
well, Mr. Speaker, what they’ve done is cherry-picked sections 
out of other provinces instead of incorporating the total 
legislation from other provinces, if they’re so pleased to have 
that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we’re electing a board who is 
appointed, which we don’t know of the qualifications of the 
people involved. And we are putting in this one person the 
ability and the authority to interpret on their own half the Bill 
and its designates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this should be of concern to all parties, not only 
business but unions. As these members rotate, other 
governments take form, other boards are appointed. It leaves in 
the hands of an individual person, the Chair of the board, to 
interpret these laws unto themselves. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
serious concern, and the interpretation today by one individual 
can certainly be a different interpretation tomorrow by a 
different individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the issue of small business, I would like to say 
on behalf of those of us who are not a member of any 
association, that it’s difficult for us to present or to come to this 
House to present our case, as it speaks, without taking this out 
to people in various areas around the province. Small-business 
people are trying to make a living, grow the economy, and 
employ people. They don’t have the time to drive to Regina to 
present. They don’t have the legal counsel. They don’t have the 
expertise to do it, but they do have a concern as to how this law 
will be interpreted when it comes to their business. 
 
And I’d like to give you one example on that, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s my own example. When the minister from Nutana says they 
will not be able to enter homes, well that’s very comforting. 
Except, Mr. Speaker, I have three companies, and the head 
corporation of those companies are in my home. So how does 
that work, Mr. Speaker? Can I take that as fact, that my house is 
incorporated . . . all of my businesses are incorporated within 
my home, that the labour board would not be able to enter my 
home . . . to interpretate this law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does that work for people who have 
home-based businesses? A lot of businesses that have 
home-based businesses employ people outside of their homes 
— accountants, lawyers, daycare centres, growers, plant 
growers, other. Maybe even a farmer may employ eight people. 
So does that mean that his home, which is the head of his 
corporation, that the labour board cannot enter that premise? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a lot of calls this week from my 
colleagues who are my peers in the business community, and 
they have a sad solution to this situation, Mr. Speaker, very sad. 
We’ll move our head offices out of this province. And that’s a 
shame, Mr. Speaker. That’s a shame that we’re forced to even 
contemplate those decisions. But I believe that’s maybe what 
the other side does want. But what does that do, Mr. Speaker? 
That moves our tax dollars also out of this province . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . but, as the colleague said, you know, 
that makes more for the rest of us. Well I don’t think it does, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



3050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

I’m proud to make my earning here. I’m proud to pay my taxes 
here. But it’s my decisions, Mr. Speaker, not the decisions of an 
individual that’s appointed to a labour board to contemplate 
these decisions. 
 
I believe these laws are not good even for the union movement, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, how do we send an individual that we 
don’t know has the training and the expertise to do a job to 
make a decision to enter a premise and seize documents . . . or 
copy documents, pardon me, to examine documents. Where do 
the limitations go? Not only do I have my corporate documents; 
I have my family trusts. I have my personal stuff. How do I 
know that when they’re on that computer where they’re going, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is something that those of us that 
are in the business community cannot comprehend why this 
government is so intent in getting this through so quickly. How 
do the people in Eastend, Saskatchewan, how do the people in 
Hudson Bay, how do they get to give their opinion on this, 
those that aren’t part of large associations, whether they be 
unionized or non-unionized associations? This province is run 
on small business. It’s the foundation of this province. 
 
And this government has made the decision to enter those 
businesses where courts need to be involved, lawyers need to be 
involved. I find it terribly irate that somebody would make the 
decision based on the ability that I have my business in my 
home, would enter my premises. And, Mr. Speaker, the comfort 
of a minister just saying, oh that won’t happen, well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve heard that before. It’s kind of say one thing and 
do another. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, those of us that have invested our own 
money — our own money — without government grants to 
build businesses in this province and employ people want to 
have a say in the way these things are interpreted. We can’t take 
two days out of our business schedule to drive down here to 
meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want the right to have these hearings across 
this province so all small-business owners have a say. This isn’t 
just about big business. This isn’t just about big union. This is 
about all of us who have a say in this. And are . . . what we 
saying is that the small-business people don’t have a say in this 
province, that what we do isn’t interpreted . . . or what you’re 
saying, we’re not welcome in this province because it’s a stroke 
of a pen to leave, and with it we take the tax dollars. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, nobody is against good law. But 
people are against this law that’s interpreted and forced down 
their throat without proper consultation. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not asking for something that nobody else 
would have. It’s a right to speak. It’s a right to speak freely in a 
democratic society, have our point heard by the government of 
the day, to interpret our concerns. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those concerns, from the phone calls I’m 
getting from my peer group, are severe. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, this isn’t a fear tactic to say businesses are going to 
leave this province. I’m not standing here saying that, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m staying here, standing here saying that we want a 
right to be heard, and we haven’t had a right to be heard. 

Now the minister may say this has been on the books since 
December, but a lot of us are out there trying to make a living 
since December, Mr. Speaker. Farmers are in the fields now, 
planting. You know, Mr. Speaker, the difference of passing this 
law in May or November is absolutely insignificant. It makes 
no difference. There are no cases that are pending that need to 
be heard under the labour standard board that can’t wait until 
. . . The minister can beak all she wants. 
 
I want to ask her how many home-based business people has 
she talked to? How many of them has she sent out a letter and 
informed what’s going on in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s fine to talk to big 
business. It’s fine to talk to big labour, but there’s the rest of us 
out there. There’s those of us who are creating employment, 
trying to employ our families while they’re on the farms to 
make a living. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they can say what they want. But the 
calls that come into our office tell us that they’re not consulting. 
They can say that they’re consulting. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister speaks up. She says one thing. She says she never 
said seizure, and yet it’s in the press. It’s everywhere that she 
did say the word. Well, Mr. Speaker, those of us that may be 
getting a little older and have time for our memory failures, you 
know, Mr. Speaker, I understand that. But it’s on the public 
record what she said. And she did say seizure one day and said 
no the next day. And that’s what concerns us in the business 
world. 
 
[16:00] 
 
We need stability. We need government stability. We need 
stability to know that when we invest dollars in this province, 
we have an opportunity to get return on those investments, on a 
stable marketplace . . . not laws that are changed. 
 
When the Premier went before the election, he committed to the 
business community in the province there would be no 
significant changes without consultation. And this is the third 
major Bill since that. And the business community is asking 
what kind of stability is that. Where is the stability? Why 
should I invest my dollars in this province? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to say that this is urgent. 
And it’s fascinating that we have some urgent things that we 
should be doing, certainly on crystal meth and other issues. But 
there is no urgency to put this Bill through this month or any 
time this summer without the opportunity for people to speak to 
it. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s funny how we can get these labour 
laws that are quickly put through, and yet when we try to do 
something on crystal meth, we want to study it for a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — We want to go out, Mr. Speaker, and we 
want to have consultations around the province to understand 
crystal meth. Well, Mr. Speaker, get on the Internet. There’s 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3051 

enough there to bury you for a year. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand how we can push a 
Bill through that has no significant impact in the next six 
months, and yet we can’t commit to putting in treatment centres 
for our children who are dying in this province. Mr. Speaker, I 
just don’t get it. It’s a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and that substitute the following therefor: 
 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now 
read a second time but that it be read a second time this 
day six months hence. 
 

And it’s seconded by the member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest, seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be not 
now read a second time but that it be read a second time 
this day six months hence. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to enter 
this debate. I don’t intend to take up a lot of the House’s time, 
but I think there are a few comments that I’d like to put on the 
record. 
 
I will indicate at the outset that I have no intentions of 
supporting the amendment nor do I believe my colleagues will. 
This legislature has lots of work before it, and I think it’s 
important that we proceed with our legislative agenda which is 
what this government intends to do and which is what we will 
do. And ultimately, Mr. Speaker, we will oppose these types of 
amendments. 
 
And I want to speak, Mr. Speaker, first of all . . . and I want to 
speak as an MLA who has sat in this legislature for a 
considerable period of time. I also want to speak as someone 
who has been a business person in this province since I was 18, 
19 years old, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say to members of the 
opposition that they should not take the approach that they are 
the only people who come to this legislature with some history 
in business because that’s not simply the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those of us who don’t belong to the 
Progressive Conservative Party or the Conservative Party or the 
Liberal Party, but who are New Democrats who have a business 
background and who frankly have been successful without 
government grants, without government support. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m proud to say that I am one of those members of 

the legislature who come with that kind of a business 
background and who also come with the knowledge that what I 
have generated — in terms of wealth and the opportunity that 
I’ve been able to create jobs for some young people in this 
province so far — came without the support of government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to set the record straight that not all the 
business people of this world support a right-wing political 
ideology. I’m one who doesn’t, Mr. Speaker, because I believe 
in fairness and I believe in balance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that 
I have never, ever been a member of a trade union. I have never 
been in a workplace where that has been part of the workplace. 
And I’m not saying that I wouldn’t have. I would have joined if 
the place was unionized and I would have been proud to be a 
member of a group of people who use a trade union for job 
protection and job security. And I think that’s part of the 
balance. 
 
And I think we also have to understand, Mr. Speaker, that this 
province was built on the work and the sweat and the brows of 
working people both urban, rural, unionized, non-unionized. 
 
It’s been built by Aboriginal people, people from all ethnic 
backgrounds. And it will continue to be built that way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it will be built by a positive attitude and it 
will be built by fairness. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’ll 
also be built by a balance in terms of the legislation that goes 
before this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we may not always agree with members of 
the opposition in terms of some of the issues and how they will 
portray some of the issues and some of the legislation that 
comes forward. 
 
And I have to tell you that I don’t always agree with the 
chamber of commerce. I’ve been a member of the chamber of 
commerce. I’ve been a member of the CFIB [Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business] many, many years; when it 
was first started as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker. I felt it was a 
. . . [inaudible] . . . for a small business. But I don’t always 
agree with the conclusions of that business community — that 
part of our business community. 
 
And I’ve got to say, Mr. Speaker, that even members of the 
opposition will have to admit that the leadership of the business 
groups aren’t always speaking 100 per cent in terms of what 
their membership are saying. It’s not always the case. Now that 
might be a little controversial and the members opposite may 
not agree to that, but that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am more interested in 
seeing the kind of an economy that we have been able to build 
here in this province, the kind of economy that we should be 
proud of, Mr. Speaker, and the kind of economy that’s been 
built on positive attitudes and the belief that we can do things 
here in this province that maybe can’t be done anywhere else in 
the world, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve proven that. We’ve proven 
that in health care, Mr. Speaker. We’ve proven it over and over 



3052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

again in terms of worker protection here in this province. We’ve 
proved that we are leaders. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the fear . . . the 
fearmongering, the fearmongering that goes on, sometimes I 
have to take exception to. And that’s why I’m speaking to this 
Bill today because there has been a lot of it go on in this 
province in the last little while. 
 
And there’s been some misinformation cast, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. The 
member for Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. There 
should be no doubt that the private sector has confidence in this 
economy. There should be no doubt because the numbers will 
portray that that’s exactly what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s potash, whether it’s uranium, whether it’s the oil 
and gas sector, whether it’s manufacturing, whether it’s 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. All you have to do is look at the 
numbers. 
 
You’ll look at the GDP [gross domestic product] growth in this 
province. You’ll look at what the bond rating agencies are 
saying about the management of this economy, Mr. Speaker. 
Twelve successive credit upgrades here in this province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, you never hear members on that side of the House 
give this government credit for that, or the former 
administration. Never. All they ever do is stand up and say that 
we’ve created an environment where there will be no 
investment. Mr. Speaker, those aren’t the facts because the 
investment is happening and the economy is growing. 
 
If you look at the nations of Stats Canada . . . of Canada, and 
what Stats Canada says about this province, we led in nominal 
GDP growth on a per capita basis. This province, number one. 
We led on a per capital income tax . . . income growth. A per 
capita income growth, Mr. Speaker, number one. Personal 
disposable income, number one. Growth in personal disposable 
income, number one. Productivity growth, Mr. Speaker, number 
one. Real GDP growth, Mr. Speaker, number one. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, part of that growth are 
members of my family. My son and daughter-in-law own 
businesses both in Saskatoon and Prince Albert, and they 
employ people, Mr. Speaker. And they listen to what members 
of this opposition say and some of the business community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they know the facts. They know the facts 
because they pay attention to what’s going on in the place 
where they’re investing money. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
doing it without government grants; they’re doing it without 
any kind of support. They’re doing it only with hard work and 
their desire to grow this Saskatchewan economy. And they want 
to be part of it, and they’re going to employ people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that of my three children, 
they’re all living right here in this province, and they’re all 
generating wealth in this province, and they’re all part of 
building the province for Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And so what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
is I know what’s in Bill 87. I’ve read this Act. I also know 
what’s in Alberta legislation. And I know the role of regulators. 
I know the Department of Health when they come into inspect 
your place — I’ve sold food, repackaged food — and I 
understand what responsibilities they have and also what 
authority they have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that not all people believe in the 
fear that’s being cast by members of that opposition. Not all 
people believe in that. But I tell you what, Mr. Speaker. There 
are a million people in this province, the vast majority of whom 
have voted NDP over the years because they believe we manage 
the economy much better than right-wing governments, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why we’re going to be re-elected. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why members of that right-wing philosophy are 
going to be sitting on that side hungering for power for a long, 
long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In closing I want to say to you, that I’m proud to support Bill 87 
on behalf of the people of Prince Albert Northcote because it’s 
fair and it’s balanced, it clarifies some old wording in 
legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this 
amendment. I support this Premier. I support this Labour 
minister. I support this government. And I’m supporting Bill 87 
because it’s the right thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. The question before the 
Assembly is the amendment to the motion as moved by the 
member for Saskatoon Northwest, seconded by the member for 
Humboldt: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 

 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004, be not 
now read a second time but it be read a second time this 
day six months hence. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:14 until 16:21.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
amendment moved by the member for Saskatoon Northwest, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3053 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “That” and substituting the following therefor: 

 
Bill 87, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be not 
now read a second time but that it be read a second time 
this day six months hence.” 

 
Those who favour the amendment please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 22] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner Krawetz Draude 
Bjornerud Wakefield McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Merriman Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Addley Lautermilch Hagel 
Van Mulligen Serby Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour, 22; those 
opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion defeated. Debate resumes 
on the main motion. The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to enter the debate on the Bill 87 this 
afternoon. Unfortunately on a couple of occasions now the 
official opposition has tried to suggest the very, very reasonable 
step of public consultations for this Bill, that this Bill be 
subjected to continued consultations with all the stakeholders 
on both sides of the equation — those who create jobs and with 
organized labour. On both counts, Mr. Speaker, the government 
members, the NDP have stood in their places to vote against 
consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this particular Bill it is important for us to 
remember what has transpired in terms of the information the 
government has provided both to the opposition and to the 
business community, to the taxpayers, to the voters of 
Saskatchewan about the nature of this Bill. We have seen the 
minister unsure of what’s in the Bill. The Minister of Labour at 
one day said that seizure was part of it. Then the next day said 
seizure wasn’t part of it. Then she clarified that well, seizure is 
sort of part of it because it’s a matter of officials of the 
government, of the LRB being able to photocopy and take 

documents out, which most people would define as seizure. 
 
So again we have seen a minister unsure of her own Bill. 
Unable to answer basic questions about a Bill which you’d 
think the Minister of Labour who sponsored it would be able to 
do. Consultations of course would help with that. Public 
hearings would help with that. It would give the time the 
minister might need to do her homework and find out what is 
actually in this Bill. 
 
We’ve also heard the Minister of Labour and other speakers 
from the government side say there’s nothing different in this 
Bill. There is nothing different in here relative to what is 
available in other provinces. Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from the 
deputy Leader of the Opposition, we’ve heard from the member 
for Saskatoon Northwest, and many others on the opposition 
benches who’ve spoke to this Bill. We’ve heard from the 
business community. We’ve heard from other observers that the 
Minister of Labour is dead wrong on that count. We have heard 
them clearly highlight that the powers for seizure as they are 
articulated in the Bill, as the minister has confirmed through 
photocopying, are different than other jurisdictions. We have 
heard highlighted clearly for the public record that the 
government hasn’t simply adopted what’s available in other 
provinces, they’ve cherry-picked elements of other Bills in 
other provinces. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we see here in this Bill, in section 18 of the 
Bill, specifically giving the members of the board, the LRB, the 
same privileges and immunities as a judge of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. 
 
There is only one other province in the Dominion of Canada 
that provides that power to Labour Relations Board members 
and that’s the province of Quebec. That is a pretty key part of 
this Bill. That is a pretty fundamental essential element of this 
Bill that you would give the powers of a judge to someone who 
is not legally trained, someone who’s clearly not a judge, 
someone who is appointed by the government to the Labour 
Relations Board. 
 
So we know very clearly that the information we’ve gotten 
from the NDP is not true on this Bill. That’s a good reason for 
perhaps just to defeat the Bill outright, but it’s certainly a good 
reason, Mr. Speaker, for continued public consultation on the 
issue. 
 
We have tried to get an answer to the question — from this 
minister and this NDP government, from this Premier — why 
this Bill? Why are we doing this? Who is asking for this? I 
haven’t heard where the outcry is for this Bill, for the Labour 
Relations Board to have the powers of a judge. Or for the 
increased powers for search and seizure that come in this Bill. I 
don’t know who’s asking for it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the member for North Battleford is asking for it. The 
member for North Battleford is asking for it. Why is that, Mr. 
Speaker? Doesn’t he trust his businesses in North Battleford, 
Mr. Speaker? Doesn’t he trust the men and women and the 
co-operatives of his constituency who are creating jobs, who 
abide by the laws, who have to live by labour standards and 
freely and willingly do so? What doesn’t he trust about his 
businesses in his constituency that he thinks he needs the LRB 



3054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

to have the powers of a judge? 
 
And other than members of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, MLAs out 
there who clearly have a quid pro quo going with union 
leadership — not union members but some union leadership — 
is that the reason for the Bill? Is that the why behind the Bill? 
 
Because I haven’t had organized workers, I haven’t had 
unionized workers come and ask me, lobby me in my office or 
here or write me letters saying, we really need this Bill. Well 
the member from Regina South might want to listen to this. I 
have not had anybody in organized labour come to me and say, 
we really need this Bill. I haven’t had unionized workers say, 
we need this in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So why do we have it? Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have the 
answer as to why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t know why. The people of 
the province don’t know why. I would argue the significant part 
of organized labour doesn’t know why. Business does not know 
why we have to have Bill 87. 
 
But we know what it will do, Mr. Speaker. We know what Bill 
87 could do without the kind of consultation that would 
improve this Bill, without the kind of public hearings that it 
could actually make this fair and balanced. Mr. Speaker, we 
know what it will do without that, without the improvements 
that could come from public hearings. It will send the wrong 
message about the business climate, about the investment 
climate in the province of Saskatchewan. It will send a mixed 
message, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the Deputy Premier’s chirping from his seat. He should 
get up and participate in the debate because I want to tell him 
that he is part of a government, he is the proud deputy leader of 
a party that campaigned only months ago in this province, 
looked business people and organized labour straight in the eye 
and said, we will not implement major labour legislative 
changes without consultation. He looked them in the eye and 
did that. 
 
And then he broke that promise, Mr. Speaker. That’s the track 
record of that Deputy Premier right there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And that’s what they’re all about. And that’s 
what that Deputy Premier’s all about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Members will have ample 
opportunity to enter debate. Right now, the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The sad reality is that that Deputy Premier, the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask the member from 
Yorkton to not interrupt the debate. The member for Swift 
Current. 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the sad reality is that members of 
the government opposite — the NDP, the Deputy Premier, the 
Premier — they have not a clue, not a clue as to how to send a 
positive signal about the investment climate and the investment 
opportunities in our great province. They send mixed messages, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Bill 87 is an example of that, when the Premier promised to 
consult before labour legislative changes, and he didn’t do that. 
The minister has not consulted on the Bill. That question has 
been resolved. 
 
We see other mixed messages. We see the Premier, we see the 
Deputy Premier travel around the country, Mr. Speaker, and say 
that the future is wide open in Saskatchewan, that you should 
come and invest here. And what do we see, Mr. Speaker, from 
the Premier of the province? What does he think about the 
businesses that he says wants to come and invest here in a 
fundraising letter from the campaign? He says, quote: 
 

Big corporations see a successful provincial economy and 
want to take over the most profitable parts of it . . . so they 
finance a political party, in this case the Saskatchewan 
Party, to get it for them. 
 

What a mixed message, to go to some jurisdiction, some 
other place, or even within the province and say, we want 
your investment, your future’s wide open, and oh by the way, 
when it really comes down to it in a campaign, we think 
you’re out to take over the most profitable parts of the 
economy. That’s what the socialist Deputy Premier thinks 
over there. That’s what the NDP believe over there when it 
comes right down to it. They’ve got to stop sending these 
mixed messages. Our economy can’t take it any more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What other mixed messages have they sent out, Mr. Speaker? 
On the one hand they would say, at the same time they were 
saying the future’s wide open, they were contemplating Bill 87 
and implementing most available hours, Mr. Speaker. They 
were going to bring it in to this Assembly and drive it through if 
nobody objected. It would be a law in the province. And you 
know what? We would be the only place on the continent with 
such a law. 
 
The Premier kind of . . . The Deputy Premier is kind of grinning 
from his seat. I wonder what he thinks of that reputation for this 
province around North America, to those people in Yorkton that 
he says he wants to create jobs in his community and then he 
accuses them of wanting to take over the most profitable parts 
of the economy — or introducing most available hours 
legislation or Bill 87, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And do you know what the matter of consultation on that issue 
was? Do you know what we found out, Mr. Speaker? With 
respect to most available hours — and it goes directly to Bill 87 
and the issue of consultation — on the most available hours 
measure, the Minister of Labour . . . Why she’s the Minister of 
Labour still, I don’t know, for this reason if not for others. 
 
The Minister of Labour, days before she went to the SFL 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3055 

[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] to announce that she 
would be introducing unilaterally most available hours or 
government-directed hours, met with some business groups in 
the province. Did she breathe a word of this to those business 
groups days before she went to the SFL to announce it? Not a 
breath, not a word from this NDP government, from the NDP 
Labour minister who says, well they’re committed to 
consultation. They are not committed to consultation, Mr. 
Speaker. They are committed to driving through their agenda, 
and whether or not it hurts the economy doesn’t seem to matter 
to them at all. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? It matters to the people of 
the province. It matters to organized labour. It matters to union 
members who would like to see more numbers in their ranks, 
more employees. It matters to small-business men and women 
and to co-operatives. And I want to tell you, it matters to the 
official opposition. And it’s part of the motivation — not all — 
but part of the motivation we have to change the Government of 
Saskatchewan and change it soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here’s another mixed message. And I’m glad the 
minister of industry and natural resources is here because, you 
know, I’m not sure how much of a fight he has in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I just want to remind the 
member that they should not be referring to the presence or 
absence of members during debate. Member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In terms of mixed 
messages, imagine this. Imagine the Premier at his dinner in 
Regina — which I understand was significantly smaller than the 
dinner that we had in Regina — imagine a dinner in Regina 
where the Premier announces to the province and the world that 
when it comes to the oil and gas sector, he will wake the 
sleeping giant. That’s were the words that he used. 
 
And then a few days later, they announced something pretty 
positive with respect to the oil and gas sector — enhanced oil 
recovery initiative. That’s not bad. And when they announced 
it, we congratulated them for it, and thought maybe after 60 
years, maybe they actually will try to wake the sleeping giant. 
Maybe they will finally get it. And then days later, days later, 
the Finance minister stands in his place and delivers a budget 
that — what? — increases taxes to that same oil and gas sector, 
$25 million this year, $40 million next year. That’s the kind of 
mixed messages that hurt an economy. That’s the kind of mixed 
messages that we see in Bill 87 that the member for northwest 
was referring to. 
 
Perhaps even more than high taxes or a bad regulatory 
environment in terms of dissuading businesses from investing 
or retaining their investment and employees is instability, is a 
government they can’t trust, is an investment climate they can’t 
figure out. And Bill 87 is the most recent example of the kind of 
mixed messages that we get from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But there is another concern, Mr. Speaker, with respect to Bill 
87, and it goes to the vision of this government, of this NDP 
Premier — or the lack of vision. And I want to highlight for the 

public record the amount of public discourse and discussion in 
the newspapers and in the media and by people of this province 
about their complete lack of confidence — this is the people of 
this province — their complete lack of confidence in the vision 
or the lack of vision demonstrated by the members opposite. 
 
Here’s some quotes from just this spring, March 24, 2005, 
Leader-Post, quote: “But what might . . . ” This is a political 
columnist in the province, quote: 
 

But what might be harder to get past is the NDP 
government’s failure in this budget to demonstrate a 
grander vision. 
 

Here’s the same article: 
 

If there is a hallmark of the Calvert administration, it’s that 
it can’t make up its mind what it wants to be when it 
grows up. 

 
That’s from a column by Mr. Burton entitled “Calvert and Co. 
walking blindly through [the] term.” Here’s some more, Mr. 
Speaker, again from the Leader-Post or rather from The 
StarPhoenix: 
 

[The government] . . . has yet to articulate a vision for how 
it intends to improve our competitive position with other 
provinces, and seems to be conflicted over who it 
represents. 
 

Here’s another one: 
 

It is a similar problem to last week’s provincial budget. A 
reasonable Saskatchewan taxpayer could be forgiven for 
asking Finance Minister Harry Van Mulligen [and I’m 
quoting] ‘Are we getting anywhere, or are we just spinning 
our wheels?’ 

 
That from Todd Hirsch, who the Premier proudly introduced 
and welcomed to his own economic summit, Mr. Speaker. Todd 
Hirsch can’t figure out what this government’s plan is, if it has 
a vision. Bill 87, Bill 87 is going to just further confuse people 
like Todd Hirsch and the business community, and frankly 
labour . . . in the organized labour too in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s another one: 
 

It’s ironic that the main sector responsible for vaulting 
Saskatchewan to the status of a ‘have’ province — the oil 
and gas sector — is the one targeted by the capital tax 
amendment. 
 

And that’s what I just referred to in terms of other mixed 
messages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s another one from The StarPhoenix: 
 

The NDP’s evil twin is ideological and disorganized, with 
a tendency to lurch from one crisis to the next with no 
clear idea of its destination or how to get there. 
 

From the P.A. [Prince Albert] Daily Herald, and it’s too bad the 



3056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

member for Northcote is gone. Here’s what they had to say. 
 
The Speaker: — I would remind the member about what I 
reminded him about. The member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’ll try much harder to refer from doing that. 
Here’s what the P.A. Daily Herald had to say on the issue of 
vision: 
 

Besides, does Calvert think that Wall [that would be . . . I 
guess that would be me] is the only person who has 
noticed that this government has been lurching from crisis 
to crisis and failing to articulate a vision for the province 
. . . it’s also dismayingly obvious that the government has 
no coherent plan to use the windfall money to 
Saskatchewan’s . . . advantage. 
 

And the list just goes on and on and on of people making 
observations that this government lacks a vision. It doesn’t 
know what to do with respect to the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s another quote from a recent editorial regarding the 
rebate, the minister for Nutana’s rebate. Here’s what they say: 
 

Another $137 million-credit on everyone’s SaskTel bill 
does nothing for the province’s future and underlines the 
utter [underscore the word utter] lack of vision that’s 
become the hallmark of this mundane administration. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — To raise a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote state his point of order. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, my point of order, Mr. Speaker, is 
that I noted just moments ago the Leader of the Opposition 
recognized my absence. And I want to say to the House that it 
was only because he’s very difficult to listen to. I was in the 
members’ lounge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please. The point of order 
and the order that I have already brought has been reinforced. I 
recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — And, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, I truly do 
apologize that the member wasn’t here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of vision is important here. What’s at 
stake is important with respect to Bill 87. Bill 87, and the fact 
that the government is unwilling even to get further consultation 
to try to improve the Bill, underscores the complete lack of 
vision that this party, this NDP Party, this fourth-term party in 
terms of their government, has for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what is the result for this province of that 

lack of vision? Because if it didn’t hurt our province, if the lack 
of vision by the NDP didn’t have any major impact on the 
province of Saskatchewan, I guess no one would worry about it. 
But the sad reality is that it has a major impact on 
Saskatchewan. It has a negative impact on Saskatchewan. 
 
Because of the lack of vision, because of things like Bill 87, our 
province has been able to attract only 165 new people in two 
years. The NDP Finance minister created more government jobs 
than that, frankly, in the last budget; 165 people in the midst of 
a boom if you listen to the member for P.A. Northcote. At the 
same time, in those same two years the province of Manitoba 
attracted 17,000 new people — 17,000 new people. 
 
Can you believe it, Mr. Speaker? This NDP government is 
taking it on the chin, is getting a licking from our province to 
the east of us that has resources that pale in comparison to what 
we have. They can’t manage to even compete with a province 
frankly, that’s not as blessed as we are in natural resources. A 
hundred times better population growth than when we’ve seen 
in our province. That’s the first example. 
 
Here’s the second one as I wrap up, Mr. Speaker, and I 
encourage members opposite to pay careful attention to the 
speech, on both sides of the House. 
 
What is the result of a lack of vision? What is the result of 
things like Bill 87, Mr. Speaker? Do they have an impact? Well 
here, from an article earlier this month in the Leader-Post, is 
what the Sask Trends Monitor and the very respected 
statistician Doug Elliott had to say. And I’m going to quote this, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Doug Elliott, publisher of Sask Trends Monitor, who 
compiled the statistics for the chamber [of commerce] 
report, said that, “private sector is underperforming during 
a period of high commodity prices . . . and high 
investment.” 

 
And that’s what we’ve been saying in our party. That’s all we 
have been saying. That there is so much potential and so many 
resources in this province, that we should be leading the 
country, we should be leading Manitoba. 
 
The Minister of Industry and Resources doesn’t have to take it 
from me. He can talk to Doug Elliott. He likes to quote Doug 
Elliott. Doug Elliott says clearly and starkly that we are 
underperforming under their leadership. And in large measure 
it’s because of most available hours, it’s because of high 
business taxes, and it’s because of their unwillingness to even 
consult on things like Bill 87. 
 
I’ll just continue . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what Elliott said and I quote: 
 

We’re at the stage in the business cycle where the private 
sector should be driving everything because of commodity 
prices. This is as good as it is going to get in 
Saskatchewan. 
 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3057 

That’s what he has to say. He goes on to say: 
 

What’s going to happen when the public sector goes 
stagnate; as it will? Then we won’t have anything 
happening. 

 
Because he highlights, Mr. Speaker, Doug Elliott does, that in 
our province the public sector is growing faster than the private 
sector in the face of a boom, Mr. Speaker — in the face of a 
boom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s at stake? What’s at stake with respect to 
Bill 87, and the motion we presented to the House, and our 
reasonable suggestion that it needs further consultation? What’s 
at stake if we don’t get a government that understands how to 
implement the kinds of policies we need for a better investment 
climate and a growing economy in the province? 
 
What’s at stake isn’t statistics. What’s at stake is not numbers. 
What’s at stake aren’t percentages. 
 
What’s at stake is the sustainability of the province we love, it’s 
the future of Saskatchewan. What’s at stake is a decision that 
businessmen and women across this province will be making as 
to whether they will invest more and create a job for a family or 
maybe whether they will look elsewhere for their investment. 
That’s what’s at stake and that’s what’s frustrating from this 
NDP government, this Premier, and this Deputy Premier. 
 
They don’t get it. Because if they got it, Mr. Speaker, they 
would agree with our motion. They would submit Bill 87 to 
further consultation and get it right. For once, they would get it 
right. I will be voting against this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill 87, The 
Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:45 until 16:51.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 
the motion moved by the Minister of Labour, that Bill No. 87, 
The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second 
time. Those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 28] 
 
Addley Lautermilch Hagel 
Van Mulligen Serby Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 22] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner Krawetz Draude 
Bjornerud Wakefield McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Merriman Dearborn  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order. 
 
Hart Kirsch  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 28; those 
opposed, 22. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill referred? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill 87, The Trade Union 
Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 87 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 86 — The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 



3058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my remarks will be considerably shorter than my 
remarks on Bill No. 87. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, very clearly when we look at a 
comment made in an open letter to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan dated April 20, 2005, where I quote from this 
letter, it says: 
 

It is our fear that if your government proceeds with Bill 86 
& 87, you will undoubtedly confirm Saskatchewan’s 
reputation as an anti-business jurisdiction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks very clearly about the fact that 
Bill 86 along with 87 need to have amendments. Bill 87 is now 
before the committee and I’m hopeful that the minister 
responsible for that Bill will indeed move amendments to it as 
she’s heard from various groups. She’s been able to stand in 
this Legislative Assembly and say, I am listening, and I am 
hearing, and I am receiving reports. So I would hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that she recognizes that indeed Bill No. 86 is flawed. 
 
There are a couple of problems with it. A Bill that introduces 
whistleblower protection is good. No question about that, Mr. 
Speaker. But when you look at the concerns about an 
anonymous third party that can put forward a complaint that is 
going to be investigated, that is of concern. And that needs to be 
clarified by the minister to ensure that that is not what the 
intention is. And I think she needs to ensure that there be 
amendments that will in fact bring that about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that 86 should have followed the 
same path as we suggested for 87 and that there should have 
been further consultation to indeed produce a Bill that would 
have been supported by a partnership of not only the 
government, but business and labour workers as well. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 86, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the members 

for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:57 until 17:03.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Labour that Bill 86, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2), be now read a second 
time. Those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 28] 
 
Addley Lautermilch Hagel 
Van Mulligen Serby Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 22] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
Heppner Krawetz Draude 
Bjornerud Wakefield McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Merriman Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion 28; those opposed 22. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 86, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 86 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 122 — The 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3059 

Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes, we’ve only just begun. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to rise today and put a few comments for 
the record. And I’d like to talk about the labour legislation in 
Saskatchewan and the protection of Saskatchewan workers and 
managing the work environment of part-time workers. 
 
The issue of providing vulnerable workers with opportunity to 
make a decent living from a secure job, Mr. Speaker, is a 
complex one. It is about young people. It’s about women. It’s 
about Aboriginal employment, about immigrants, and about the 
working poor. 
 
In the early 1990s, Mr. Speaker, we passed legislation that dealt 
with part-time hours and most available hours. Part-time work 
and the conditions faced by part-time workers has become a 
more complex issue now than it was in the 1990s. Mr. Speaker, 
we need a broader set of guidelines, a broader public policy set 
that deals with the largest set of issues that protect the rights of 
workers. 
 
This is once again a question of approach, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Conservative party has a knee-jerk reaction, an 
approach to its policy. If it’s a headline, that party will grab it 
and use it as an issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we prefer a more complete approach to public 
policy. We want to take a broader brush to developing policy 
regarding the Saskatchewan workplace. We have established a 
commission that will make recommendations to improve access 
by part-time and vulnerable workers, to employment income, 
employment benefits, and work opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lynne Pearson, the dean of commerce at the 
University of Saskatchewan, will be chairing that three-member 
commission. The other members are Fred Cuddington, 
consultant and mediator, and Deb Thorn, chief executive officer 
at Temple Gardens Mineral Spa in Moose Jaw. The commission 
will submit a report and recommendations to the government by 
December 15, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are about helping Saskatchewan people find 
employment opportunities that allow them to better support 
themselves and their families. I’m looking forward to reviewing 
the results of the commission’s work. I’m looking forward to 
the opportunity to have an even wider and more comprehensive 
approach to part-time hours than just additional hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] introduced social welfare in this province, we 
removed it from a mishmash of municipal programs and created 
a standardized approach across the province. When we made 
hospitalization and medicare province-wide, we were applying 
broad principles and standards to the whole province. 
 
When we put occupational health and safety into labour law — 

the first in the world to do so, Mr. Speaker — we were making 
it part of a broader set of worker protection. In some other 
jurisdictions, occupational health and safety regulations were in 
health departments, in some they were stand-alone regulations. 
It was here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
made regulations a part of a larger, cohesive policy governing 
the treatment of workers. 
 
We are withdrawing the old legislation, but that does not stop 
us from working toward the protection of the vulnerable, the 
protection of part-time workers. 
 
The issue of providing vulnerable workers with the opportunity 
to make a decent living from a secure job is a complex one. We 
address the protection of vulnerable in our society through the 
social legislation, the Building Independence program, 
minimum wage, health care, SchoolPLUS, and many other actions 
and programs. 
 
We will address the issue of part-time workers with a variety of 
tools — education, law, regulation, services, and social change. 
We will examine existing government policies and programs 
including the application and enforcement of employment 
standards that address these issues and assist workers. 
 
This is our approach, Mr. Speaker. It is not the irrational, 
fearmongering, headline-driven approach of the opposition. I 
would like to talk about the fearmongering approach of the 
opposition Saskatchewan Conservative party, Mr. Speaker. I 
have in recent days had the opportunity to read some of the 
advertisements run by the Saskatchewan Business Council 
talking about the changes to the labour laws we have 
introduced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are building on our progressive 
legislation, and we’re working to better labour relations for 
part-time and full-time employees. Our first-contract legislation 
is part of an overall approach to create a positive labour, 
investment climate. That is the way that we are building this 
province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Conservative 
party cannot understand these facts. And they hide behind 
advertisements that make dubious claims. 
 
We have first-contract legislation, Mr. Speaker. The reason we 
have first-contract legislation is because it provides stability. 
The members opposite will do well to remember that the quality 
of labour and stability are the key to investment criteria for 
business which we continuously hear from that side. Stability 
prevents the loss of productivity, Mr. Speaker, the loss of profit, 
Mr. Speaker, and the loss of work due to strikes and other work 
disruptions. Mr. Speaker, it prevents the loss of money for 
workers and business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the history of new certifications clearly shows that 
the parties need some assistance prior to establishing a mature 
bargaining relationship. The anti-labour types across the aisle 
don’t understand these things, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
understand the real world of labour relations, Mr. Speaker. 
First-contract legislation addresses this issue. And these are the 
facts, Mr. Speaker, which seem to escape those folks over there. 
Mr. Speaker, the best we can say here is that those folks have 
totally missed the boat on this one, totally missed the boat. 
 



3060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2005 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look forward to the commission set up 
by this government, and I have every good reason to believe 
that the members of this commission will provide us the facts 
which are sorely missing, Mr. Speaker, sorely missing. And the 
facts will no doubt have many quality solutions for part-time 
workers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to end by saying that the legislation 
regarding the Labour Relations Board is not new. These are 
general powers that the board has that we have simply now 
listed. These are not new, Mr. Speaker. These are not the 
draconian measures that the opposition is trying to trump them 
up to be. And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition should quit hiding 
behind ads. And, Mr. Speaker, what they should do is come 
clean. They should come clean about their anti-union and 
anti-worker positions. Quit hiding about behind ads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
believe in democracy in the workplace and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that means equality. Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this side 
of the House we are not going back prior to The Trade Union 
Act, the days of the master-servant relationship laws. We’re not 
going back to those days, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know the 
Leader of the Opposition has some hankering in that direction. 
 
Oh yes, he wants to take us back 60 years, Mr. Speaker, to the 
good old days — the good old days, Mr. Speaker, the days 
before medicare, the days before crop insurance, the days 
before union protection, the days before workers’ 
compensation, the days before occupational health and safety. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what the Leader 
of the Opposition says. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he says we can still turn this thing around. 
That’s what he’s quoted as saying. We can still turn this thing 
around in our province if we try some policies, economically, 
that frankly we haven’t tried in six decades, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — six decades. Just like the member, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, from Kindersley and I quote, “We need to move back 
to the pre-World War II situation.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 
policies would he be talking about? The war or the Depression? 
Which ones? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this not the end. There’s more that the 
opposition leader thinks about labour legislation and 
occupational health and safety. He says they destroy jobs. They 
destroy jobs, and how is this good for part-time and full-time 
workers? And here’s a quote from the Leader of the Opposition 
on his speech he’s got posted on his website, on his website: 
 

. . . red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto 
[the] business community by this government, be it 
through Workers’ Comp or occupational health and safety 
or various pieces of labour legislation, too often has driven 
businesses and jobs they create and . . . taxes they pay out 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he has not been listening at all to what is 
being said about the facts in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say again, the opposition should quit 

hiding and just come clean. Come clean about their anti-union 
and anti-worker positions. They should come clean about those. 
I look forward to the commission’s work, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, people did not win the right to vote in a day, 
and workers did not win the right to organize overnight. 
Part-time employees’ rights must and will be addressed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank 
. . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the working 
people of this province for their hard work and dedication to 
making our world a better place. 
 
And I would like to thank the young people for their enthusiasm 
for a better future. Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I’d also like 
to thank my colleagues for carrying forward in the face of 
adversity and remembering that we are here for working people 
and for those young people, and to make a better tomorrow. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, seeing that no one on the government side wishes to 
continue with the debate, I would like to make a couple of quick 
comments about Bill No. 122. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been consultation with the 
people of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Labour wanted to 
introduce regulations and changes by way of reintroducing 
sections of a Bill that have sat idle for 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the comment of many people, the comments of 
many people have varied a great deal. And I want to put one 
comment on the record and this is from the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix of February 1, 2005. And this is a paragraph from 
an article in that paper that day. And I quote. Even a former 
NDP minister says the available hours legislation is flawed: 
 

. . . . [Dwain Lingenfelter] told reporters . . . he didn’t 
know why available-hours was revived . . . just like 10 
years ago, it has caused consternation in the business 
community with uncertainty over whether it will even 
benefit the workers it is intended to help. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think you can see by the quotation from 
a person who was around at the time that that Bill was passed 
over 10 years ago, the public outcry and the realization that that 
particular section clause 13.4 was not in the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan, was not in the best interests of the 
very people that the member from Saskatoon Fairview talks 
about, that in fact it might not even help those people. And the 
government of the day recognized it and that particular clause 
sat idle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time to complete the job of removing this 
job-killing monster and indeed passing this Bill immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
 



May 12, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3061 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the minister that Bill No. 122, The Miscellaneous 
Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. Call in the members. 
Standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 17:20 to 17:24.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is motion 
by the Minister of Labour that Bill 122, The Miscellaneous 
Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 50] 
 
Addley Lautermilch Hagel 
Van Mulligen Serby Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Crofford 
Prebble Forbes Wartman 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson Wall Toth 
Elhard Heppner Krawetz 
Draude Bjornerud Wakefield 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Merriman Dearborn 
Hart Kirsch  
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion 
50; those opposed 0. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill 122, The Miscellaneous 
Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 122 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Bills Relating to the Same Subject 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before we proceed 
any further, I wish to make a statement. I want to draw to the 
attention of the members that this Assembly has two Bills on 
the order paper that contain provisions with substantially the 
same purpose: Bill No. 206, An Act to amend The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 1994 under the name of the 
member for Canora-Pelly, and Bill No. 122, An Act to amend 
certain Labour Acts under the name of the Minister of Labour. 
Both Bills propose to repeal the same sections of The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 1994. 
 
According to Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice, 22nd 
Edition, page 499: 
 

There is no . . . rule or custom which restrains the 
presentation of two or more bills relating to the same 
subject, and containing similar provisions. But if a 
decision of the House has already been taken on one such 
bill, for example, if the bill has been given or refused a 
second reading, the other is not proceeded with if it 
contains substantially the same provisions . . . 

 
This Legislative Assembly has numerous precedents on the 
subject of the same-question rule with respect to Bills. It has 
been ruled that once the Assembly has given or refused second 
reading on one Bill, the Speaker must then prevent any further 
consideration of the other Bill. On this day, May 12, Bill No. 
122 received second reading. Consequently it is necessary that I 
order that Bill No. 206 be removed from the order paper. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, in order to expedite 
the work of the policy field committees, I would move that this 
House do now adjourn and that the policy field committees 
reconvene at quarter to 6. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this House do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:29.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3027 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3027 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3027 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3027 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3027 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3027 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3027 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant ........................................................................................................................................................................3028 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................3028 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3028 
 Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................3028 
 Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................3029 
 Bill No. 93 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................3029 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................3029 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3029 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3030 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3030 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................3030 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3030 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3030 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................3038 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3047 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................3049 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Meadow Lake’s New Saskatchewan Party Candidate 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3030 
 International Nurses Day and National Nursing Week 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................3031 
 Eatonia’s Eaton Catalogue House 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3031 
 Saskatchewan Centenarians Honoured 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................3031 
 Women Entrepreneurs Week 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3032 
 University of Regina Receives Major Donation 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3032 
 Von Imhoff Exhibition at Neutral Ground Art Gallery 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3032 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Commission on First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3033 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................3033 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................3033 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3034 
 Vacant Nursing Positions 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................3034 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3034 
 Prosecutions Under The Election Act 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................3035 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................3035 
 



 

 Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3036 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3037 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Action Plan for Improving Health, Justice, Prosperity, and Safety in Saskatchewan 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................3038 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3040 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Committee 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3041 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3041 
 Ruling on Bills Relating to the Same Subject 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3061 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................3042 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................3042 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3042 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3042 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................3045 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ...............................................................................................................................................3048 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3048 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................3051 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ...............................................................................................................................................3053 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3053 
  Lautermilch (point of order)..................................................................................................................................................3056 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................3056 
 Recorded Division (second reading motion).............................................................................................................................3057 
  Higgins (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................3057 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3058 
 Recorded Division (second reading motion).............................................................................................................................3058 
  Higgins (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................3058 
 Bill No. 122 — The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................3059 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3060 
 Recorded Division (second reading motion).............................................................................................................................3061 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




