

















































Hansard: May 11, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 110A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 11, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3013 
 May 11, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents primarily from the 
community of Leader very concerned about the continuing 
deterioration of Highway 32. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition regarding the contract of Jim 
Fergusson. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Estevan and Steelman. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the consulting contract 
that was signed with Mr. Jim Fergusson. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Viscount, Clavet, 
Allan, Watrous, and Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway 35 south of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Radville and 
Trossachs. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned parents in the constituency of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Peters Cove, Wright Crescent, 
Overholt Terrace, and Kucey Terrace in northeast Saskatoon. I 
so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
that’s calling on the government to repair or resurface Highway 
15. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of No. 15 
Highway be repaired or resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Bladworth and Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents opposed to possible 
reductions of the health care services in Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 



3014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2005 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Sonningdale and Arelee and 
district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to rise 
today and talk on the excessive contract of Jim Fergusson, the 
Saskatoon Health Region. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 

Signed by the good people of Clavet and Viscount. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present another 
petition regarding the contract of Jim Fergusson. I will read the 
prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Clavet, 
Bradwell, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today in 
the Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan outraged at the excessive contract to Jim 
Fergusson. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the town of 
Clavet and Bradwell. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
with a petition from the people that are upset with the Jim 
Fergusson contract. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s signed by the good people of Saskatoon, 
Viscount, and Clavet. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper no. 72, 97, 637, 640, 666, 715, 730, 800, and 
808. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 115 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what was the cost of 
issuing the Farm and Food Report for 2004? 
 

And I have the same question for 2005. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege for me 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
Assembly here today, a young man sitting in the gallery directly 
behind me. This gentleman is Kevin Wasko who is working in 
my office, my constituency office, for the summer. Kevin is a 
soon-to-be-graduated honours student in political science from 
Dalhousie University in Nova Scotia, but he is a constituent of 
mine by birth, by birthright, and by duty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Kevin’s family ranch in the Eastend area, and he spent his 
entire schooling at the Eastend high school. He went far afield 
to get his advanced education. We’re glad to give him an 
opportunity to show how the real world of politics operates as 
opposed to the book learning that he’s had to date. 
 
Kevin is going to be the valedictorian of his graduating class. 
That happens on May 30. We’re very proud of him in our 
community, and I’m especially pleased that he’s working with 
me and has the opportunity to be here today. Would you please 
help me welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3015 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you and to the members of the Legislative Assembly Gary 
Tinker of Pinehouse — and they’re sitting on the west gallery, 
by the way — George Ward and Randy Stomp. And they’re all 
members of the Gary Tinker Federation in La Ronge. And we 
just had a very pleasant lunch at noon along with the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
As most of you know, the Gary Tinker Federation is a 
non-profit organization that exists today because in 1989 Gary 
Tinker, a young man with cerebral palsy, took it upon himself 
to make the 650 kilometre walk from La Ronge to Regina on 
crutches to raise awareness about the needs of people with 
disabilities in northern Saskatchewan. For us in the North, Mr. 
Speaker, he’s a great role model and an inspirational leader. 
And we’re also very proud of him. 
 
And a few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, my colleague and I had the 
pleasure of attending the Gary Tinker Federation 15th 
anniversary celebration and disability conference in La Ronge 
where Gary was also awarded the Saskatchewan Centennial 
Medal. 
 
And on a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I know that Gary had 
another goal, and that was to meet Her Honour Dr. Lynda 
Haverstock. And he had the chance to do that yesterday. On top 
of that, he had the opportunity to meet a whole bunch of classy 
First Nations and Métis women who were all after him because 
he had such a great jacket and he smelled good, one of them 
said, because of the tanned moose hide. 
 
So, Gary, welcome to the House. And I hope that all of you 
have a pleasant trip back to La Ronge. I envy you that you’re 
heading back North. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming Gary Tinker, George Ward, 
and Randy Stomp to the legislature in the west gallery today. 
And I also would like to commend the strength and 
determination that Gary had to make the trek from the North 
down to Regina to bring forward the plight of people with 
disabilities. I really admire his courage. So please welcome the 
three gentlemen from the North to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you, through you, 
and to all members of the Assembly four visitors seated in the 
west gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a commemorative gesture, I’m wearing a German tracht 

jacket today, which is one of the costumes that one wears in 
Germany. And I’m doing this out of respect for the 50th 
anniversary celebrations that the German Canadian Society 
Harmonie is currently celebrating. And I’d like to introduce 
these four guests to you and ask them to stand as I introduce 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our first guests are Winfried Schlosser and his wife Stephanie 
Schlosser. They have both been active members and organizers 
of the German Canadian Society Harmonie since its inception. 
One of my fondest memories is of Winfried playing the role of 
St. Nikolaus with the full traditional garb, for as long as I can 
remember. And now it is my daughter sitting on his knee every 
Christmas. 
 
Our next visitor is Mr. Charles Mutschall. He and his wife have 
also been very active members and organizers of the German 
Canadian Society Harmonie and have initiated very many 
projects over the years. 
 
Next we have Ray Fichter and his wife Ute Kocks. Ray is the 
current president of the German Canadian Society Harmonie, 
and both he and his wife are very active members of the 
organization as well. 
 
And last but definitely not least we have Ingeborg 
Schlichtmann. She is the current principal of the German 
Heritage Language School of Regina and has been the driving 
force behind it for many, many years. My mother had the great 
pleasure of working with her as the vice-principal of the 
German Language School for ten years and enjoyed it 
immensely. 
 
I welcome you to the House today and thank you very much for 
joining us in the proceedings. And I ask all my colleagues to do 
so as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
member from Rosetown-Elrose, I would like introduce to you, 
and through you to the members, 33 grade 8 students seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Rosetown Central High School. 
I would also like to introduce teachers Ken Boyd, Todd 
Weinhandl, Tana Brown, chaperones Jodi Slocombe, Wendy 
Wiens, and Jackie Krchov. I look forward with meeting with 
you later and having a visit and also getting our picture taken 
together. So please join me in welcoming the grade 8 students 
from Rosetown Central High School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly sitting in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Terry Zahorski. Now Terry was just 
elected the new president of the Regina and District Labour 
Council about six or eight weeks ago. So I’m sure he’s been 
learning his new role and keeping everything in order here in 



3016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2005 

Regina. And I would like all members to welcome him to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 7 grade 
11 students seated in the east gallery from the 33 Central School 
which is straight down Highway 33 to Fillmore, Mr. Speaker — 
and I do mean straight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with the students is their teacher Andrew 
Kidd, bus driver Melvina Treble and chaperone Vernna 
Wiggins. I would ask the members to welcome them here 
today. I look forward to meeting them after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if my eyes 
aren’t deceiving me, I think I note in your gallery a former 
member of this Assembly, member for Turtleford, a former 
minister of the Crown, Mr. Colin Maxwell. And we want to 
welcome him back to his Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, last night the Saskatoon and 
District Chamber of Commerce held its annual awards gala to 
honour businesses and entrepreneurs for their outstanding 
achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winners of the 2005 Saskatoon Achievement 
in Business Excellence Awards are, for new business venture, 
Dakota Dunes Golf Links. In the growth and expansion 
category, the award went to Golden Opportunities Fund. For 
innovation, the winner was Today’s Technology Marketing 
Group. The award for new product went to Display Systems 
International. 
 
In the export category, the award went to Nu-Fab Burton. For 
customer service, the winner was Centennial Plumbing Heating 
and Electrical. The award for community involvement went to 
Brainsport The Running Store. The award of innovation went to 
Dr. Marianna Foldvari in the College of Pharmacy and 
Nutrition. The winner of the Athena Award was Gerlinde 
Sarkar. The Business of the Year is West Wind Aviation and 
Early’s Farm and Garden Centre was inducted into the Hall of 
Fame this year. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members will join me in 
congratulating the 2005 SABEX [Saskatoon Achievement in 
Business Excellence] winners and nominees on their 
achievements, and in thanking them for their significant and 
ongoing contributions to the strength of the economies of both 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Celebrate Success 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recognizing 
business excellence is an important element in creating a better 
business climate in our province, and it is a way to create a city 
of opportunity. 
 
Last night the Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce and 
Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan presented Celebrate 
Success to recognize and celebrate the many successes of the 
business community. The member for Saskatoon Massey Place 
and I were able to attend this event to help honour the nominees 
and award winners. 
 
Serving as MCs [master of ceremonies] for the event were Rob 
MacDonald and Teena Monteleone of CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] Saskatoon. Winners of the SABEX 
awards included Display Systems International in the new 
product category; Nu-Fab Burton in the export market category; 
Brainsport The Running Store for their efforts in community 
involvement. And the winner of the growth and expansion 
category was Saskatchewan’s first and largest labour-sponsor 
venture capital fund, Golden Opportunities, led by Grant Kook. 
 
The New Business Venture of the Year was the Dakota Dunes 
Golf Links. Centennial Plumbing, Heating and Electrical won 
the Customer Service Award. Today’s Technology Marketing 
Group was recognized with the Innovation Award along with 
Dr. Marianna Foldvari from the College of Pharmacy and 
Nutrition. The Athena Award went to Gerlinde Sarkar of 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology]. Congratulations also Spencer Early and Joe 
Bloski on being inducted to the Business Hall of Fame for their 
work with Early’s Farm and Garden Centre. 
 
And the big winner of the evening, the Business of the Year, 
went to West Wind Aviation. Congratulations to Dennis Goll, 
Maxine Montgomery and Denis Baranieski. Celebrating success 
is one way that we demonstrate why Saskatoon shines in so 
many ways. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the 
Battlefords. 
 

Youth Business Excellence Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have seen the 
future and it is indeed very bright. On Saturday I attended the 
Youth Business Excellence or YBEX awards and trade show in 



May 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3017 

North Battleford. The event sponsored in part by Northwest 
Community Futures Development Corporation is a regional 
competition that showcases and presents awards to enterprising 
youth for excellence in business planning and management. 
 
This year’s winners list, Mr. Speaker, is extensive and it 
includes Chantelle Marshall from Macklin School; Taylor 
Jimmy and Karen Osecap from Moosomin First Nations 
School; Daniel Drieschner from Spiritwood High School; John 
David Mulder, Amanda Mulder, Luke Maddaford, Rebecca 
Macnab, and Carlie Tollifson from Turtleford Community 
School; Jenna Nemish from Blaine Lake Composite High 
School; Adam Merkosky, Kyle Esquirol, and Christopher 
Delainey from H. Hardcastle School in Edam; Nicholas Allaro, 
Ken Haang, and Tyson Poulin from Rivier Elementary School 
in Spiritwood; Kelsee Lang from the North Battleford 
Comprehensive High School; Shelby George from Bready 
School in North Battleford; Tyler Kaminski from NBCHS 
[North Battleford Comprehensive High School] in North 
Battleford; the John Paul II Health Club in North Battleford; 
and the North Battleford Junior Achievement group sponsored 
by the North Battleford Rotary Club. 
 
I ask all members to recognize and congratulate these 
marvellous young people as well as the organizers and sponsors 
of this extraordinary event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Provincial Volleyball Tournaments 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
weekend of April 23 and 24 brought some 49 girls’ volleyball 
teams from across Saskatchewan together for the 16 and under 
women’s provincial volleyball tournament in Saskatoon, as well 
as 18 boys teams from the 16 and under men’s provincials. 
 
I had the opportunity to take in some of the competition on 
Sunday, April 24, and watch my daughter’s team, Biggar Club 
Smash, take bronze in tier 4 of the tournament, placing them 
15th out of the 49 teams in the competition. It was a gruelling 
two days of competition, with the girls playing upwards of 10 
games over the course of the weekend. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Biggar Club Smash, which I am proud 
to mention is coached by my wife Cindy, for their achievement 
in the tournament. Also thanks to manager Terry Zimmer and 
coach Edward Young. The team members are my daughter 
Alex, Britney, Darci, Kaitlyn, Katelyn, Kaitlynn — all spelled 
differently — Robyn, Sarah, Sam, Shanley, and Shannon. Way 
to go gals. 
 
I’d like to congratulate all the teams that competed in these 
tournaments, and special congratulations to the Landis boys 
team who took silver in tier 2 of their tournament. Way to go 
guys. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 

Special Screening of Documentary, 
Ted’s Story: Honouring Melissa 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words 
about a documentary film called Ted’s Story: Honouring 
Melissa that was recently released at a special screening here in 
Regina. 
 
It’s a film rooted in tragedy, Mr. Speaker. A number of years 
ago, Ted Gross was driving while impaired, ran a red light, and 
killed 21-year-old Melissa Hoeving. Ted pled guilty to a charge 
of criminal negligence causing death and served eight months in 
the Prince Albert Penitentiary. 
 
Upon his release, he decided to pursue the idea of making a film 
to pay tribute to Melissa and to make a strong statement about 
the dangers of drinking and driving. The result is the 
documentary Ted’s Story: Honouring Melissa. It includes 
interviews with Ms. Hoeving’s parents, members of her family, 
one of her former teachers, and EMS [emergency medical 
services] workers who were at the scene of the collision. 
 
The film looks at the accident and at impaired driving from a 
number of perspectives. It emerges that the effects of the 
incident are not just devastating but are also extraordinarily 
far-reaching, with its terrible shock waves reaching beyond the 
victim, the offender, and their family and friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a special broadcast yesterday afternoon 
at 2 p.m., and SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] 
and Sask Learning encouraged all schools from across the 
province to watch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge all those involved in the 
making of this film, particularly the Hoeving family and Ted 
Gross. In this work they have wrested something positive from 
tragedy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Meal Allowances 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as elected members travelling 
around our beautiful province, we have the opportunity to meet 
many outstanding people. One such individual I’ve had the 
honour of getting to know is Gary Tinker. Gary lives in 
Pinehouse, north of Prince Albert. 
 
He is physically disabled. In fact many of us in the same 
situation might consider his disabilities totally incapacitating, 
but not Gary. In fact 15 years ago Gary walked — using two 
crutches — from La Ronge to Regina to bring to the attention 
of government the plight of people on social services that have 
a disability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today people on social services who receive an 
allowance for meals for medical appointments receive $15 a 
day — $15 total for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Anyone who 
eats in a restaurant, especially in northern Saskatchewan where 
costs are considerably higher, know it is impossible to eat a 



3018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2005 

healthy diet on $15 a day. Breakfast alone is normally $7 in the 
North. Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities needing medical 
appointments have normally spent their $15 by dinnertime. 
 
In a have province where this government has had $2 billion 
windfall extra in the last two years, it is unconscionable to let 
anyone — especially someone who needs our help — starve. 
 
It is time this government was more concerned with the needs 
of citizens whose existence is tied to the whims of government 
than the politics that can be gained from films like the Tommy 
Douglas movie. Tommy wouldn’t be impressed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

50th Anniversary of German-Canadian Society Harmonie 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in a pause of a 
lighter note, it is with a great deal of pride and a great deal of 
pleasure that I attended part of the 50th anniversary celebrations 
of the German-Canadian Society Harmonie here in Regina on 
Saturday night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the German-Canadian Society Harmonie has been 
part of my life for as long as I can remember. My parents, Franz 
and Marianne Grobmeier, were very active members, and that 
provided me with the opportunity to stay in close contact with 
my German cultural heritage. 
 
I know traditional German folk dances and songs through 
participation in the club’s dance groups and choir, and though I 
learned to speak German at home, it is thanks to the German 
Heritage Language School that I can read and write it as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that my daughter Morgan is 
now taking part in the Regina German club’s dance program 
and attending the language school as well. I’m sure the 
experience will enrich her life as much as it did mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in its 50-year history, the German-Canadian 
Society Harmonie has become an integral part of the life of this 
city. The German pavilion at Mosaic is a perennial favourite. 
For many years a tannenbaum, a beautifully decorated 
Christmas tree provided by the club, was a focal point of the 
holiday season here in Regina. And the glockenspiel in Victoria 
Park, only one of two in Canada, is a Regina landmark. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the German-Canadian Society Harmonie on 50 
years of contributing to the social and cultural wealth of Regina. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Business Council is asking a 
fundamental question in a news release today. And I quote from 
the news release: “Can you trust the Calvert government?” 
 
The council says it’s astounded to learn that this government 
thinks passage of Bills 86 and 87 is more important than 
keeping a promise on repealing most available hours. That 
promise was made unconditionally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the council is insisting this government keep its 
promise to repeal most available hours immediately. Mr. 
Speaker, the official opposition is willing. Can we do it today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we discussed this at length 
yesterday. There’s a number of Bills that are on the docket, 
have been there since last fall, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know why 
the member is in such a rush to do things immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, session in the spring normally lasts till the end of 
June, first week of July. We’ve got plenty of time. We’ll have 
our members speak their piece on the legislation that’s on the 
docket, and we’ll continue with our agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Business 
Council says delays in repealing available hours legislation are 
prolonging uncertainty in the investment community. 
According to a news release dated today, the council says, and I 
quote: “She misled business groups and the general public 
about the government’s intentions regarding labour legislation.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader says he wants to 
keep all his Bills together and we have to do things in the 
proper order. I say, let’s be bold and decisive — let’s bring 
closure to this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government keep its promise today and 
kill the plan for government-directed hours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would question the 
comments from the Business Council. Mr. Speaker, all one has 
to do is look at the numbers on Saskatchewan’s economy. We 
will lead all provinces in investment growth with 8.5 billion in 
2005. That’s a 13 per cent increase and double the national 
average. Mr. Speaker, the forecasters have predicted job growth 
of 1 to 1.5 per cent. But they’ve now revised that, Mr. Speaker, 
to 2.5. The Business Council should know that this province is 
on a roll, Mr. Speaker. 



May 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3019 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Business Council 
understands very well what’s going on. A sentence from their 
press release today, and I quote: “Labour Minister Higgins . . . ” 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. It seems that members 
— order please — that members are trying to out yell each 
other. Let’s restore some decorum. Order please. I will invite 
the member to start over. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 
the Business Council release, very clearly they understand. And 
the quote from the press release is this: “Labour Minister 
Higgins does not appear to understand . . . ” That’s a quote. 
That’s a direct reference to the minister not understanding the 
process of consultation, not understanding what needs to be 
done before Bills are introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s approach appears to be 
completely backwards. The one Bill they did consult on, which 
is available hours, they said they would dump. And now they’re 
stalling. The Bill they are not consulting on, Bill No. 87, is the 
Bill there is no consensus on, yet they’re pushing it through. 
This is all wrong, Mr. Speaker. Will the Minister of Labour 
suspend Bills 86 and 87 pending appropriate public 
consultations with stakeholders and a significant review of all 
labour legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, during the first meeting 
that I had with the Business Council, they were very clear in 
demanding — and I say demanding — that we pull all labour 
legislation off the table, or my resignation. They requested my 
resignation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — So, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know who butters 
their bread, don’t we? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, and during consultations 
and as we have and as this government will continue to do, we 
look at the whole province and all stakeholders. Mr. Speaker, it 
would be irresponsible to just accept one stakeholder’s 
viewpoint and put that into action. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you a very clear example. On 

October 5, Ms. Pollon from the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business] sent a letter to the WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board] — and, Mr. Speaker, this is on the 
website, it’s public information — and she gave a very nice 
discussion on WCB in BC [British Columbia] and Alberta. And 
then her final request, Mr. Speaker, was: 
 

Given the many challenges facing Saskatchewan business 
owners, [the] CFIB strongly urges the Board to . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the second last sentence is: 
 

Given the many challenges facing Saskatchewan business 
owners, CFIB strongly urges the Board to freeze 2005 
premium rates. 
 

If we had listened to just one, there would be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for a 
moment there I thought that the Minister of Labour was going 
to be bold and decisive and announce her resignation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — But it didn’t happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Business Council represents 51 
organizations — the vast majority of businesses in the province 
of Saskatchewan. They have no faith in the Minister of Labour. 
They have no confidence in the Minister of Labour. They feel 
the Minister of Labour has been ineffective in communicating 
the need for these changes to the labour law. They believe the 
Minister of Labour doesn’t understand the implications of her 
own proposal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a good situation. When and how will 
this Minister of Labour begin the task of winning back the 
confidence of our business leaders? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I mean the opposition says 
one thing but the facts are another. This government has 
believed in balance and putting forward proposals that benefit 
the province as a whole. Mr. Speaker, we just have to look at 
the investment growth — eight and a half billion in 2005, a 13 
per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, job numbers are up, 
manufacturing is up, the resource industry is going through the 
sky, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if I want to get . . . well, Mr. Speaker, I have as much 
comfort getting labour advice from the opposition as I would 
having Enron chartered accountants do my income tax. 



3020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Condition of Provincial Highways 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, Highway 35 from the 
US [United States] border north to Weyburn is an 
embarrassment. This is the highway the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government turned back to gravel last year. When it 
rains, there is mud. And when it’s dry, there is dust and flying 
gravel. Truckers from my constituency tell me that the US 
customs officials say they are not going to put up with the mud 
that’s coming across on the trucks, and there is also concern 
about grain seeds and weeds coming across in the mud on truck 
tires. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this section of Highway 35 be repaved? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And thank you for the question. I answered a number of 
questions related to Highway 35 in committee several weeks 
ago I think it was. There is a process in place where there is a 
partnership, and we are rebuilding parts of the road through a 
paved structure over a series of years. 
 
But also I said in the committee, Mr. Speaker, that part of the 
challenge in fact is the success of the province. As economic 
development flourishes and as jobs take off here in the 
province, it creates a lot more pressures on the infrastructure. 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, it requires more funding for the 
infrastructure. But what I’m pleased about is that we see a lot 
better job numbers, and we see a lot more growth in the 
economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is alarming 
to say the least. Mr. Speaker, truck traffic is being obstructed. 
Rob Pratt . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. The 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy and only the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, truck traffic is being 
obstructed. Rob Pratt, a trucker from my constituency, told me 
this is an economic issue. He said US customs officials can shut 
him down. They can turn him around. They can send him back 
to Weyburn to clean his truck, and then he’ll have to wait for 
the mud to dry up. And, Mr. Speaker, when it is dry, the dust 
and flying gravel are also a great hazard. If this means that 
truckers like Rob Pratt will have to take another route, he is 
concerned about lost revenue and wasted time. 

Mr. Speaker, Rob Pratt wants to know when will this 
government repave this section of Highway 35. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well based on the questions that we’ve heard in the legislature 
for the last number of weeks, I’m not surprised that that 
member would find that economic growth and the economy 
growing is alarming news to them because it’s obvious they’ve 
not noticed that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do want to say again, Mr. Speaker, we have worked with and 
partnered with the communities. Mr. Speaker, we recognize this 
as an important link north and south into the province. There 
are a number of routes though, like No. 6, which has a much 
higher traffic count. We try and priorize within the Department 
of Highways, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we have adequate 
infrastructure to north and south, in and out of Saskatchewan 
into the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the importance of Highway 35 and 
that’s why we’re working to rebuild that highway. Mr. Speaker, 
I recognize it’s not as fast as some of the people would like to 
see but we’re working at it as quickly as we can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there has been no recognition by the NDP of the 
importance of Highway 35 in north-south trade. Mr. Speaker, 
15 kilometres of this highway was turned back to gravel last fall 
after years of deplorable state from potholes. Mr. Speaker, 
when I asked recently when repaving Highway 35 would begin, 
I was told by the minister that only 3 kilometres would be done 
this year. That will mean that it will be five years in order to 
complete this stretch of highway if they do 3 kilometres a year. 
This is unacceptable. This was and still should be a major route 
to and from the United States. The condition of Highway 35 is a 
threat to economic viability, to tourism, and to safety. Mr. 
Speaker, when will this government get its priorities straight 
and repave Highway 35? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again let 
me just first of all describe the facts. The road was a thin 
membrane surface road. She is correct that there was a revision 
back to gravel to ensure that there was safety for the travelling 
public and for the truckers, Mr. Speaker. But the changes that 
have been made and the improvements that are being made over 
a series of years rebuilds the road to a paved infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker, to a paved surface, which is a much better road than 
used to exist in the past. 
 
We recognize the importance and the priorities of these roads, 
but I mean, Mr. Speaker, we rebuilt Highway No. 6. And if that 
member thinks we shouldn’t have done that and done Highway 



May 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3021 

35, I say to her, Mr. Speaker, then she should identify the 
priorities. We try and identify, Mr. Speaker, where the most 
traffic is, where will be the most economic benefit for the 
province, and that’s what we try to do, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
we are doing a pretty good job of that, Mr. Speaker, given the 
job numbers and the economic development that are happening 
in Saskatchewan right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
for the Minister of Highways. There are numerous examples of 
highways in poor condition in my constituency, but none are 
poorer than Highway 15. Portions of Highway 15 are in severe 
state of disrepair. Problems include broken pavement and deep 
potholes. There’s a section between junction of Highway No. 2 
and 20 where there is no pavement. This highway represents an 
unacceptable safety hazard and . . . When will this particular 
piece of road be fixed? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again 
we’ve answered a number of these questions in committee. This 
past budget we delivered a budget of $300 million, Mr. 
Speaker, an increase of about $5 million. We are honouring our 
commitment to spend $2.5 billion over 10 years. We’re 
honouring our commitment to spend 1.2 billion over four years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We recognize the challenges, particularly in the spring. You 
can’t go through a season like we’ve gone through — through 
winter I should say, when there’s wet conditions and severe 
freezing — and not have impacts on the roads. It happens right 
across Canada. More so in Saskatchewan I suspect, Mr. 
Speaker, with the extreme weather conditions. 
 
We are doing what we can with the budgets we’ve got, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll get to all of the roads eventually, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at Semans, the town of 
Semans, there’s a provincial STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company] bus that take an RM [rural 
municipality] gravel road to the town of Nokomis. It will not 
travel that particular piece of highway. 
 
I don’t think it travels through the RM for a sightseeing tour, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t think the bus driver takes his passengers on 
a sightseeing tour. He takes that route because he believes in the 
safety of his passengers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since the Minister of Highways won’t answer the question, I’ll 
direct this question to the Minister for STC. Will he petition the 
Minister of Highways to fix this dangerous piece of highway so 

that STC bus drivers don’t have to carry RM maps with them so 
they can find . . . the safety of their passengers to the next town, 
so they can follow their planned route of destination, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for STC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I could also 
talk to the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations if 
you’d like. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say this. I’m not clear in his reference 
to STC, if his concern is around STC, if he’s suggesting that 
maybe we should sell off STC, Mr. Speaker, because I think 
that’s what they’re really, really still wanting to do. 
 
Look, we’ve answered these questions many, many times, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve increased the budget significantly in Highways. 
It is reflected in the much better roads and the much better 
infrastructure across the province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we will continue to improve the roads as they need to be 
improved. But we need to identify the priorities. I’ve described 
that and my officials have described that in detail in committee, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Highway 368 in my constituency is in dire need of work. 
Recently a semi-trailer rolled over, dodging large potholes and 
soft spots in the road. Mr. Speaker, it’s reaching the point where 
poor conditions of Highway 368 is a danger to human life. Mr. 
Speaker, a patch job is not enough. When will this government 
commit to rebuilding Highway 368? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I don’t 
know what more I can add, Mr. Speaker, to the Conservative 
Party, other than to say there have significant increases in the 
budgets. It’s springtime in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The 
crews are out there working right now. We will be improving a 
significant amount of infrastructure this year again. People will 
be in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. Order 
please. Order please. Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. Order. 
 
I would ask members that they refrain from saying things across 
the hall, across the aisle that is off the record, that is not allowed 
to be said in this Assembly that is on the record. 
 
I would recognize the Minister for Highways and 



3022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2005 

Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 
saying, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Conservative Party 
opposite identifies many, many times, Mr. Speaker, that there 
are challenges, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t talk about the facts. 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that we’re spending $300 million on 
infrastructure and highways this year. Mr. Speaker, the facts are 
that the crews are out there working right now. The facts are 
now, Mr. Speaker, that drivers will be unfortunately 
inconvenienced . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan drivers and people travelling across our province 
this year will be inconvenienced by the amount of construction 
that’s taking place this summer, Mr. Speaker. We are improving 
the roads and there have been significant improvements in the 
infrastructure in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
you would think that in a centennial year the government would 
want . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members, come to order please. Member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, you would think on a 
centennial year the government would want people to be 
welcome in coming to this province. And our highways are the 
first thing they see and they’re atrocious, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in the village of Alida are very upset 
with the NDP. Highway No. 361 runs through that community 
and it’s such a poor condition that it’s been returned back to 
gravel. Now families with little children that are walking on the 
road, riding their bikes, or being dropped off from the school 
bus, Mr. Speaker, are in danger because of the excess dust from 
that supposed highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in Alida believe they should count just 
as much as the people in the rest of the province. Will the 
minister pave that highway or will he just continue to watch the 
decline of our highways across this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to listen 
to the opposition you would think that everything is doom and 
gloom here, Mr. Speaker, when in fact the facts are we have 
record job numbers, Mr. Speaker. We have investment growth 
that is virtually unprecedented, Mr. Speaker. Tourism, Mr. 
Speaker, continues to flourish in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
people are coming to Saskatchewan to enjoy the beautiful 
province that we have during the centennial year. Mr. Speaker, 

everybody in Saskatchewan as I leave the legislature and I go 
out to my constituency are in a good mood, Mr. Speaker. But 
when I come in here it is depressing to listen to the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party over there talk about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts are it’s springtime in Saskatchewan. The 
crews are out there. The roads are being fixed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post there was 
a letter from Henry Goertzen of Edmonton. He speaks of 
receiving a glossy tourism brochure called Places in the Heart 
painting a wonderful picture of Saskatchewan. Then he talks 
about never wanting to bring his RV [recreational vehicle] back 
to our province because of the “broken-up, pot-hole filled, 
weed-choked strips of decaying asphalt.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Henry Goertzen wants to know why we spend 
money on “nice-looking brochures to promote tourism” when 
we’re not even going to fix the roads. Mr. Speaker, we’d like an 
answer to that question as well. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I am 
familiar with the letter that the member raises, Mr. Speaker. But 
let me say this. Mr. Speaker. In the community in which I live 
and in the Meadow Lake Provincial Park from where I am, Mr. 
Speaker, I do know that on a number of occasions, surveys have 
taken place. And many times over 50 per cent of the people 
there are from outside of the province, from Alberta. So if it’s 
really as bad as that member says, why are people . . . why do 
people keep coming back to our beautiful province? 
 
The reason they keep coming back, Mr. Speaker, to our 
province is because they recognize we have a wonderful 
province. We have so much to offer, Mr. Speaker. And the only 
people that don’t recognize that, Mr. Speaker, are the 
Saskatchewan Conservatives over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, we are facing a system-wide 
collapse of our infrastructure. Trade between our province and 
southern markets is being placed in peril by the poor state of 
Highway 35. Highway 32, an important road to our province’s 
largest gas line, is being beaten to a pulp by heavy trucks and 
needs urgently to be maintained. We have tourists openly 
asking us why we bother inviting visitors to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these problems are widespread. There are poor 
road conditions in every corner of this province. These 
problems affect many areas. It affects tourism, commerce, 
future development, international trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these highways and roads are costing our trucking 



May 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3023 

industry large amounts of money to repair their, maintain their 
trucks. It’s also a safety problem with the general public and the 
drivers on our roads and highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today we have heard, Mr. Speaker, that there are trucks rolling 
over after hitting huge potholes. Mr. Speaker, we have trucks 
being stopped at the American border and not allowed to cross 
into the United States because of the mud and the dirt and the 
weeds, Mr. Speaker. And we have the added embarrassment of 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I’d ask . . . Order please. And 
could the member proceed to the question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We also have STC 
buses being rerouted because the drivers do not feel it’s safe to 
drive down some of the roads and highways in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, this is not only a danger to our . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order, members. Would the 
member go directly to the question? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not only 
dangerous but the highways and roads in this province are an 
embarrassment to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does this government not put a higher 
priority to maintaining and repairing the roads and highways in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if the 
roads are that bad, I have one question — how the heck do they 
get here, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts are, the facts are, Mr. Speaker, that there 
is huge economic growth in the province. Mr. Speaker, I just 
referenced some of the latest statistics. I see Saskatchewan is 
number one in the nominal GDP [gross domestic product] 
growth per capita. I see Saskatchewan is number one in per 
capita personal income growth. I see Saskatchewan is number 
one per capita personal disposal income. The list goes on, Mr. 
Speaker. Everybody but the Saskatchewan Conservative Party 
knows, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan’s on a roll. It’s 
growing. The infrastructure’s improving. And we on this side 
are proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order please. Order 
please. The Chair . . . Order now. I just advise the members that 
these mikes are quite sensitive. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
 

Training and Apprenticeship Review 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I am very pleased to announce that we are undertaking a 
comprehensive external review of Saskatchewan’s training and 
apprenticeship system. 
 
At this time of unprecedented economic growth, this review 
will help us to ensure that students and youth have access to the 
right training at the right time right here to help them participate 
in our growing economy. Mr. Speaker, this review will focus on 
ensuring that Saskatchewan’s training and apprenticeship 
system is able to meet the growing demands of our provincial 
economy. 
 
Today we have record numbers of people working. We are 
seeing tremendous growth in the oil and gas, manufacturing, 
mining, IT [information technology], cultural industry sectors. 
Mr. Speaker, these sectors need highly qualified, highly skilled 
workers to continue that momentum. As such we have a real 
opportunity today to ensure that Saskatchewan students and 
youth will be able to take full advantage of the opportunities 
this growth represents. 
 
The review that we are announcing will be the first time that we 
have undertaken a comprehensive and integrative look at 
SIAST, the regional colleges, and the Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission. These three organizations together 
have an annual budget of approximately $200 million and 
provide training programs and courses to approximately 75,000 
individuals annually. About 30,000 of these are full-time 
students. 
 
This review will look to enhance the linkages between our 
educational institutions and our economy, between business and 
the trades, and to ensure students and youth can access 
appropriate training to help them secure not only jobs but 
careers here at home. Our NDP government places a high 
priority on the issues of students and youth. 
 
We know also that a strong economy needs a strong workforce. 
That’s why we announced an additional $2 million in this 
year’s budget to create an additional thousand new training 
opportunities. It’s also why we hosted the economic summit in 
January. 
 
At that summit, Mr. Speaker, we heard from business and 
labour leaders as well as economists and academics. One of the 
key messages of the summit was that Saskatchewan’s economy 
is growing faster than our ability to supply it with skilled 
labour. We know that today 65 per cent of the new jobs being 
created require some kind of post-secondary education. While 
we’re well positioned to meet the needs of the growing 
economy through the education and training of a new 
generation of Saskatchewan residents, we need to make sure 
that our training system remains world-class and flexible 
enough to meet industry needs. 
 
The review panel that we have announced today will 
recommend how the training system can best meet the needs of 
students and help build Saskatchewan’s labour market. It will 
focus on recommendations that ensure the high-quality 
programs, services, and resources are available to help students 



3024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2005 

get the training they need to get jobs in our growing economy. 
It will make sure that we are able to deal with a training system 
that responds to and meets the human resource and skills need 
of Saskatchewan employers and employees. And finally it will 
look to ensure the mandates of the training system partners are 
appropriate to support the economic and social development of 
this province. 
 
This review panel will consult with stakeholders, including 
business and labour associations, representatives from the K to 
12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system, universities and 
Aboriginal institutions, students and community 
representatives, as well as our institutional partners at SIAST, 
the regional colleges, and the Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission. 
 
I was very pleased this morning to announce that the 
three-person panel will be comprised of Doug McArthur as its 
Chair. As many members will know, Mr. McArthur is a former 
minister of Education here in Saskatchewan and was 
instrumental in developing the regional college system of this 
province. 
 
I have also appointed Lorraine Hanson who is a reeve of one of 
our rural municipalities, a former school board trustee, and a 
former Chair of the Southeast Regional College Board. 
 
Additionally I have appointed Professor Paul Dudgeon to the 
board who brings a unique perspective from his role as a 
professor emeritus with the First Nations University of Canada 
and his role as a former Chair of the SIAST board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say in closing that this review provides 
the first real opportunity we have to reinvent and renew our 
training and apprenticeship systems in a way that encourages 
closer linkages between education and our economy, between 
business and labour. It is one of the initiatives that comes from 
the economic summit held this spring and it is a cornerstone of 
how our NDP government will help ensure that Saskatchewan 
is indeed the best place in Canada to live, to learn, to work, and 
to raise a family. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to offer a 
few comments in reply to the ministerial statement just read for 
the House this afternoon. And before I do that, I’d like to thank 
the minister for making a copy of his comments available to me 
in advance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the review that has just been announced, the 2005 
training system panel of review, is an undertaking that is, in my 
estimation, overdue. I understand, if I heard the minister 
correctly, this is the first time that this kind of a comprehensive 
look at the role of the post-secondary educations would be 
undertaken in the province. 
 
And while it may not have been thought necessary previously, 

we are entering a time in this stage of our economy in terms of 
the competitive nature of economic growth, both in 
Saskatchewan and in other jurisdictions that surround us, that 
we need to make sure that our educational institutions are 
offering the very best opportunities to the people of the 
province. And in successful economies elsewhere, much of this 
type of undertaking has already occurred where advanced 
institutions of learning have coordinated very carefully the 
programs they deliver, trying to expedite the training of 
individuals, moving them through the system as effectively and 
as quickly as possible. And so having done that good work in 
their jurisdictions, they’re seeing the benefits of that already in 
their economies. 
 
So I welcome the opportunity for this report, for this 
commission to undertake this study, for the report to be 
developed and presented. I do hope that the work that comes 
out of this exercise will be worthy of the time and effort that 
they will put into it. 
 
The minister talked about consulting broadly to achieve the 
hoped-for results and once again I will be very interested to see 
with whom the consultation is undertaken. We’ve heard from 
this government time and again about their willingness to 
consult and have found that frequently they say they’re willing 
to consult, but the consultation is very, very weak and very 
minimal at the best of times. So we’ll be watching carefully that 
that broad scope of consultation is undertaken. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy is growing faster than the supply of 
skilled workers in the labour market according to the minister’s 
statement. And I think that there is certainly an element of truth 
to that, but one thing that goes unstated as part of this 
presentation is the fact that many of our already performing 
skilled workers in this labour market are being enticed away by 
other economies to other jurisdictions. And that creates an extra 
burden on our businesses because the competitiveness related to 
finding skilled labour is just dramatically increased when you 
have other economies pulling well-trained people from our 
jurisdiction. So while we need more people that problem is 
exacerbated by the loss of existing skilled labour. 
 
The minister’s statement also says that we need to make sure 
our training system remains world-class and flexible enough to 
meet industry needs, and that is absolutely true. I alluded to that 
earlier. But we also need to remember that our economy is 
simply not isolated from the rest of the country. And we need to 
be aware of what demands exist for skilled labour in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that this review will be successful. We’ll 
look forward to the recommendations brought forward and will 
wait to see what kind of work is produced by this particular 
exercise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day to 
raise a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order? 



May 11, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3025 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
two occasions during routine proceedings, firstly the Minister of 
Learning, during a member statement, and secondly the 
Minister for Community Resources and Employment, during 
question period, uttered what I believe are very extremely 
unparliamentary languages and phrases. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that you will be successful in 
reviewing the transcripts of the proceedings and the tapes that 
the microphones hopefully were clear enough to pick up these 
words. But even if they were not, the ministers responsible 
know that they used unparliamentary language and should be 
asked to withdraw that language and apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes on the point of order the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I did certainly during the 
proceedings say that the statement that was made by the 
member opposite, one of the members opposite, was indeed 
shameful, disgusting, and disgraceful, as she suggested that this 
government allow people to starve. If that is unparliamentary 
for me to have said, I would withdraw it. But I do however 
admit that I said it was shameless, disgusting, and disgraceful. 
 
The Speaker: — I think the . . . Order please. Order please. 
Order please. I am very conscious of the sensitivity of use of 
language and I thank the member for bringing . . . for raising 
this point of order. It’s impossible to hear all of the phrases 
from the Chair. I do occasionally get people mentioning this to 
me. I would ask members to just take a deep breath before they 
utter things across the way they wouldn’t do otherwise. And it 
would certainly help to improve the decorum and certainly the 
esteem of this Assembly. 
 
I thank the member for the statement. I will listen to the tapes. 
If there is something there that has not been brought to the 
attention, or if somebody else wishes to acknowledge and 
apologize at this time, I will accept that as well. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? Member for 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for The Battlefords has asked 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery today there are two guests to the legislature that 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the legislature. 
 
One individual in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is well-known 

to members on both sides of the House. He is Mr. Bob 
McDonald who is the director of . . . I’m just trying to read my 
own writing here, Mr. Speaker. Bob is director of membership 
and legal services with the Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With Mr. McDonald is Michael Price who is the deputy 
registrar of the Professional Engineers of Ontario. Mr. Price is 
in the city of Regina attending the Canadian Council of 
Professional Engineers’ annual general meeting and awards 
banquet which starts its proceedings today and continues 
through to Saturday. 
 
I ask all members to warmly welcome Mr. McDonald and Mr. 
Price to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased on behalf of the government to stand and 
answer written questions no. 1,218 through 1,235 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,218 through to 
1,235 have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, so that the Economy 
Committee can take over the Chamber for its meeting and 
concurrently the Human Services Committee can meet, I move 
the Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:40.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3014 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3014 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3014 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................3014 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................3014 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3014 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3014 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................3015 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3015 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3015 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3015 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3015 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3016 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3016 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................3025 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................3016 
 Celebrate Success 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3016 
 Youth Business Excellence Awards 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................3016 
 Provincial Volleyball Tournaments 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3017 
 Special Screening of Documentary, Ted’s Story: Honouring Melissa 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3017 
 Meal Allowances 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3017 
 50th Anniversary of German-Canadian Society Harmonie 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3018 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Labour Legislation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3018 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3018 
 Condition of Provincial Highways 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................3020 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................3020 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3021 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................3021 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3022 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3022 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3022 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Training and Apprenticeship Review 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................3023 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3024 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3025 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................3025 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3025 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................3025 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3025 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




