















































Hansard: April 22, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 97A  FRIDAY, APRIL 22, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2617 
 April 22, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the issue of crystal meth in their community. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will 
really deal with crystal methamphetamine — the 
education, the prevention, the enforcement, and the 
treatment. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from the town 
of Wadena. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise on behalf 
of constituents who are concerned about the deficiency in 
residential support offered to people with long-term disabilities 
in Swift Current, southwest Saskatchewan. And the prayer of 
their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for residents of Swift Current 
who have long-term disabilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of Swift 
Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the growing problem of crystal meth. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that’ll deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Wadena, 
Kuroki, Leslie. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the state of disrepair of 
Highway 35. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 North from the 
US border in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Colgate, Weyburn, 
Radville, and Gladmar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of parents in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a 
much-needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of 
Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Kenderdine Road, Wright 
Crescent, Bentham Crescent, and Beckett Crescent in northeast 
Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens calling on the government to repair and resurface 
Highway 15 from the junction of Highway 11 east to the 
junction of Highway No. 2. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Hanley and Dundurn and Regina; 
Saskatoon, Biggar, and Kenaston. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

petition for improved cellular telephone coverage in the 
constituency of Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the regions 
encompassed in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — According to order the 
following petitions have been received and pursuant to rule 
14(7) they are hereby read and received: 
 

A new petition calling for the repeal of section 13.4 of The 
Labour Standards Act; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper 637, sessional paper 640, sessional paper 666, sessional 
paper 715, sessional paper 716, and sessional paper 720. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 99 move first reading of Bill No. 
206, The Labour Standards (Repeal of Government Directed 
Hours) Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 99 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: is the moratorium on school 
closures from September 2004 to December 2006 still in 
effect; if not, when was the moratorium removed? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce to this Assembly a group of 
students that have joined us today from Wolseley Elementary 
School. Mr. Speaker, we have 15 students accompanied by their 
teacher, Tim Fisher, and their bus . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m sorry. Members, I would ask 
members to allow the member from Moosomin to make his 
introductions. Member for Moosomin. 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Introducing this group 
of students from Wolseley, their bus driver Stan Magel. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege yesterday to attend the 
Aspen Grove Heritage Fair and I had the privilege of meeting a 
number of the students. 
 
I would like to welcome the students and invite all members to 
join me in welcoming the students this morning and I look 
forward to meeting with them about 11 o’clock for pictures and 
something to drink. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook, I would like to 
introduce 38 students from Shellbrook High School — grade 7 
actually — and their teachers Diane Popovitch, Wade 
Reddekopp, and Lori Rosvold, and Brenda Lecompte. Sorry if I 
get that wrong. And on behalf of all the members here, we’d 
like to welcome you to your Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognize the member for Sask 
Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my 
welcome to the students from Shellbrook Elementary, some of 
whom live in my constituency. 
 
And I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I did not introduce a 
constituent of mine who is in the east gallery. She is a very 
good friend and an advisor. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I often call on 
her for political advice. She is not family, but she is as close as 
family to me. 
 
I’d like to introduce Alanna Closs, who is among the students in 
the east gallery. She has met the Premier and other government 
members when my constituency office was opened but I am 
pleased to introduce her to all members of the Assembly here 
this morning. Alanna Closs. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have just received a note from 
the Sergeant-at-Arms that says, “There is a suspicious looking 
character sitting in the top row of the east gallery. Do you know 
him? Patrick.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that suspicious looking character is my brother, 
Ken, who resides in Saskatoon. He is an electrical contractor 
and he is accompanied today by his companion, Iris Garcia, 
who resides in McAllen, Texas. This has been a long-term 
romance for my brother, and the first time Iris was here was last 
December and they went snowmobiling in northern 
Saskatchewan. Iris, until she had met my brother, had never 
been further north than Las Vegas and I asked her after she had 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

been snowmobiling how it was. And she described it as being 
crazy cold, and I thought a very apt description of 
Saskatchewan weather. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members 
to join me in welcoming Iris and Ken to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome to 
you, through you and all members of the Assembly someone 
seated in your gallery. Her name is Alyssa Peel and perhaps she 
can stand and wave. She is an intern with the Saskatchewan 
legislative internship program and she’ll be working with me 
for the next number of months. I am very excited to be able to 
have the opportunity to work with her and I hope that she finds 
the opportunity as experiencing as I will. And with her I would 
also like to introduce and welcome to the Assembly today is my 
daughter, Morgan Morin. She is quite familiar to this Assembly 
and enjoys her visits here immensely. So I’d like to welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Earth Day and Soil Conservation Week 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
Earth Day, a day to recognize the importance of the 
environment and to acknowledge environmental concerns. 
Earth Day is a result of efforts by US [United States] Senator 
Gaylord Nelson to bring environmental issues onto the 
American political agenda. As a result of his efforts on April 
22, 1970, millions of people across the US used their collective 
strength to bring a voice to the environment. Earth Day is now 
recognized, Mr. Speaker, all across the world. It’s a day when 
we think of environmental concerns that face all the inhabitants 
of the globe we inhabit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, this week is Soil Conservation Week, which 
coincides with Earth Day. And I think it’s very fitting, 
particularly in a province like Saskatchewan where in our past 
we saw the soil blow away during windy springs and summers, 
and now with advances in technology we see that being 
minimized, Mr. Speaker. And so I would ask, Mr. Speaker, all 
members of this Assembly and all citizens of this great province 
of ours to just take a moment today to think about the 
environment and the world we live in. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Earth Day 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, today is the 35th anniversary of 
Earth Day — a special time set aside to raise awareness about 

the environment and our place in it, and to celebrate and honour 
the world we call home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Earth Day was first established in 1970, 
approximately 20 million people gathered to demonstrate 
support for the environment. Today, more than half a billion 
people celebrate Earth Day each and every year. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan there will be a tree planting ceremony at 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum in recognition of Les Goforth 
of Regina. Mr. Goforth was instrumental in the creation of the 
First Nations Gallery — a gallery that displays artwork of 
various events and places in First Nations history. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, this weekend teachers and education 
students from across the province will meet at the Earth Day 
centennial year conference to discuss ways of educating and 
inspiring young people to become environmental leaders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that from the earth comes 
everything required to sustain life, we often take it for granted. 
Although Earth Day comes once a year, it is a reminder that 
each one of us is responsible for protecting and preserving the 
land we live on each and every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in acknowledging the 
efforts of everyone involved in the 35th anniversary of Earth 
Day and in creating awareness about environmental issues. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Aspen Grove Heritage Fair 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 
privilege yesterday of attending the Aspen Grove Heritage Fair. 
Now you may wonder exactly what a heritage fair is. What it is, 
Mr. Speaker, is a fair where young people are invited to look at 
the history surrounding their community or the history of the 
province. And I want to thank the Aspen Grove School Division 
for initiating this program and promoting it in their area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were schools represented in the area from 
Balcarres, Sedley, the Dr. Isman School — the group that’s 
with us this morning, Kipling School, Broadview, Whitewood, 
Kennedy Langbank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was very interesting as I toured the fair, 
when you think there were 200 exhibitors, all school students 
who took the time to research history — whether it was of their 
community or of their school or of the history in Saskatchewan 
— and just to talk to students and to find out the knowledge that 
they had gained and how interested they were in sharing their 
knowledge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the grade 4 class from Dr. Isman School here this 
morning had a class project about Lord Wolseley, a British 
general, after whom the town, the community of Wolseley is 
named. And I want to congratulate the grade 4 class on their 
work and efforts and everyone involved for the effort they put 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

into this heritage fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from this heritage fair yesterday, 13 projects will 
be selected to go to regionals, and then to nationals, if they 
move on from there. So congratulations to each and every one 
for the hard work and dedication in promoting heritage fairs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the 
Battlefords. 
 

Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 16th annual 
Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence last night in 
Regina held some considerable excitement for the province and 
in particular for the people of the Battlefords. 
 
The Battlefords Wildlife Federation nature centre project won 
the Land of Living Skies Award sponsored by Access 
Communications. The Living Skies Award recognizes the 
tourism business that demonstrates innovative efforts to prevent 
and reduce the environmental impacts of their business 
operations through planning and practice. The nature centre 
instills an appreciation of wildlife to visitors and demonstrates a 
strong commitment to environmentally responsible tourism. 
 
And that’s not all, Mr. Speaker. The major announcement of the 
evening, the Chairman’s Lifetime Achievement Award, was 
given to June Sutton, for 18 years the owner/operator of Sutton 
Lodge on Jackfish Lake near Metinota— a tireless worker and 
promoter of Saskatchewan and tourism. 
 
The Lifetime Achievement Award is presented to an individual 
who has had a significant impact on the development of the 
tourism industry, who has provided longstanding and 
exceptional service, who has demonstrated leadership and 
integrity, who has left a strong legacy, and who has gained the 
respect of those in the tourism industry. Mr. Speaker, June 
Sutton has done all this and more and we are very proud of her. 
 
My congratulations to these incredible people and projects, to 
the folks at Tourism Saskatchewan who put on an exceptional 
gala evening, and to the board and staff of Battlefords Tourism 
who work all year round to promote our small part of this great 
province of ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 

Wanda Constantinoff Celebrates 100 Years 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to applaud the achievements of Mrs. Wanda 
Constantinoff as she celebrated her 100 years of life on October 
5, 2004 at the Buena Vista Lodge in Kerrobert, Saskatchewan 
with family and friends. 

Wanda was born in Bulgaria and immigrated to Canada. She 
married Chris Constantinoff and they farmed in the Cactus Lake 
area until retiring in Luseland. They raised two sons, Mike and 
John, and Wanda has 11 grandchildren, 22 great-grandchildren 
and 8 great-great-grandchildren. I would like to quote what one 
of the grandchildren said about Wanda: 
 

Grandma — you are a treasure to us all, to celebrate 100 
years of living is amazing. We will always remember how 
much you love your family, how you helped us out, 
looking after your grandchildren and great grandchildren. 
We remember your laughter and smiles, the special treats 
you made us. How you loved your flowers and garden, to 
go for walks, [to] stay healthy, visit, sing and pray. Thank 
you for all the wonderful stories you told us, now we all 
have our own little precious stories of you. 

 
On March 4, 2005, I had the pleasure, along with the mayor of 
Kerrobert, Mr. Erhard Poggemiller, to present the 100-year 
medallion and plaque to Wanda, along with friends and family, 
and we all enjoyed cake and coffee. Please join me in 
congratulating Wanda for contributing 100 years to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

North Central Regional Recreation Association 
Volunteer Recognition Awards 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday night by far the most important event in the Prince 
Albert area was the Centennial Volunteer Recognition Awards 
banquet for the North Central Regional Recreation Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone once noted, “All that we send into the 
lives of others comes back into our own.” This describes well 
the awards banquet last Saturday. There was a real sense of 
celebration as we honoured those who’ve made a positive 
difference in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of visiting with some of my 
own constituents and past students, as well as meeting many 
others from the north central region. And I had the honour of 
presenting 13 individuals with volunteer recognition awards for 
outstanding service to their communities. 
 
Bernie and Marianne Kramchynsky of Rosthern, Ed and 
Darlene Lang of Wakaw, Bill and Audrey Cherneski of 
Cudworth, Cec Hovdebo of Candle Lake, Ted Walker of 
Christopher Lake, and Alvin Tait of Macdowall were all 
recognized for their contributions in the area of recreation and 
special services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the youth volunteers receiving awards were Jade 
Smith of Macdowall, who attends Wesmor in Prince Albert, 
Shari Borstmayer of Cudworth, and Vincent Detillieux, who 
lives in Domremy and attends Wakaw high school; and, Mr. 
Speaker, Ingrid Mateen of Prince Albert who’s recognized for 
her volunteer activities in culture and heritage. 
 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating these recipients of the North Central Regional 
Recreational Association Volunteer Recognition Awards, as 
well as all the organizers who made this special event possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Weyburn’s Women of the Year Awards 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Tuesday of this week I had the privilege to attend the Women 
of the Year Awards in Weyburn. The Women of the Year 
Awards are sponsored by the Quota International and several 
other businesses in Weyburn and community. 
 
The Quota club supports many worthwhile projects in the 
Weyburn area, and I’d just like to mention a few of them: the 
toy lending library, the Weyburn Music Festival, Southeast 
Regional College scholarship, Weyburn Special Care Home, 
speech and hearing project in Weyburn schools, Weyburn 
Care-a-Van, violence intervention, Mini-Go School, Family 
Place, and Tatagwa View. 
 
The winners of the 2005 awards are, Mr. Speaker: for the 
SaskPower Workplace Excellence Award, Colleen Weimer; for 
the Access Communications Exceptional Entrepreneur Award, 
Linda Aitken; for the Quota International Women Weyburn 
Community Service Award, Marlene Nedelcov; and for the 
Investors Group Young Women of Distinction Award, Tessa 
Scrupps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate all the nominees and the 
winners who each play a key role in making Weyburn a great 
community. And I’d like to congratulate the Quota club for 
once again recognizing these outstanding women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Compensation for Saskatoon Health Authority 
Management 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
June the former CEO [chief executive officer] for the Saskatoon 
Health District, Jim Fergusson, stepped down. At that time he 
stepped down with a $66,000 severance package plus benefits. 
But not only did he step down with a severance package; he 
also at the same time signed a year-long contract with the health 
region to give the new CEO some advice. 
 
We finally found out today in The StarPhoenix what this advice 
cost — $13,000 a month, Mr. Speaker — $13,000 a month 
when this NDP [New Democratic Party] government resides 
over the longest waiting lists in Canada. 
 
But who is Jim Fergusson? Is he just the CEO of Saskatoon 

Health District? No. This is the same Jim Fergusson that was 
one of the Chairs for the NDP Party’s policy renewal process, 
Mr. Speaker. As John Gomery would say, from the Gomery 
Commission, it’s good work if you can get it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does the Minister of Health condone this type of action? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are in this 
particular case, the Saskatoon Health Authority enters into a 
contract with Mr. Fergusson to make sure that the long-term 
knowledge and of the history of that administration would 
continue as they move forward. The facts are, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s an entirely appropriate way to make sure that you have 
continuity. 
 
As the member opposite should know, Mr. Fergusson left his 
job last summer. There was an interim CEO while we did a 
national search, and just recently a new CEO was appointed. 
Mr. Fergusson provided some able assistance during that time. 
And I think that’s a very good way to make sure that we have 
the biggest health region in the province operating smoothly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t common 
practice. This hasn’t happened in other health districts, Mr. 
Speaker. It seems more than a little suspicious that this happens 
when it’s an NDP party supporter helping them with their 
policy conventions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The interim CEO says it’s good value. She says, I phone him at 
least once a week — once a week, Mr. Speaker. If you’d add 
that up for four weeks in a month, a phone call once a week 
adds up to about $3,000 a phone call. That’s what it’s costing 
taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is when people in Saskatchewan are waiting up to two 
years for an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging]. Mr. Speaker, 
why is the NDP paying Mr. Fergusson over $3,000 a phone 
call? Wouldn’t a fee-for-service make more sense? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. Order, please. 
Order. Order. Would the member put the question, please. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m interested to 
see the Minister of Health stand up and justify $3,000 a phone 
call. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that people of 
Saskatchewan are getting a little tired of the distortion that goes 
on across the way. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, they’re also sick and tired of 
the fact that those members opposite attack able civil servants 
throughout the whole province. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
pattern which we have seen for a number of years. 
 
I think that what we need to do is affirm that when we have 
senior people who have provided good service to us for many 
years, that we continue to use that particular service. In the 
Saskatoon Health Region we want to make sure that they 
treated their former CEO with respect, that they used his 
knowledge in an appropriate way, and that there was an 
appropriate transition to the new CEO. Mr. Speaker, I think that 
is a good way to provide the care for Saskatchewan people, and 
that’s the ultimate issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what people are getting sick 
of in this province and this country is government corruption 
and political patronage. That’s what people are getting sick of 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Glen Beck is a professor of 
health economics at the University of Saskatchewan. And he 
finds that 12-month retainer extremely surprising, very unusual, 
Mr. Speaker. He goes on to say that, and I quote: “The larger 
[the] . . . administration [costs], . . . the less the resources can be 
used . . . [for] surgical wards and operating theatres,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s the very point. The more money we put into 
administration, the more money we put into political patronage, 
the less money we have to settle with nurses and front-line care 
workers, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand up 
and give a rational answer of why they would be paying $3,000 
a phone call for a former NDP party policy adviser for the 
advice, for one phone call a week? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the distortion around the 
comment that the member just made about $3,000 a phone call, 
those are not the facts. He knows that. The public knows that. 
Mr. Fergusson has served well in that position. In Saskatoon we 
have a health authority where their budget is over half a billion 
dollars, and they are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In Saskatoon they are providing very 
good services for all the people of Saskatchewan and for the 
people of the Saskatoon Health Region. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Fergusson has provided leadership for a long time. He has 
moved out and allowed for a transition for a new leader and . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask members to allow 
the response to be given. The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to apologize 
for the numbers of operations that are done there. We’re not 
going to apologize for all of the very good work that is done in 
that health region and that it takes all of the people, especially 
the leadership, to make sure things go ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite to support our budget 
as we move forward in providing health care for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I imagine CEOs in this 
province, all around this province, are kind of wringing their 
hands. They think, I’m going to step down and then get hired 
back by the same health district at $160,000 a year, Mr. 
Speaker. Is that the policy this government is setting? Is that 
what you’re going to be doing into the future? 
 
And when you break it down, when you break it down for a 
month, $13,000 a month, and when you listen to the new CEO, 
the interim CEO, that she is saying that I phone him maybe 
once a week and get some advice, $3,000 a phone call or 
$13,000 a month for advice . . . is that the precedent you’re 
setting for the other 12 health regions? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I just remind the member to direct his 
remarks through the Chair. I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again the facts are 
clear, but the member opposite takes another track. What we 
need to remind ourselves is, why do we make sure we get very 
good people to provide leadership in our health care system? 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because we have patients; we have our citizens 
who require help. 
 
In Saskatoon we’ve been able to develop a very complex mix of 
services that provide care for our citizens. We also train many, 
many of our health providers in that area. Mr. Fergusson knows 
about how the various operations work together — the medical 
school, the health region, all of the various groups that are there 
— and he has provided valuable assistance in that as he’s gone 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we should celebrate good leadership in our 
government, not tear them to pieces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Investment in Pangaea 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, sadly we must add yet another 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

name to the NDP hall of shame. There was SPUDCO, 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], 
Navigata, Clickabid, Channel Lake; the list just goes on and on 
and on. 
 
And now we add another name to the list of NDP money-losing 
business ventures. And the name of that business, Mr. Speaker, 
is Pangaea — $3 million dollars gone in the dead of the night. 
Mr. Speaker, to the Industry minister: how did he let that 
happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The Chair . . . Order. 
The Chair recognizes the Ministry of Industry and . . . The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and with 
thanks to my colleague from Industry for allowing me to 
answer the question. 
 
The investments that CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] from time to time has made within the 
information technology sector have been undertaken with a 
number of objectives, those being to try and increase our 
capacity, to try to improve commercialization of our IT 
[information technology] sector, and to build a more robust 
industry. That has been a partnership arrangement that we’ve 
undertaken. 
 
In this particular case, the investment was written down. It’s 
unfortunate it did not work out, but it was undertaken with good 
intention and within the overall strategy for building the IT 
sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that 
the members opposite just with good intentions can just spend 
taxpayers’ dollars but don’t necessarily get a return. 
 
There was a press conference. The NDP had promised 35 new 
jobs. There was a photo op. We had a smiling minister. We had 
a smiling Premier talking about how good this was going to be 
for Saskatchewan. And what do we have now? Well we have an 
empty office. We’ve got bare walls and, Mr. Speaker, the 35 
jobs are nowhere to be found in this province, and the $3 
million is gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us when he’s going to get the 
taxpayers’ dollars back? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, there are six sectors that 
we’ve identified for growth in this province. The information 
technology sector is part of that, and I think the members 

opposite are doing a great disservice to that sector and to the 
business people in it. 
 
What we have been trying to do is to expand this sector to help 
Saskatchewan grow beyond its . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Please, I ask 
members to allow the minister to respond. The Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is the same party opposite that has 
criticized us for investments in the research parks, the same 
party that has criticized us for investments through the Crowns. 
This is the same party that has criticized us for our investments 
in the universities. This is a party that is nothing but critical. It 
does not have a vision. It does not have an approach, and it will 
not be able to lead this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just examine that growth 
record of Pangaea in Saskatchewan. As late as March 23rd, 
Pangaea Systems Inc. had jobs posted on the website. These 
jobs were for business analysts and projects managers, the kind 
of jobs promised for Regina by this NDP government. Here’s 
the kicker, Mr. Speaker. At the bottom of the posting reads the 
following: Calgary residents need only apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s given money to a firm that is no 
longer even interested in speaking to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This NDP government is still a shareholder in 
this company. Why is the minister allowing this to happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member asks why are we allowing 
this to happen. Allowing what to happen? Allowing what to 
happen? The member is unclear in terms of what she’s asking. 
She’s saying we should be doing more to stimulate the 
economy. She’s saying we should be doing more to make sure 
that there is good investments. We’re doing that. We’re making 
sure that our economy is growing beyond its traditional base. 
We’re making sure we’ve got strategic investments. 
 
We’ve got the universities today in the newspaper saying how 
happy they are with this government’s investment in the 
budgets, in the research park. And that party opposite has voted 
against that budget, voted against those investments and 
continues to simply snipe at the Crowns as part of their 
not-so-secret agenda for privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this is just appalling. They 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

didn’t create any jobs in Saskatchewan. They’re only creating 
jobs in Calgary. They lost $3 million, and this is another NDP 
thinks it’s a success story. 
 
Here’s what the Industry minister had to say on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please members. I would ask members 
to allow the member to put the question. The Chair recognizes 
the member from Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — He was asked, what’s a solution centre? 
What is this, Pangaea was supposed to build? His response, and 
I quote: 
 

“I imagine the solution centre would be a way in which 
people who have websites would contact Pangaea.” 
 

I imagine. He said, “I imagine,” not I know or it’s a good idea. 
Just I imagine. Mr. Speaker does the minister imagine that he’ll 
be able to get our $3 million back? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well there we go with the same 
approach that we saw that opposition launch before the last 
election, standing up, going from Crown to Crown 
cherry-picking where the investments are. When is this 
opposition going to stand up and support the investments that 
have been made . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The members opposite have a pattern 
of distortion in terms of this. There is a pattern which is very 
clear, and it is the same one they pursued before the 2003 
election, which is to discredit every piece of public investment. 
 
Now they’re out there saying, well we shouldn’t be working 
with companies in Alberta. They never seem too concerned 
about that as they make their weekly trip to Calgary to try and 
pick the pockets of those businesses to support their political 
objectives. And I think that that really is an unfortunate thing on 
the part of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Land Development Project in Regina 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, here we go again. They say one thing and they do 
another. 
 
This NDP government is committed to a green and prosperous 
economy, so they say. But it seems like they’re in a big hurry to 
abandon heritage buildings and kick out community gardeners 

here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to whoever wishes to answer it: 
who is purchasing the government Crown land at the corner of 
College and Broad in Regina? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’m sure as everyone in the House is aware, the property at the 
corner of College and Broad has a number of proposals. We are 
looking to sell that piece of property shortly. There may be an 
announcement made. 
 
The community gardens have been there for just over 10 years 
on a lease. And they know that there was always the option 
there of the property being sold, and there would have to be 
other options found for the community gardens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
media reports suggest the government is selling out to a land 
developer, a land developer that is a major US-based provider 
of senior citizens’ care facilities. Mr. Speaker, could it be, could 
it be is this the same company, Denver-based Broe industries, 
so well-known in our province as the builder of imaginary 
ethanol plants? 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question: is this the company? Can the 
minister tell us, if it is not, which company it is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, until the detail is finalized, 
I’m not releasing any details. I don’t have the liberty to do that 
to the public at large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will assure the member that there isn’t an ethanol 
plant going at the corner of Broad and College but there is a 
very good . . . I’ll say that most definitely. Mr. Speaker, this 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. The minister . . . 
Order, please. Minister for Property Management. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this government always 
looks to developments that enhance the city, enhance the 
community, and we feel that this proposed development at the 
corner of College and Broad will do that. And it will add value 
to the community, to the neighbourhood, to the citizens that live 
in this city, and to the city of Regina itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

Feasibility Study for the Meat Packing Industry 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Deputy Premier. At a meeting in Saltcoats on 
October 19, 2004, put forward by the Beef Initiative Group, 
they put forward a packing plant proposal. And the Deputy 
Premier was there, and the Deputy Premier spoke to about 150 
farmers that night and made commitments on behalf of that 
government. And that commitment was that that government 
would fund a feasibility study for this project. My question to 
the Deputy Premier is, are you funding that feasibility study? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite and this Assembly and to the people of the province 
that not only have we completed our work on the feasibility 
study, we have taken it about the province now to a variety of 
different groups. This project has been managed by the Minister 
of Agriculture and myself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The company is from Ontario that prepared the study for us. 
And they have now talked to a number of community groups. 
We’re working at building collectively today a meat strategy, 
Mr. Speaker, which we should see making itself available to the 
people of Saskatchewan in the next little while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s totally contrary to 
what the Beef Initiative Group is saying. What they’re saying is 
that government has done a pre-feasibility study for the whole 
province into what kind of packing plants would work in the 
province. But I want to do a quote here, Mr. Speaker. I was at 
this meeting that night and a lady got up and I quote: 
 

To Clay Serby, will your government provide the funds 
necessary for these people, the Beef Initiative Group, to 
complete their feasibility study and business plan? 

 
I want to quote the Deputy Premier’s answer. In answer to the 
question earlier Mr. Serby stated that the Government of 
Saskatchewan will not only support this group in its concept but 
will also fund the feasibility study and business plan needed to 
push this concept forward. 

 
A commitment made, a commitment broken, Mr. Speaker — 
here we go again, say one thing and do another. Mr. Speaker, 
will the Deputy Premier honour that commitment for this group 
and fund their feasibility study? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we can’t deny the facts, and 
the member has a huge capacity to reconstruct the facts on a 
regular basis as I pointed out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we provided the funding 

for the study. We provided the funding for the study, Mr. 
Speaker. That funding was provided by our departments. It will 
be provided to the people who are going to be out there 
reviewing the context of the reports. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
feasibility study will be used for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I want to say to this House and to the member opposite — 
and we had this conversation before about what happens when 
this member asks questions, Mr. Speaker — when this member 
asks questions, Mr. Speaker, he reconstructs them on a regular 
basis as he did reconstruct the information that came from our 
AIDA [agricultural income disaster assistance] meeting, Mr. 
Speaker, a couple of years ago in Ottawa. And I want to take 
you back there, Mr. Speaker, because every time that this 
member gets on his feet he distorts the information. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please members. Order. Order, please. The 
member from Yorkton, the Deputy Premier’s remarks are 
getting rather personal and the member ought to stick . . . Order, 
please, members. And the members ought to stick to the issues 
rather than the personalities. I would ask the member from 
Yorkton to withdraw the personal aspect of his remark before 
he continues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the personal 
remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member, and now I ask the 
member to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what I said in my comments 
is that we have put together for Saskatchewan people — 
Saskatchewan producers, developers across the province — a 
package, a feasibility package. That is exactly what I said to the 
people in Saltcoats. We’re putting that piece out today to 
Saskatchewan people across the province. And that work, Mr. 
Speaker, will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I have no problem with how 
personal that Deputy Premier gets, but I think what this boils 
down to is the credibility of that Deputy Premier and the 
credibility of that NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, if I’m going to believe 
something . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Once again, first of all I would 
ask members not to comment — order, please — not to 
comment on any ruling of the Speaker. And I would also ask 
the member from Melville-Yorkton not to make any personal 
remarks. I recognize the member for . . . pardon me, Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, in a letter from the Beef 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

Initiative Group in a response that I got when I asked the 
question, where are you with the Saskatchewan NDP 
government with your feasibility study money, here is their 
response in answer to the question. And they say: 
 

Well where are we with the Saskatchewan government? 
They have not fulfilled their commitment made by Mr. 
Serby to fund our feasibility study. And according to Brian 
Rusnak, the Agriculture minister’s chief of staff, they 
never will. 
 

Here we go again, a commitment made by that government, that 
Deputy Premier, and he walked out of that room and never 
intended for a minute to honour that commitment. We’ve seen 
this so many times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members of the Assembly, I once 
again ask the member for Melville-Saltcoats not to make any 
remarks that could be considered of a nature that are personal 
that would imply wrongdoing on the part of a member. I would 
ask the member for Saltcoats-Melville to withdraw the remark. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
even give you some quotes that the Agriculture . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I ask the member to first of all 
withdraw the remark. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I withdraw the remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it wasn’t just the Deputy Premier that made this 
commitment. I want to give you some quotes that the 
Agriculture minister at meetings in Tisdale and other places 
made. And the quote is: 
 

We don’t have the treasury to fund the full project, but we 
will back the feasibility study, confirmed Mr. Wartman. 
 

Then also he goes on to say, the write-up says, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Agriculture minister Mark Wartman 
attended a Beef Initiative Group meeting in Tisdale, 
Saskatchewan last week, and he was convinced to pledge 
his support for the initiative. And here’s his words, “These 
guys are not whistling in the dark,” said Wartman during 
an interview on Friday, “they have done their research, 
they have a good idea, and we will back the feasibility 
study.” 
 

Not only do we have the Deputy Premier making the 
commitment; we have the Agriculture minister making that 
commitment on behalf of that NDP government. And what do 
they do? They run out and forget they ever made that 
commitment. They’ve left this group hanging out to dry at a 
time when we need slaughter plants in this province. Is that how 

they intend to help agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have 
the letter of November 26 that I wrote to Mr. Ostercamp, and 
said to Mr. Ostercamp, that we would be doing a feasibility 
study in the province. That’s exactly the same kind of 
conversation that I had with Mr. Ostercamp in the early part of 
the new year. And we have, Mr. Speaker, funded the feasibility 
study in Saskatchewan for the development of the beef industry 
and the packing industry in Saskatchewan. We’ve already done 
that, Mr. Speaker. And we have said to Mr. Ostercamp that that 
feasibility study will be used as a template for all development 
in Saskatchewan — of which, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ostercamp and 
his group will be using. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite and to 
you and to this House, Mr. Speaker, that we have the distortion 
after distortion after distortion, Mr. Speaker, that comes from 
the member, that comes from my colleague from 
Saltcoats-Melville, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Once again, I would ask members to 
— in their remarks and in the heat of debate — to take extra 
care not to impugn wrongdoing on the part of another member. 
The member from Yorkton, would you please rise and 
withdraw the remark before we proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the remark, and I 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — And I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that when the member 
for Saltcoats stands up and talks about the kinds of farm policy 
in Canada that is in place today . . . and I made this comment to 
this House a couple of weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the 
member opposite. We attended meetings, Mr. Speaker. We 
attended meetings in Ottawa. We met, Mr. Speaker, with people 
in Ottawa to change the agriculture policy in Saskatchewan. 
And when we change that agriculture policy in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Conservative party returns back 
to Saskatchewan, and it changes the policy in front of us, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s the kinds of issues of which we take 
exception with on a daily basis. And we take that exception 
today, Mr. Speaker, with the member from Saltcoats. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 

New Regional Hospital to be Built in Swift Current 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to draw 
the attention of my fellow members to some very exciting news 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

for the residents of southwest Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 
Health and the Cypress Health Region are moving forward with 
a new $32 million regional hospital to be built in Swift Current. 
I am pleased to announce our government has approved the 
functional program for the project. This means design work and 
other planning necessary for construction can begin. 
 
The new hospital supports our government’s commitment in the 
Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care to build a strong 
network of hospitals across the province so that we can improve 
access to care for all residents. Today’s announcement is just 
another example of how our government is making strategic 
investments today to ensure the delivery of high quality health 
care services in the future. 
 
The new regional hospital, in keeping with our strategic plan, 
will offer a broad range of health care services, including 
internal medicine and other specialty care, general surgery, and 
intensive care. This is indeed good news for the residents of 
southwest Saskatchewan. Every community in the Cypress 
Health Region will benefit from the services in this new facility. 
From the rural municipalities of Swift Current, Excelsior, 
Coulee, Morse, and Riverside, to the residents of the towns of 
Herbert, Morse, Stewart Valley, Cabri, Gull Lake, Shaunavon, 
Leader, Maple Creek, Climax, Mankota, Val Marie, and 
Ponteix, not to mention the city of Swift Current itself. 
 
The improvements in Swift Current will contribute to a more 
efficient and coordinated approach in delivering health care 
services in this province, leading to reduced waits for surgical 
and diagnostic care. But projects like this do not happen on 
their own. They take strong community leadership, 
commitment, partnerships, and involvement. Today’s 
announcement embodies all of those elements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all Saskatchewan residents, I want to 
congratulate the Cypress Regional Health Authority and the 
people of southwest Saskatchewan for their part in building a 
better health care system and a better future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be able 
to rise and respond to the ministerial statement from the 
member opposite. I want to say to the members of this 
Assembly, they’ll probably know this but maybe not have 
marked it as closely as I have. Obviously as a local member for 
Swift Current, I think this is about the fifth time that the 
hospital in Swift Current has been announced. 
 
It’s been announced in about three budgets, and the minister’s 
gotten up on several statements, and we’ve responded each 
time. I’ve responded each time to say that it’s positive for Swift 
Current to get a new hospital. It was positive the first time they 
announced it, and it’s positive this fifth or sixth time as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would say this though, I would say this to be on the record 
very clearly on behalf of my constituents. There is a grave 
concern in my community amongst the people of the province, 

of Swift Current, and specifically on the part of those on the 
front line of health care about the scope of this facility. And 
although the price tag for the facility has gone up and up and 
up, the number of beds that we’re talking about in Swift Current 
has gone down and down and down. And there’s a concern in, 
especially from front-line health care workers about the ability 
of the hospital to serve the entire region. 
 
We’re grateful that we have a brand new regional facility in 
Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that we are grateful 
for. But you know what? We’re also confident in southwest 
Saskatchewan that one day — arguably, arguably after the 
government changes — one day our region will grow. And it’ll 
grow quickly and rapidly, and we will need services like 
hospital health care services and infrastructure to match a 
growing population. So that’s an ongoing concern. It’s 
something that the people of Swift Current have asked me 
directly to look into and to monitor. And I know they’ve asked 
the same of the minister. I’ll be doing that in concert with him, I 
hope, to monitor the scope of service, the level of service that 
there is available in this new facility which the community is 
grateful for. 
 
I understand that I’ll also be able to attend the ceremony later 
this day in Swift Current to turn sod on the new hospital. And 
it’ll be a great day for Swift Current and southwest 
Saskatchewan and health care in the home of health care Region 
No. 1. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 998 and 999. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 998 and 999 have 
been submitted. 
 
Order, please. Order, please. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
reached a milestone, Mr. Speaker. We’ve reached our 1,000th 
question and, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people have worked very 
hard to answer these questions. And this particular question, 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to convert for debates returnable 
because of its prestigious point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — 1,000 has been converted. The Chair 
recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I am very pleased to stand on behalf of the government, and 
now that we have passed that milestone, table a response to 
written question no. 1,001. 



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Building Independence Program 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the resolution before us today 
is to see this Assembly endorse Saskatchewan’s Building 
Independence program, a program which supports low-income 
families, a program which has reduced the number of social 
assistance cases to the lowest level in 14 years. I am pleased to 
speak in favour of this motion. I am pleased to speak in favour 
of Building Independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Building Independence program is not a single 
program. It is not a single administrative structure. It is not 
something that can be carved out and separated. It does not 
have a single budget line item. There is not a line in the budget 
numbers that say Building Independence program, like you 
might have for student loans. Building Independence is what we 
would call in university a multidisciplinary approach. It is 
multi-departmental and multi-program — it is an approach. I’ll 
describe the details of the various programs that make up 
Building Independence a little later. 
 
First I want to talk about approach. I want to talk about our 
approach, the NDP approach, and I want to talk about the 
opposition’s approach, the conservative approach. 
 
Our approach is to help Saskatchewan people make the move 
from social assistance to jobs, Mr. Speaker. Under our approach 
at least 20,000 families in Saskatchewan are better off as a 
direct result of Building Independence. By making jobs the first 
option for people in need of assistance, thousands of 
Saskatchewan families have left welfare or have avoided it 
altogether. That is an approach that works, Mr. Speaker. That is 
the approach that we are about. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1997 we have been investing in people 
though a series of unique programs that are fundamentally 
redesigning social assistance in this province by helping 
low-income people become and stay employed. 
 
I would now like to address the approach of the members 
opposite. Their approach to welfare, social assistance, and 
social programs has been well documented over the years. The 
members opposite have had a number of positions on social 
assistance and poverty issues, but their approach remains the 
same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they try to avoid talking about their plans. They 
try to evoke early mayors, premiers, and governments of 
Saskatchewan in an effort to avoid anyone looking at their own 
history, Mr. Speaker, their own history on social policy and 
social programs and social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was reading the Leader of the Opposition’s 
convention speech the other day and I saw him say that he was 
a disciple of Ronald Reagan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Yes, it’s true, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite said about 

two months ago, at the launch of the Sask Party’s fancy new 
policy manual, the Leader of the Opposition said he was a 
disciple of Ronald Reagan. This shiny new leader of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party said he agreed with Ronald 
Reagan when he said: 
 

“You know I’m not interested in right and left. I’m 
interested in up and down. There are policies that lift a 
people up and there are policies that drag a people down 
and that’s what’s driven the process.” 
 

That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition 
said there are policies that lift a people up. So I thought I would 
look up the policies, Mr. Speaker, that attracted this new shiny 
leader to the Saskatchewan political scene. 
 
I remember that the Leader of the Opposition was attracted to 
the policies of Grant Devine so much that he ran for nomination 
as a Devine Conservative. I also remember that the Leader of 
the Opposition was attracted to the Saskatchewan Conservative 
Party’s policies when he first ran for them. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would ask the member to relate his remarks to the motion that 
he himself has put, and the remarks ought to be related to the 
motion at hand under debate. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — The motion before us, building 
independence, and I will be talking about the eight strategies 
that we employ, including the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement. But I also want to say that I also remember the 
Leader of the Opposition saying when he said that these are 
policies that lift a people up. 
 
The platform of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party, unlike 
our platform about building independence in Saskatchewan, is 
coincidentally called The Way Up. Is that coincidental, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Building Independence programs include a 
strategy of eight programs: the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement; the family health benefits; the Saskatchewan Child 
Benefits; the provincial training allowance; the child care 
subsidies; employment supports for person with disabilities; 
Jobs First and traditional employment allowance; child care. 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that is what we are building. 
 
The members opposite told us that they were going to cut $50 
million from the social assistance budget. They were going to 
cut 25 per cent of people off of welfare. They called that 
welfare reform, Mr. Speaker. Let’s remember a little more 
about so-called welfare reform as proposed by the 
Conservatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1987 the Devine government that the Leader of 
the Opposition wanted to be so much part of, was doing 
surveillance on single mothers. They called it welfare reform, 
Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition wanted to be part of 
a government whose Social Services annual report said the 
following: 
 

As part of the government’s welfare reform strategy, a 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

Special Investigations Branch of the department was 
established, reporting to the Assistant Deputy Minister. 
 
The purpose of this Branch was to investigate abuse of 
social assistance and to recommend charges of fraud. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is not what this government is about. This 
government is about building independence for Saskatchewan 
people. But, Mr. Speaker, let me read to you an article in The 
Star Phoenix from those times. The headline is: 
 

‘Fraud squad’ skulker upsets victim. 
 
Suspecting that the well-dressed man peering through her 
window from a parked car was some sort of upper-class 
peeping tom, Angel McKay complained to city police. 
 
She was flabbergasted by what police later told her. The 
suspicious gentleman was a “fraud squad” officer for the 
Department of Social Services [Mr. Speaker] assigned to 
watch her house to make sure she wasn’t living with a 
man. 
 
[She goes on to say] “I was really freaked out about it, 
because Social Services for one thing had the right, and for 
another, because there was nothing either I or police could 
do about it,” McKay, 34, said in the interview. 

 
That is what they call welfare reform. If you look at the Sask 
Party’s approach in other areas, you see the same kinds of 
attitudes — not an approach that helps people, that redirects 
people, that lifts people up like they claim they want to do, but 
an approach that is about punishment and anger. 
 
Remember boot camps, Mr. Speaker? They don’t want to admit 
that any more, don’t want to admit that any more, just like they 
don’t want to admit the rest of their history. 
 
Let’s talk about another Saskatchewan Conservative Party 
policy related to poverty and social assistance. How about core 
services review? Everyone remembers the first leader of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party saying: 
 

One initiative that I believe holds tremendous value for 
Saskatchewan is a project launched by [BC] Premier 
Campbell called the Core Services Review. 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government will launch a similar 
Core Services Review in this province within 30 days of 
taking office. 

 
Mr. Speaker, remember that. In BC [British Columbia], those 
policies the Saskatchewan Conservative Party said they liked 
resulted in a training wage that is $2 under the minimum wage 
for the first $500 worked. Mr. Speaker, that’s not good for 
people in poverty or near the poverty line and it’s not good for 
young people either. 
 
In case the new Leader of the Opposition claims he wasn’t part 
of that policy, I’d like to remind this Assembly that on the new 
leader’s website he offered this policy: 
 

Make government smarter, smaller and more efficient by 

launching a Core Services Review of every government 
program . . . commission, agency and crown corporation. 

 
Kind of sounds the same, doesn’t it, Mr. Speaker? The new 
leader agreed with the old leader on core services review. But 
the new leader never mentions the old leader or the new party’s 
glorious past. What a mess, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we on 
this side of the House are about building independence for 
people and the opposition over there is about surveillance. 
 
A moment ago, Mr. Speaker, I talked about the BC training 
wage and young people. I would like to share with this House 
and the people of Saskatchewan, I would like to give them a 
taste of, a taste of what some of the other members of the 
opposition think about the minimum wage and the opposition’s 
approach to social policy. I contrast that with our approach, an 
approach about building independence. 
 
The member for Indian Head-Milestone said: 
 

. . . I really think that a fair labour policy is letting the 
market take care of itself . . . that takes care of a lot of . . . 
problems when it comes to a fair wage policy. 

 
I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker, but I think that sounds 
like no minimum wage and that’ll definitely help young people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t end there. The old leader of the 
opposition had this to say to low-income earners and young 
people: I’ll tell you what happens if the minimum wage is 
where it is fairly low, Mr. Speaker; it stimulates the 
employment, particularly for young people. 
 
A low minimum wage — do you think that’s good social 
policy, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t worked 
in the Deep South and it hasn’t worked in the Third World and 
it won’t work here, Mr. Speaker. It won’t work here. 
 
I want to return to the core services review and its effect on 
social policy. In BC, the core services review resulted in an 
average 25 per cent cut to all public programs. Will that help 
people? Or how about the 23 per cent cut in early childhood 
development programs? I imagine that’s going to help alleviate 
poverty. 
 
Remember the member from Lloydminster when he was 
opposition economic critic, Mr. Speaker. He told reporters that 
a Saskatchewan Conservative Party government would likely 
implement the BC model. And also remember, the member 
from Wood River said he was in favour of general downsizing 
of government. And the member from Melfort said, once 
reviewed, government should be redefined because it cannot 
offer all the services it does now. The last leader articulated 
their policy best, Mr. Speaker: we think the solution is smaller 
government; I believe there’s room for much smaller 
government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Slash and burn, Mr. Speaker, that’s their policy. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re building a future. We’re building independence for 
Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re 
about. Mr. Speaker, when I look over there, they’re about slash 
and burn. 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, in 2003-04 over 7,600 low-income working 
families per month, many of them single parent families, 
received a benefit from the program, the average monthly 
benefit being $185. In the provincial training allowance, the 
provincial training allowance . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Would you allow the 
member to make his statement, please. Order. Order. Order, 
please, members. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the provincial training 
allowance, the provincial training allowance provides financial 
assistance to individuals to increase their employment 
opportunities by upgrading their education and skills. There’s a 
monthly allowance administered through Saskatchewan 
Learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to return finally to the Ronald Reagan 
discipleship of the new leader and the devotion of that 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party to transplanting American 
right-wing policies into Canada. I want to quote from another 
press report about the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

. . . in a press scrum on the day he was acclaimed as leader 
he suggested that innovative free enterprisers could solve 
the problems (presumably financial) of single parent 
mothers. 
 

In the US, they have privatized social services. Ronald Reagan 
did a lot of that, Mr. Speaker. Is that the opposition of the . . . Is 
that the plan of the opposition, privatize Social Services? 
Perhaps we’ll return to the days of no public welfare. 
 
Here’s a quote from the new leader: 
 

We can still turn this thing around in our province if we try 
some policies economically that frankly we haven’t tried 
in six decades. 

 
Are they talking about economic and social policies from the 
’30s, Mr. Speaker? How will that work? 
 
Is that what the member from Kindersley was saying when he 
said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, about Tommy Douglas. He said 
this about Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . whose policies have hurt this province more than any 
single individual in this province’s history. And let’s be 
absolutely clear about that. 
 

That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker — that’s what he said. 
 
Further on our Building Independence, Mr. Speaker, we also 
provide employment supports for persons with disabilities. And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to move that this Assembly 
endorse Saskatchewan Building Independence program, which 
supports low-income families and has reduced the number of 
social assistance cases to the lowest level in 14 years. Thank 
you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview and seconded by the member for Moose 
Jaw North that this Assembly endorse Saskatchewan’s Building 
Independence program, which supports low-income families 
and has reduced the number of social assistance cases to the 
lowest level in 14 years. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure for me to enter into this debate which I think, in many 
ways, Mr. Speaker, when we stop and think about it, spells a 
significant difference between the two sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to do is to support the motion moved 
by the Hon. member for Saskatoon Fairview. I note that he has 
spelled out in ways that have been rather uncomfortable for the 
other side of the House to hear, the kinds of messages about 
support for people who need assistance in order to build their 
own personal independence and the kinds of notions that come 
from the right wing. And, Mr. Speaker, I think they stand 
starkly different from those policies which have been 
implemented in this province for the last eight years, have made 
a significant difference in the quality of life of a large number 
of our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in 1997, the Building Independence program 
was introduced. The Hon. member for Fairview outlined some 
of the points. I want to expand on that a bit. But since then, 
there has been a drastic difference in the lives of a number of 
folks and it’s based on a basic understanding about what 
poverty is. 
 
[11:15] 
 
There was a decision made, Mr. Speaker, a very concrete and 
specific decision made on the side of the New Democratic Party 
government that we were going to tackle child poverty in this 
province. And we were going to do something real that would 
make a real difference for real people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s exactly what has happened. 
 
We understand, Mr. Speaker, that here’s the reality. The reality 
is that kids do not grow up in poverty in some form of isolation. 
When kids grow up in poverty, it’s because they grow up in 
homes in which their parents are poor. That’s the reality. 
 
And if you want to do something, Mr. Speaker, that is real, that 
is going to make a difference in the lives of those families and 
particularly those children, then you have to address in real 
ways the ability of those adults who are their parents to remove 
themselves from poverty. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 
has been happening over the course of the last eight years in 
this province. And what a difference it’s made. 
 
In many ways, one of the basic concepts that differentiates the 
two sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, are often found in that 
age-old debate about work for welfare as supported by the right 
wing and, Mr. Speaker, work for wages and the dignity of work 
that is supported by the social democrats and the New 
Democratic Party Government of Saskatchewan. 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

And, Mr. Speaker, we decided that it made sense to make some 
changes. Truth of the matter was, Mr. Speaker, prior to that 
time in Saskatchewan, and in fact across Canada, you could 
make a solid argument that there were many, many cases in 
which people were literally better off receiving social assistance 
than working. And we looked at that and we said, that doesn’t 
make any sense. That doesn’t make any sense for those 
families, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t make any sense for our 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we decided, Mr. Speaker, was to implement some 
policies that would truly make a difference and that would 
understand that when a family is earning their income through 
the dignity of work, that makes not only a difference — and it 
should ought not to make only a difference in terms of the 
income — because the truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, since 
the beginning of Building Independence, every single family in 
Saskatchewan is better off working than not working. And that 
was not the case. And that is an essential difference that has 
come about as a result, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What a terrible position to put a family into, to have to make a 
decision to not work in order to have better circumstances for 
their family. Mr. Speaker, we changed all that. Not only are 
people better off financially by working today, they’re better off 
in a number of ways, and through holistic policies, Mr. Speaker, 
that touch a number of lives in ways . . . that touch people’s 
lives in a number of different kinds of ways that reinforce each 
other. 
 
Truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that today there are some 
20,000 or more Saskatchewan families who are better off, better 
off in a whole host of ways because of Building Independence. 
Since Building Independence was introduced, the social 
assistance caseload in families has dropped by 41 per cent in 
our province to its lowest level since 1991. Truth of the matter 
is, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan today there are more than 
7,300 fewer families receiving assistance than there were 
before. But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 
today there are more than 16,000 children who are not growing 
up in social assistance families as a result of Building 
Independence. 
 
And I’ve argued many times, Mr. Speaker, that not only is it 
better for families today and over the course of the last eight 
years, but the real benefits of Building Independence will be 
found a generation from now, as those children who grow up in 
a family in which they understand the dignity of income 
through work and set their own aspirations and make their own 
decisions about their own lives, that Saskatchewan will truly 
feel the ongoing benefits of social, of the social programs which 
have resulted in building independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member for Fairview said, Building 
Independence is not a single program, anybody with a half a 
sense about understanding poverty understands that there is no 
single solution to addressing the issues of poverty. And there is 
probably no single issue that faces our society, and in fact all 
Canadian society, than addressing realistic the issue of poverty 
and enabling families to move out of poverty into 
independence. 
 
And so we have here in Saskatchewan the employment 

supplement which enables a family, when they’re a low-income 
family — not necessarily receiving assistance, a low-income 
family who is working — to receive additional income to 
support their cost of living and to enhance their earned income, 
and that makes a very big difference. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
before Independence the after-tax income for a single parent 
with two children would have been about $17,750. Here were 
are, 2005, eight years later, Mr. Speaker, that single parent with 
two children, earning minimum wage, will have an income of 
$23,600, an increase of $6,000 per year because of the 
combination of support through Building Independence. Mr. 
Speaker, that makes a difference. 
 
But the fact of the matter is as well, that it is common, 
unfortunately, that children in families who are poor experience 
health problems to a higher degree than most. And one of the 
most valuable aspects of the Building Independence program, 
Mr. Speaker, is the family health benefit which gives to 
children the health benefits they need and that unfortunately 
caused, unfortunately caused parents previously to remove 
themselves from employment to stay on assistance to have the 
health protection that they needed for their children who were 
sick. 
 
Add to that, Mr. Speaker, the child benefit, the child benefit, a 
national program instituted in this province, taken to the nation, 
adopted by the nation, and now contributing to the quality of 
life of low-income families not only in Saskatchewan but across 
the country. 
 
Add to that, Mr. Speaker, the provincial training allowance 
which enables people to receive support, financial support, for 
training in a way that comes to them with a sense of dignity. 
The child care subsidies that enable families to have the 
comfort of knowledge of knowing that their children are being 
well taken care of as they’re off earning the family income, Mr. 
Speaker, supports, very importantly, supports for people with 
disabilities to gain access to employment. Unfortunately, way 
too many, way too many of our people in Saskatchewan who 
live in poverty are people who live with disabilities, and that’s 
the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has made significant 
progress in making resources available to overcome the barriers 
between an individual and the workplace. Mr. Speaker, Jobs 
First and the transitional employment announcement, 
transitional employment allowance enabling people who come 
looking for assistance — that before needing to move into the 
social assistance program — enabling them to find the thing 
that they most want in order to bring income and dignity to their 
lives. And that’s work. 
 
And it’s working, Mr. Speaker. And the numbers and the 
number of people working is going up, while the number of 
people requiring assistance is going down. And the incomes are 
going up, and the quality of life is improving for low income 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, and this has to 
be a holistic program when you look at it, Child Care 
Saskatchewan — the commitment to expand the number of 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

child care spaces by some 1,200 over four years — in place, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, the Canada-Saskatchewan career and 
employment services which provides a whole range of services 
in a way that brings them available to Saskatchewan people in a 
very accessible way. And that enhances their sense of dignity 
and self-confidence, as they engage in improving their lots in 
life, their education, their entry into the workforce, gaining the 
experience that enables them to build their future for them and 
their families with a sense of confidence. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a housing program that recognizes 
that for many low income families and particularly those with 
children, the importance of a decent place to live in a 
neighbourhood that they can call their own, as the children go 
to a school that they can call their own, and they can look 
forward to a future that they call their own, in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we enter our second century as a province, we 
can do that with a great deal of confidence and optimism, 
knowing that this is a place for all families to build their future. 
And to do that with confidence because there is a government in 
Saskatchewan today that over the course of the last eight years 
has implemented social programs that have made a huge 
difference for those who have been the most vulnerable among 
us in our society. A chance to look forward with a sense 
confidence and optimism for themselves and for their children, 
as active participants in a promising future in our second 
century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is why, that is why, when we stop and think about it, 
in our Saskatchewan, and we reflect on what goes on in this 
province, in this province — and we think about this often 
hurried and very troubled world in which we live, Mr. Speaker 
— that Saskatchewan people conclude, you know, the world 
could use a little more Saskatchewan. And one of the reasons is, 
Mr. Speaker, is because of the Building Independence program. 
I support enthusiastically the motion moved by hon. member 
for Fairview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a privilege to rise today to speak to the motion brought 
forward by the government today. And we certainly, the 
Saskatchewan Party certainly agrees with the premise of 
building independence for people and for low-income families 
and their children in Saskatchewan. But we believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is so much more that could be done to assist 
individuals to make the transition from welfare to work. And 
we do agree that the intent of the government’s Building 
Independence program is positive and certainly needs to be 
explored further. 
 
We need to provide individuals with financial support to assist 
them in moving from welfare to work, and we need to 
recognize the important role that access to quality child care 
plays in enabling parents to acquire and maintain employment. 
And we fully understand that education and skills training is 

essential if individuals and families are to build long-term 
careers in Saskatchewan. And we also believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that reducing poverty and allowing families to build assets is 
essential for the long-term stability of families. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Building Independence strategy has allowed the 
province to take steps towards achieving these goals, but there 
is much more that can be done and needs to be done and in 
many cases a different approach taken to achieving these goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts indicate that we do need to do more. 
Let’s look at hunger and poverty in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We know that hunger is a key measure of 
poverty in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, sadly this is very 
evident in, especially in some of our neighbourhoods in Regina 
and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, food bank usage is up over 37 per 
cent between 2003 and 2004, and amongst children food bank 
usage is up by 24 per cent. Consistently and persistently, Mr. 
Speaker, those that work directly with providing food services 
at the food banks have called on this government to address the 
concerns that they raise. The Saskatchewan Party has also 
continued to raise this issue, that the government needs to do 
more. 
 
It was the former premier, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Romanow, who 
made a commitment almost 10 years ago that under his charge, 
that he would eliminate food banks in Saskatchewan. That 
certainly did not happen and as we have witnessed, that the 
usage of food banks has escalated. We also can remember when 
another member, the member from Saskatoon, indicated that we 
need: 
 

. . . the New Democratic Party are committed to ending the 
need for food banks in this province. [And] We in the New 
Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, [he said, I believe he 
quoted this in the House, said that we] will endeavour to 
do that in our first term of office. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, sadly this is not happening. What we have 
witnessed today is that this government has thousands of dollars 
to spend on patronage and corruption — in the health district in 
Saskatoon, as an example — and yet they do not have the 
dollars needed to eliminate the use for food bank in the 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, this is an ongoing legacy of this 
government, is that they simply do not get their priorities 
correct. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP had not raised the food allowance 
in the province for 20 years. And in the budget they raised it by 
$10 a month — that’s $120 per individual in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, sadly I do not believe that 
that’s going to make much of a dent in the poverty that many of 
these families place. So again I’m sure that the families across 
Saskatchewan, who are hearing of yet another misdirection and 
another missed priority of this government, are wondering how 
they can afford to spend $13,000 in this case of two CEOs for 
one health district, and yet they wonder every day how they’re 
going to put food on the table for their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not enough merely to talk about, as the 
government has now, they’ve brought in a rental program. And, 
Mr. Speaker, although this is a laudable program in some ways, 
we believe that the most important thing for families is that they 
have home ownership. And the whole rental supplement 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

program raises a number of issues, Mr. Speaker, and key among 
them is who really is going to benefit from this new rental 
housing supplement. Will it be the actual people that are 
requiring adequate housing at an affordable rate, or will much 
of the benefit go to the landlords that own the properties that 
these people are renting? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, again we believe that home ownership 
should be the key. Because when people own their own home 
they can become stable in a community. Their children can 
continue to attend the same school year after year, and they 
become . . . They receive a sense of belonging and security and 
therefore they do better at school. And we believe that that 
should be the goal in Saskatchewan, is to helping those that 
need adequate housing attain ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also look at the high taxes that low-income 
workers in Saskatchewan are faced with, and we believe that 
there is a key way to assist in that. And, Mr. Speaker, that is by 
increasing the personal exemption so that people in 
Saskatchewan actually do get a real increase in their take-home 
pay. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are dozens of families and children in need 
in Saskatchewan, and the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment is involved in providing these services to 
children. But in many cases these services can and should be 
provided by community-based organizations who deliver them 
much more efficiently, effectively, and who actually have a 
pulse on their communities and understand the real needs and 
are there to demonstrate and to actually see positive results. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we look at this government that is in 
power today and we realize that in many cases what they are 
doing is moving the control and the delivery of programs from 
community-based organizations under government. And we 
find that that is not acceptable; that these programs should be 
delivered by community-based organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also look at the First Nations in Saskatchewan 
and the high unemployment that is faced in many of those 
neighbourhoods. And certainly we need . . . The government 
needs to speak directly through and with the grassroots of First 
Nations to address their concerns and to find ways to make 
improvements in their ability to attain employment and to stop 
poverty in their communities. 
 
And another area, Mr. Speaker, is the lack of adequate support 
for child care. And, Mr. Speaker, in many cases we have 
neighbourhood care that is available and the government is 
moving forward on putting roadblocks in place, not allowing 
parents to choose where they want their children to go but 
actually shutting down private daycares and legislating whether 
parents can take their children there or not. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing against in Saskatchewan a 
child going home and being a latchkey kid, quote, but there is a 
law against them going to a neighbourhood home and having 
good care and support after school. So, Mr. Speaker, I would 
wonder what the priority of this government is. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government must look at this and realize that 
parents should have the right to choose where their children go. 
And if they feel that their children are secure and they support 
the care that they are receiving, that should be their decision, 
not the government’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess the question that we have is if government 
is so committed to improving assistance and support in the 
province, then why is there a cut in many of the areas in the 
budget for Department of Community Resources and 
Employment? There’s a cut in the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, 
and there’s also a cut in housing. Last year when I questioned 
about the cut in housing, I was assured that that was a one-year 
solution only, and that it would be addressed this year. It has 
not been. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party does believe that we 
need to have a reason and we need to have a strong policy to 
move families from welfare to work, so that at the end of the 
day it is the families and it is their children that actually receive 
the benefit of this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we believe that we should strengthen 
income support for individuals and families. We should reduce 
hunger. We should increase jobs and skill training so that there 
are real jobs at the end of the day and not just make-work 
projects. We believe that there should be a real desire to 
actually have people retain their own . . . or to be able to 
maintain employment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re working with . . . we believe that the 
employers need to be part of the decision process so that there 
are real jobs for people at the end of the day. And we promote 
home ownership and we believe that parents should have a say 
in how their children are cared for if they do require daycare. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP programs always sound great, and 
in many cases they are, have great goals; but we believe that 
there has to be true results at the end of the day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very proud today to get up in this Assembly and endorse 
Saskatchewan’s Building Independence program which 
supports low-income families and has reduced the number of 
social assistance cases to the lowest number in 14 years. 
 
You know, I want to start out on a fairly personal note, Mr. 
Speaker. When you see young children you say, what affects 
young children? One of the big things that affects young 
children is the role models in their life. And there’s no greater 
role model that any child has than their parent. 
 
And what makes that parent a good role model? Well you 
know, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that makes parents a good 
role model is that they are working — working in the 
community, working in employment; that they’re making 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

improvements in their life, that they have pride in themselves, 
and that they have a level of independence where they are able 
to control what happens in their own life. 
 
We used to have a social assistance system in the province, and 
I would say in Canada — whether it was with the First Nations 
or other people — that was very paternalistic. It was a system 
that decided that everybody else knew better what was good for 
people. And we’ve gone to a building independence system 
where we’re really focusing on families having the adequacy to 
be employed, to get education. 
 
And I want to be clear about some facts because we’ve heard a 
lot of things that were not factual from the previous speaker and 
I want to be clear on what the facts are here. 
 
I’ll use Regina as an example. In Regina we’ve gone from 
9,000 families on social assistance to 6,000. Every single one of 
those 3,000 families that has moved off assistance is materially 
much better off than they were when they were on assistance. 
We heard the speaker from Moose Jaw mention that a single 
parent who would have been receiving $17,000 while on 
assistance, now with the Building Independence program 
receives $23,000 a year. 
 
And it’s not just the money, Mr. Speaker. These programs 
include health benefits. The child benefit for a family of that 
size, the child benefit would be around $800 a month. There’s 
the employment supplement for low-income working people. 
There’s HomeFirst which not only allows home ownership but 
home renovation and repair. There’s the child nutrition and 
development programs that operate through schools and 
daycares and the good food basket program and community 
kitchens. 
 
And as well, of course, there’s many excellent child care centres 
today that provide a professional level of early learning and care 
where parents can drop off their children knowing that they’re 
in a safe environment with good developmental programs. As 
well, the transportation programs that are taking place are 
giving people a huge amount of freedom for independence and 
to participate in the community. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not enough. We know that people 
who are making big changes in their life need supports as well. 
The KidsFirst program actually goes into homes and offers 
those supports to families. I was in a KidsFirst home a few 
weeks ago with the police chief and the mayor of Regina. And 
they were a young couple; their home was very nice. They were 
involved in our housing programs as well and they were getting 
on with their lives, Mr. Speaker. They were building their 
independence and looking after the kids. And you can see 
first-hand the very positive effect these programs are having on 
supporting families to make changes. 
 
As well, we have a pre-kindergarten program where 
four-year-olds in 80 community schools receive play-based 
preparation for moving ahead with the opportunities in their 
life. 
 
And I want to contrast this, Mr. Speaker, with the ideology of 
the members opposite, who I think their policies can summed 
up in two words, boot camps and food stamps. There’s no 

question in my mind that they think that the way you get people 
to change is through punitive approaches to people’s lives. 
 
And recently I was reading some research in the newspaper by a 
leading expert on teen development who said that punitive 
measures are not what makes young people change. What 
makes young people change is support, guidance, mentoring, 
and the proper kinds of supports in their world. 
 
I want to particularly talk about the quote from the leader of the 
party opposite at his convention, where behind closed doors, 
yes, they advocated a raise in the basic allowance. But I think 
the fine print is what matters, Mr. Speaker, or, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The quote from Gormley, when he was interviewed on March 3 
of this year, was asked specifically about this business of 
helping to ensure that people on social assistance have enough 
to eat. And he said, you know we need to look at both 
accountability to ensure that the food allowance is used for its 
intent and purpose. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, is he talking about food stamps? How do 
you ensure that someone uses their food money for food? Are 
you going to follow them to the supermarket? Are you going to 
drop a box of carrots off at the house? This is the kind of 
thinking . . . I’m not surprised to hear that Ronald Reagan is his 
idol because this is the kind of thinking, Mr. Speaker, that 
causes people, that causes people to be very concerned about 
what the real agenda of this government is. And it is probably 
no surprise to anyone that in fact that person is a great actor, 
because I think that that would give him a lot in common with 
the members opposite as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I would like to hear 
someone from the members opposite contradict the notion that 
boot camps and food stamps are their approach to these issues. I 
have not seen any evidence in anything I’ve read. And of course 
because their last convention was conducted in secret, nobody 
knows what they actually said behind closed doors. And 
certainly we’d be very happy today to determine whether or not 
the intention to make sure that people use their food allowance 
only for its intent and purpose, how exactly they intend to carry 
that out, and whether in fact food stamps are their objective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done a number of things, actually working 
with the community to make sure that the school programs have 
enough resources. And in this budget — which I’m hoping the 
members opposite support — we increased the programs for the 
schools, for the child cares. And certainly people were very 
happy about that. 
 
But as well, I’ve asked a provincial committee of all the people 
involved in food security to meet and to make recommendations 
to myself of what they think are the best things we could do in 
order to improve this situation even further. And they’re doing 
that right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m looking forward 
to the support we can get from the people out in the community 
who are on the front lines doing this work every day. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I know that in previous elections the 
members opposite have promised to achieve a 25 per cent 
reduction in the number of people on social assistance. Well, 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve achieved a 41 per cent reduction. And again 
I emphasize that every single one of those families is 
considerably materially better off than they were before. 
 
And to just clear up a few small factual points. There are home 
ownership programs. And people who go into jobs in the 
Building Independence program go into real jobs with real 
employers. These are not make-work projects. These are jobs 
that are posted, and people get them just like anybody else gets 
a job. And they are becoming real members of the work 
community and real members of the community we live in. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’m very proud of the work 
we’ve been doing. I’m very supportive of the resolution we’re 
debating today. And I challenge the members opposite to 
explain to me in what way they have changed off of their 
previous stated policies of boot camps and food stamps because 
I haven’t seen it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly as I go through all my quotes from debates in this 
legislature, from policy documents, from campaign documents, 
the evidence I see, Mr. Speaker, is more of the same 
paternalistic attitude towards people that has caused 
independence to be a problem in the past. And we want to 
support people on the path to change in their life and having a 
better situation for themselves and their children. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will support this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
Why is the member for Athabasca on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 
member for Athabasca. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
wanted to take this opportunity to welcome a school group that 
has travelled many, many miles to be here today and to also 
thank the Assembly for taking a few minutes to introduce them 
and to recognize them. 
 
In the Speaker’s gallery, accompanied by Ms. Gloria Belcourt, 
are a number of students from Minahik Waskahigan School, 
which is in Cree translated to Pinehouse School. Mr. Speaker, 
they travelled a long, long ways to be here today, and I want to 
take this opportunity to welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
And just to quickly explain, right now we’re debating a issue on 
family support. And this is what we’re doing at this stage. 
 
[11:45] 
 

And to also point out, Mr. Speaker, that this group represents 
the community of Pinehouse. They’re grade 12 students, so 
their future does indeed look bright. And to also point out that 
the community of Pinehouse with a few good, strategic partners 
have raised over half a million dollars towards the construction 
of a new arena for that community, and they’re also continuing 
to build from there. And I want to publicly offer my support for 
them to get more support for the new arena. They’ve gone a 
long ways as a community. So very quickly, in Cree: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So I just indicated that we will be sitting together and meeting 
after we’re done, so I’d ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome these students from Pinehouse school. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Saskatchewan’s Building Independence Program 
[continued] 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d also like 
to take this opportunity to welcome the students from Pinehouse 
school and I hope they enjoy the debate this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it goes out without question that 
everyone in the House here believes in building a better 
independence strategy. That’s the ultimate goal, naturally, to 
help people make the transition from welfare to work. 
 
And we all know, every member in here I’m sure knows, either 
has family members or friends or neighbours or constituents 
that have problems. They may have problems with children; or 
they may have physical, mental, or emotional challenges that 
they need help with. And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
we must do a better job in helping these people. 
 
In most cases we don’t hear about these situations because 
generally the extended family usually helps with members of 
their own family, or the community in general helps out with 
these individuals. But there’s certainly a role to play for the 
government to help out in individual cases where family and the 
extended families just cannot cope with the situation and must 
need help and resources, quite frankly, to help their friends and 
family members through their hard times. 
 
And so certainly the independence strategy is positive but, Mr. 
Speaker, just recently I had a meeting with the Wilkie 
Independent Living Services Inc. and, Mr. Speaker, I mean, 
they were quite concerned by the government cutbacks. And 
these community-based organizations, of course, are basically 
run by volunteers. I sat with a number of people, having coffee 
with them, and they outlined the problems that they have in 
their community-based organization. And just to quote from a 
letter that the minister received recently, and I’d just like to put 
it on the record, that the Wilkie Independent Living Services 
Inc. says: 
 

This letter is to stress . . . [the] enhance[d] the efforts of 



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

. . . [the] umbrella Association. We continue to work with 
the Department . . . to provide an environment where 
individuals with disabilities can receive quality services 
and opportunities. These volunteer driven organizations 
require the government’s financial support to the proposed 
human resource plan in order to continue their efforts. 

 
And this is a letter asking for continued support — not reduced 
support, but continued support — from the government to their 
community-based organizations, to the community of Wilkie, 
like so many communities in the province that have 
organizations, help to the volunteers. The government has 
added on an amendment to our 100 ideas for the next 100 years. 
And their amendment to our plan was to include volunteers, the 
support of volunteers in the Saskatchewan Party 100 plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, but we see on the ground that that is not 
necessarily happening. As this example — the CBO 
[community-based organization] from Wilkie — they’re saying 
they’re not getting the support; they’re not getting the financial 
resources. And at the end of the day . . . First of all, the 
volunteers are generally older people themselves that are retired 
and have taken their time and energy to help various people in 
the community. But they do not . . . 
 
The Independent Living group in Wilkie are having troubles 
making ends meet. And that’s going to affect their clients — the 
people that are trying to get off welfare, trying to get jobs. But it 
also includes many people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at the end 
of the day, never will be able to hold down a full-time job. 
They’re people that maybe will be able to work part-time. They 
may strive to work full-time, but I mean there’s people — we 
all know people — that are challenged and are never going to 
be able to reach that goal. And we as a society must, Mr. 
Speaker, help these people, help the organizations, and the 
volunteers that want to lend a hand up to these individuals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we brought up in question period today 
about the community gardens in Regina. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
this is open to any number of people, but I’m sure it’s 
low-income people that have found a way to grow their own 
produce. They may not even have a backyard, so living in 
apartments or low-income housing, they don’t have a backyard 
to develop a garden. This is their opportunity to grow cheap, 
healthy food in the city of Regina. And it’s unfortunate that this 
land is being taken away from them. 
 
And I understand the challenge around an area that needs to be 
developed for a very good reason. I understand it’s for senior 
housing and that’s a laudable reason to develop this land. But I 
believe the province must make sure that people in these 
community gardens have another area where they can plant 
their gardens and help them find that area and make it 
accessible. 
 
The other thing is, many of these people probably aren’t able to 
travel great distances. It needs to be in the community. And I 
believe that’s a priority of this government, that they should 
look at that and make sure that these low-income families are 
able to grow high quality, healthy food for their children. 
 
We all recognize the problems with addiction. Low-income 
people probably have a higher rate of addictions; poor nutrition, 

which causes problems for the students at school. They go to 
school hungry — and we all know the stories — and this is 
certainly an area where the government can continue to help 
these individuals with these community gardens. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a member from Saskatoon has told a story 
a number of times. And it’s an example of where training, and 
education, and help from the community, and the provincial 
government’s needed. There was a program, I believe in the 
Riversdale community, where a community-based organization 
at Christmastime was giving free turkeys away to families. And 
so, they would ask the parents to come to the school with their 
children; they would get a free turkey. 
 
And they noticed that the families were leaving the school. 
They were throwing the free turkey, the frozen turkey, in the 
garbage outside the school. And this was so disheartening to the 
people that were donating these turkeys and obviously they 
didn’t know why this was happening. Well why would someone 
throw a free turkey away, especially at Christmas? 
 
So they done some studying. They’ve asked people what the 
problem is. Well the problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was these 
individuals, these families — there’s single parents, there’s all 
sorts of types of families that — quite frankly, didn’t have the 
facilities, didn’t have an oven, a stove, to roast a turkey. And 
more importantly, they didn’t even have the skills to know how 
to do it and so it was beyond them. 
 
So the local group decided, well they’re going to make some 
changes. So they insisted on the families coming in. They gave 
them directions and help in preparing the turkey for Christmas. 
And so, it’s things like this that need to be done to give a hand 
up to individuals and families so that they can get on their own 
and off welfare and have the dignity of work and help these 
families get through their problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other obvious big area where it . . . especially when it’s 
the low- and middle-income families and either a single parent 
family or two parents that have to work, daycare is a serious 
concern. 
 
I know in Biggar we have just recently opened a daycare centre 
in Biggar and it’s so helpful to people that have jobs that are 
now able to take their children to the daycare and go on to their 
jobs. And it’s those types of programs are so very important and 
this is where this provincial government needs to recognize and 
fill in the gaps where the community needs help through grants 
or some level of funding. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot of talk about the 
federal government having a program for daycare. Well 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, all it has been is talk. And so I 
think it’s imperative that the provincial government lobby the 
federal government to get a daycare plan in place. Because at 
the end of the day it’s the people on the ground that it will help, 
and if it’s not available it hurts these people. 
 
Just think of a single mother that wants to work part time or full 
time that has a job available, and the children are not going to 
school. They’re too young. And it just about makes it 
impossible for these families to be able to get into a job to 
support themselves because there’s so many impediments in 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

their way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I only have a few seconds to go so just in my 
wrap-up comments I just believe that there is a better way to 
encourage people to get off welfare and on their own, and I 
think we’ll look at some different alternatives. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to start my remarks this morning quoting from the Western 
Catholic Reporter, an Edmonton, Alberta publication. And the 
title is, Mr. Speaker, “The Saskatchewan Advantage”. In the 
quote, Mr. Speaker, it says: 

 
The soul of a nation, or any other group of people can be 
seen in how it treats the most disadvantaged. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

In Canada, in recent years, we have made one significant 
improvement . . . [that’s] called the National Child Benefit 
and increased funding is helping to bring a lot of children 
out of poverty. 
 
Twelve years ago, the House of Commons passed a 
resolution to do its best to eliminate child poverty by the 
year 2000 . . . 
 
A report released earlier this month by the Canadian 
Council on Social Development found that Saskatchewan 
has done a much better job than either Alberta or Ontario 
in reducing child poverty, especially among single-parent 
families. Between 1993 and 1998, Saskatchewan cut the 
incidence of poverty among single-parent families from 51 
to 20 per cent. 
 
[Mr. Speaker,] . . . Saskatchewan spent $37 million on 
child benefit programs compared with $6 million in 
Alberta, a province with a population three times as large. 
 
Alberta Children’s . . . Minister Iris Evans downplays the 
CCSD report and says her department has doubled its 
budget since 1998. However, [and this is her speaking, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, however] we likely still have a long way 
to go to match the record of a province with far fewer 
economic resources than Alberta. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think I used that article to start my remarks to 
contrast the approach taken by New Democratic government in 
the province of Saskatchewan versus Tory governments around 
the country. Mr. Speaker, it says a great deal when a Tory 
government in Alberta, with far greater resources than the 
province of Saskatchewan has and three times the population, 
spends one-sixth the amount of money, one-sixth the amount of 
money that Saskatchewan taxpayers spend on the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s because the people here care and the 
government here cares for those who are the least advantaged in 
our society. And it’s not just recognized by ourselves in this 

province, Mr. Speaker; it’s recognized by others. It’s 
recognized by the Western Catholic Reporter, an Edmonton 
paper. And I think we should all be grateful in this province that 
they recognize that we do care about those people in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Building Independence is about putting people to 
work, getting them off social assistance. It’s not work for 
welfare. It’s work for wages, Mr. Speaker. It’s about giving 
people the skills to be employed within our society. It’s about 
giving them the ability to feel good about themselves and 
contribute as meaningful members of the workforce in our 
province. It’s about their dignity, Mr. Speaker. It’s about 
making them feel every bit as important as they have a right to, 
as equal contributing members of our society. And, Mr. 
Speaker, dignity goes a long way to help people, their children, 
their families to improve their situation beyond their first job, 
beyond their first home and working themselves to situations 
that at one time, Mr. Speaker, without a program like Building 
Independence, would have been outside their ability to do. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what it is all about. 
 
We’re not like the opposition Tories. Their only policies are 
boot camps and food stamps, Mr. Speaker. It’s about building 
or presenting opportunities for people to improve their own 
position in life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe on this side, work is the best path out 
of poverty, and we are taking a leadership role nationally — 
nationally, Mr. Speaker — in response to the issues of child and 
family poverty. Mr. Deputy Speaker, today at least 20,000 
families in Saskatchewan are better off because of the Building 
Independence program, and those families and their children 
have a much brighter future because of this program. And I 
think all Saskatchewan citizens should be proud of the program 
the Saskatchewan people have put forward for our citizens. 
 
[12:00] 
 
There’s been a 41 per cent drop in the number of families 
receiving social assistance, a reduction of over 7,300 families, 
and almost 16,000 children have left social assistance, Mr. 
Speaker. We have the lowest social assistance caseload since 
1991. Employment has reached all-time highs in the province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the rate of poverty for all persons has 
dropped from 11.4 per cent in 1996 to 9.5 per cent in 2001. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should all be proud. We should all be 
proud in this province of what we’ve accomplished. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to do even more. We want every citizen in 
this province to have the dignity of a job. We want every 
citizens of this province and every child in this province to have 
the opportunities of good education, meaningful employment, 
and a future that they can look forward to with hope. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what the members on this side of the House 
want. And I would hope that all members of this Legislative 
Assembly would share those views. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s sad because I don’t 
believe we all share that common view. I believe that we have 
very different approaches to how to deal with the young people 
in our society who need that extra help, need that extra step 
perhaps to have the same quality of future as all the other 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

citizens of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to work collectively to help any 
citizen in our province that for any reason is disadvantaged. 
And that’s what being a Saskatchewan citizen is about. That’s 
why in this great province medicare was founded. That’s why in 
this great province labour laws were first established. And 
that’s why in this great province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, human 
rights Act was founded. The child benefit was a creation of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the citizens of this province have 
contributed greatly to the social fabric of our country. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you will never see, never see on this side of the House 
policies like boot camps and food stamps. Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Prior to Building Independence, the province 
spent $322 million on social assistance and the now 
discontinued Family Income Plan. Last year the province’s 
expenditures for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement, and Saskatchewan 
Child Benefit were only $270 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That isn’t because, Mr. Speaker, we’re giving less money. It’s 
because of the program. Fewer people are needing, needing 
assistance from the government, Mr. Speaker. They’re out there 
working. They’re out there contributing, and they’re feeling 
good about what they’re doing in our communities. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that’s what it’s all about. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s about individuals reaching their own potential, working to 
achieve the things that they’ve always wanted to achieve. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the design of the Building Independence 
program has allowed them to achieve that. It’s allowed them to 
move from social assistance to a meaningful job. It’s allowed 
their children to have the opportunities they would not have had 
if they had been on assistance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It allows 
their children to understand the importance of a job within the 
family and the importance of the dignity and self-esteem that 
comes with knowing that you can look after yourself each and 
every day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does that do with the impact on 
poverty? The after-tax income for a single parent with two 
children receiving social assistance prior to the introduction of 
Building Independence was approximately $15,500. If he or she 
were working for minimum wage, the total average income was 
about $17,750. In 2005, the same parent working for minimum 
wage will have after income tax about $23,600, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, an increase of over $6,000 per year. 
 
It’s working, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Families are better off. 
Children are better off. And as result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
province is better off as well. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The 65-minute debate portion has 
ended. The 10-minute question and comment period will begin. 
I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Saskatoon Fairview. We’ve 
heard from members opposite about building the independence 

program, and we’ve also heard about a way of dealing with 
people. And I’d like to quote from an article, and it says: 
 

. . . it remains for us to consider remedies that at least 
mitigate, if not remove, the problem of the sub-normal 
family from midst of modern society. 
 
By “subnormal” we mean . . . a family whose mental 
rating is low, i.e. anywhere from high grade moron to 
mentally defective; 

 
My question to the member is, does he support this doctrine that 
was the doctrine of their founder and leader, Tommy Douglas? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we have on this side of the 
House nothing to learn from that opposition, whose leader said 
he was a disciple of Ronald Reagan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote to that member what this 
party has done for poverty of children. Saskatchewan children, 
low-income families, Mr. Speaker, are better off. Statistics 
Canada data shows that since 1996, the number of children in 
the province under 18 living under poverty dropped to 6.5 from 
8.8 in 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, let me tell you what the budget highlights, and 
that’s what the member should be talking about. They should be 
talking about the budget highlights that are in the 2005-06 
budget: 10 million in rental housing supplemented for 
low-income families, 2 million to assist low-income families 
with high rent, and 3 million to assist Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan’s adult’s basic allowance. Mr. Speaker, we have nothing to 
learn from those members over there. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to go back to the quote of the leader of the Conservative 
opposition where he says, both accountability to ensure the food 
allowance is used for its intent purpose. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is how do they intend to assure that? 
To the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy: how do they intend 
to do that, and do they intend to reinstitute the fraud squad, 
where they following single parents around with TV cameras? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I 
represent the Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Question and comment 
period is supposed to be one at a time. I recognize the member 
for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, there is 
no Conservative opposition. I represent the Saskatchewan Party 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

and would ask to be addressed accordingly. I was elected as a 
Saskatchewan Party MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party does believe in 
providing adequate food. But first of all, Mr. Speaker, the key 
to maintaining employment and having people move from 
welfare to work is a good job. And to have a good job, you need 
a growing economy where there are jobs that are available for 
people to attain. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party believes that that is the key to 
growth and to prosperity for everyone in Saskatchewan, 
including those that are on welfare today and are trying to move 
from welfare to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview. Earlier today in question 
period we’d raised the point of community gardens that are 
being tore up, and these people aren’t being allowed to use 
them, plus heritage sites possibly torn down. 
 
He talked about his motion and his motion about supporting 
independent living. These people that are trying to grow good, 
healthy food are trying to . . . A lot of these are low-income 
people, possibly people on welfare, that are trying to earn some 
extra food, have some extra food. So I take it . . . Does he 
support tearing up them gardens and destroying them heritage 
sites? Does he support that . . . in that by going against his 
motion on that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we support Building 
Independence and, Mr. Speaker, we support green living spaces 
in the city. Mr. Speaker, I think the question for those members 
is, where do they stand on food stamps? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they speak a lot about things, and they talk about 
their policies that they write about but, Mr. Speaker, what 
happens behind the closed doors? Mr. Speaker, what is the 
code? What about the nudge, nudge, wink, wink on the policies 
that they are talking about here? This is a very different 
policies, and nobody in Saskatchewan is going to believe this, 
Mr. Speaker. Nobody in Saskatchewan is going to believe this. 
 
The question that we should be asking them is, what do they 
think about food stamps? And what do they think about what 
their leader said on the radio station and the accountability that 
the people have to show for the money that they get for the food 
allowances? That’s the question for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question . . . If the hon. 
member for Wood River will take this question, I’ll direct it to 
him. If he won’t take the question, then I’ll direct it to the hon. 
member for Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is on record, the Leader of the 
Opposition is on record as saying that we need, and I quote 
from the John Gormley show of March 3: 
 

. . . we need to look at . . . accountability to ensure that the 
food allowance is used for its intent and its purpose . . .  
 

Now as we all know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is 
no food allowance. There’s a basic allowance, but I know there 
has been a position that has been taken by the opposition. And I 
would ask the hon. member for Wood River if he’ll take the 
question. If he won’t, then the hon. member for Weyburn, 
whether she would agree, whether she would agree with the 
statement made by her leader on the Gormley show on March 
3? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question, comment period is to 
the issue at hand, and I think the question is directed at 
Weyburn-Big Muddy if she chooses to . . . [inaudible] . . . And I 
recognize the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will answer the 
question. The member from Wood River is not part of the 
debate. And the member should know that, and knows the rules, 
and has . . . knew he could not ask the question of the member 
from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of the NDP is that under their watch, 
food bank usage has grown to a higher percentage than ever in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And it was the Romanow, when 
Romanow was the premier of this province, he was the one that 
said under his watch that they would eradicate food bank usage 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Where is there more poverty 
than in the very riding that he represents and now the Premier 
of this province represents? 
 
So for the NDP to say that somehow they have addressed the 
use . . . the food bank usage is incorrect and that the record 
shows exactly that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the member from Regina Rosemont. And in her comments she 
alluded to the former president, Ronald Reagan. And the 
question that I have, and I’m taking this from The Economist, a 
well-known British publication. He was on the front cover. And 
it said: “The man that killed communism.” So I guess it can be 
equated to him that he did dismantle a social welfare state. 
 
And I would like her comments on this: if the ensuing freedoms 
that happened for the people in the Soviet bloc were in fact a 
good thing at the cost of the dismantling of a social welfare 
state. 
 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’re getting to 
the heart of the matter here, and I go back to our question. If in 
fact your leader supports people being accountable for the food 
allowance being used . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Just to remind members to put all 
questions to the Chair. I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much for that 
reminder, Mr. Chair. So again I ask, how do you intend, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Put the comments to the Chair. I 
recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I must be getting tired, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to ask the members opposite again how they intend, 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure accountability that the food allowance is 
being used for its intent and purpose because I think what 
they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, is food stamps, and I want 
them to come clean. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member for Biggar. My question is, does he 
still believe in boot camps and food stamps? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll tell the 
member what I believe. And what I believe in is Saskatchewan 
Party’s 100 ideas to build permanent bridges for welfare people 
to work. And I’d like to have this opportunity to list some of 
them. If the member would like to look at idea no. 1, no. 3, 35, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is for 
the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
I was wondering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the member knows 
that in his very documents of his own government in the year of 
2001-02 there were two categories, one called the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, one called the Saskatchewan 
Child Benefit. Government spent $286 million in ’01-02. In the 
current document that we have before us those two categories, 
the expenditure is 217 million — a reduction of $69 million. 
 
Does the member from Saskatoon Fairview know that when he 
stands in this Legislative Assembly and criticizes the 
Saskatchewan Party for suggesting that if people leave Social 
Services they will save money? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the federal 
government . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize . . . 
Order. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the federal 
government has been increasing the amount of money that they 
have been putting in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington on a point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is not the time 
for questions in the seventy-five minute debate 10 minutes and 
10 minutes alone? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw North on the point of order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it has been long established that 
the . . . by the procedure of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that if time permitted for a question to be asked, that the 
member who was participating was enabled to answer, to 
respond to that question. 
 
It strikes me as a tad odd at the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the hon. member would want to have a question asked 
without hearing the answer. And I think past practice, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, clearly enables the question to be responded 
to. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I thank the member for the 
point of order and the member for responding. I think there 
does need to be some clarification on this issue. Traditionally 
there have been two ways of approaching this. One has been as 
soon as the 10 minutes approaches, it ends. Order. Order. 
 
Or alternatively in past practice recently that if there has been a 
question, similar to question period, that if a question is put then 
the answer is answered. So I do take the member’s point of 
order under advisement and we can clarify the rules. But at this 
point I will recognize the member for Fairview to finish his 
answer. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
government at one time funded this fully. The federal 
government has been funding it over the years, and as they have 
funded it our contributions have gone down. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The debate has now ended. 
Committee of the Whole. I do now leave the Chair so the House 
can go into Committee of the Whole. 
 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The item before the Assembly is Bill 
No. 304 of 2004-05, An Act respecting Concentra Financial 
Services Association, Association de services financiers 
Concentra and Concentra Trust, La Société de Fiducie 
Concentra. 
 
We’ll proceed through clause-by-clause consideration. We’ll 
start with clause 1. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: the short title, Bill No. 304 of 
2004-05, An Act respecting Concentra Financial Services 
Association. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 305 — The Saskatoon Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay. Next is the Bill No. 305 of 
2004-05, An Act to amend The Saskatoon Foundation Act, 
1994. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: Bill No. 305 of 2004-05, An 
Act to amend The Saskatoon Foundation Act, 1994. I recognize 
the member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 306 — The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis 
Repeal Act 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Next before the Assembly is Bill No. 
306 of 2004-05, An Act to repeal An act to incorporate Soeurs 
de la Charite de St. Louis, to dissolve that entity and to transfer 
the Assets and Liabilities of that entity to the Sisters of Charity 
of St. Louis of Calgary. 
 
Clause 1. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, enacts as follows. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I move the committee report 
the Bill without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. I recognize the member for 
Massey Place, Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The member has asked that the 
committee move and rise progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report item no. 1, Bill No. 304 without 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, as MLA for Saskatoon 
Sutherland, I move that Bill No. 304, The Concentra Trust Act, 
2005 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland that Bill 304 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 

Bill No. 305 — The Saskatoon Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report item no. 2, Bill No. 305 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 305, The Saskatoon Foundation Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland that Bill 305, The Saskatoon Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 
[12:30] 
 

Bill No. 306 — The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis 
Repeal Act 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
committee to report item no. 3, Bill No. 306 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, did you want to ask when it’ll be 
read a third time? 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I kind of thought you 
might be wondering that. Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
306, The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis Repeal Act be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moose Jaw North that Bill No. 306 be read a third time now 
and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Why is the member from Batoche on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Batoche has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I rise 
to introduce one of my mentors, the former MLA of Saskatoon, 
Humboldt. Ms. Arlene Julé is here with us today. I’d ask 
members to welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Motion No. 8 — Recognition of Distress in 
Agriculture Sector 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before I start to speak on the motion I would like to join with 
the member for Batoche in welcoming the former member from 
Humboldt, a colleague of mine. And we had gone through some 
very hard times together, some very good times, and they were 
all very enjoyable. So I want to welcome the member here 
today too, Mr. Speaker. 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that we’re about to debate this 
afternoon I think has great importance — especially in rural 
Saskatchewan, but for that matter all over the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll start by reading the motion, and then I 
have some words along with my colleague from Thunder Creek 
about what we’re talking about today, Mr. Speaker. And the 
motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly recognize that the plight of 
Saskatchewan farm families is worse this spring than it has 
been in decades, and the severity of cash flow problems 
this spring is causing severe stress and distress and 
hardship, not only in rural Saskatchewan, but other parts 
of the province that rely on agriculture-based businesses. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I guess I’d like to talk today about some of the 
reasons I feel that that stress is out there and what that stress is 
doing to farm families. And I’d just like to maybe review the 
NDP record over the past 12 or 13 years of how they have 
helped assist in the buildup of stress on farm families, created 
the problems that we have out there right now, with very little 
assistance from this NDP government. I go back, Mr. Speaker, 
to the early ’90s — I believe it was 1991-92 — when the NDP 
government under the former premier, Mr. Romanow, saw fit to 
cancel a GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program that 
was not the perfect program but was certainly better than 
anything that we’ve seen since. 
 
It was a program that farm families, including myself, relied on 
there as an insurance program and was bankable because when 
you were in the program the banking community would look at 
the program, see what your guarantee was, and would go 
accordingly — whether it was an operating loan you were 
looking for to purchase land, cattle, or whatever it was. But it 
was a bankable program that we could use, Mr. Speaker. And I 
don’t think the farmers in Saskatchewan will ever forgive the 
NDP for taking that program and totally breaking that contract 
with farmers and taking it away. And I believe the stress level 
in rural Saskatchewan started to mount at that time and for the 
past 12 or 13 years has been going up at a fairly high level, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We talked about the GRIP program being cancelled and 
replaced with what? Well we’ve gone on to the past few years 
where we had an AIDA program, a CFIP [Canadian farm 
income program] program. Now we have a CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] program. And it seems when 
they get to the point where they don’t know what to do with a 
program, they cancel it, call it a different name, make it more 
complicated for farmers, cost them more money to administer, 
and start all over again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess what we talked about in question period today and 
for a number of days is, where is this government’s 
commitment to farmers and ranchers and families in rural 
Saskatchewan to help them get through bad times? Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been through bad times before in this province and we 
will again. But I do believe that this year is probably the worst 
year that I have ever seen, and that includes the years that I was 
farming myself and the years now that I have been elected to 
this legislature. 
 
We have the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy], Mr. 

Speaker. We had frost on August 20 of last year. All these 
things adding up to the stress and the problems in rural 
Saskatchewan. And before this, Mr. Speaker, to add to the 
problem, we had low grain prices. So what we have now in 
many areas of the province is we have a large quantity of grain, 
low-quality grain, worth next to nothing, and adding to the 
stress of farm families in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another thing that the province did last year, Mr. Speaker, to 
add to the stress out there, and I think add to something that 
farmers relied on out there, was that they got rid of a number of 
ag reps in the province, closed a number of rural service 
centres, and these were offices that farmers relied on for 
information and assistance with their farming operations. And 
this government has totally cut programs that assist farm 
families in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about the budget this 
year. And I find it very amazing. In a year when this may be 
one of the worst years, if not the worst year that we’ve ever had 
in rural Saskatchewan to find money to put a crop in, to find 
money to pay last year’s bills off . . . which by the way, many 
farmers have not done at this point, do not have the cash. Many 
cannot pay their power bills. Many are even having a hard time 
finding dollars to put food on the table for their family. 
 
And this government saw fit to go from $404 million 
agriculture budget in the province of Saskatchewan last year, 
and this year’s budget, I find it amazing that they would have 
the nerve to cut that budget by about $140 million. And now 
we’re looking at about $264 million budget for agriculture in 
the province of Saskatchewan. At the same time we hear the 
Premier, we hear the Deputy Premier, we hear the Ag minister 
telling us how committed they are to be behind the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. Well the farmers I’m talking to, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, feeling they have out in rural Saskatchewan that this 
government may be behind them, but they’re a long, long way 
behind them. And there’s certainly no assistance coming from 
this government when it comes to farm families. 
 
In fact most of the farm families I talk to right now are hoping 
that there’s a good crop this year; we have good soil moisture to 
start with. But even as much as that, they’re hoping that this 
government will hurry up and call an election so we can turn 
this province around, get the economy of this province going. 
And maybe there will be with a new government, the 
government that’ll be the Saskatchewan Party government, will 
actually be committed to helping farm families in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the reasons being 
that right now most of rural Saskatchewan is represented by this 
side of the House. And I think that may be part of the problem, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there’s absolutely no one on that side 
of the House, number one, understands the problems in rural 
Saskatchewan and, number two, really cares about the problems 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the costs out there for farm families and 
some of the things that are putting them so far in debt, I’ll go 
through a list of them, Mr. Speaker. But taxes, taxes that farm 
families have to pay, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and one of those 
high taxes not being just municipal taxes because of the 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

downloading of this government onto municipalities, but the 
education tax. 
 
And I might add, and I know the members opposite have been 
quick to say, oh look at the money. We put 55 million into the 
education tax system which worked out to be approximately 8 
per cent of the total overall bill for education tax in rural 
Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan. But they’re forgetting 
to mention that in the past 13 years the education tax on 
farmland has skyrocketed, in many cases probably three and 
four times what it was when the NDP came to power in 1991. 
So they jacked it as usual. They jacked it away up, put the 
responsibility on farm families to pick up a larger and larger 
share of that education tax. 
 
And now when they return an 8 per cent return to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, want the farmers to say, oh what good guys they 
are. Well you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, haven’t heard that 
happen in rural Saskatchewan yet, and I doubt I will because 
what’s happened in rural Saskatchewan this year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is with reassessment out there and I know especially 
on . . . I know in many areas of the province, but I do know on 
the east side of the province that our assessments have jumped 
once again. 
 
Now I know municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are going to 
adjust their taxes that they need, the dollars that they need to 
run their municipalities accordingly. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
am not sure that that will carry through with the education tax 
because we have to remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in this 
budget alone, this government saw fit to freeze the foundation 
grant, the money for education. And I think the fear out in rural 
Saskatchewan is that, who’s going to be left to pick up the 
shortfall? 
 
We know the teachers now have a 2, 2, and 2 increase in wages. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the fear is out there once again as 
has happened in the past, it would be passed on to the local 
taxpayer. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a valid concern 
they have out there, and why I talk about that today is because 
it’s just another nail in the coffin of rural Saskatchewan, and it 
also is adding to the stress and hurt to farm families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, fuel prices are something that include 
taxes by this government and also have skyrocketed this spring. 
I have farmers calling me and telling me that diesel prices last 
spring were roughly 43 cents a litre, and it looks like this spring 
many of them are going to be paying 70 cents a litre for that 
same fuel to put this crop in. And they already are short of 
money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that fertilizer and chemical 
prices have skyrocketed in the last 10 years. All the input costs 
that farmers have out there have gone up. And yet they’re being 
asked by this government and everyone to supply the food for 
people of Saskatchewan and Canada at grain prices that we 
could go back to the 1930s and find comparisons of very close 
to the same value with input costs of the new century that have 
skyrocketed in the past 10, 15, 20 years. On top of that as I said 
before, we have a government here that’s there at every turn to 
knock you down when you try to get ahead. 
 
An example, in question period today was a good example, 

when we talked about slaughter plants out there. And we have 
members on that side of the House making commitments to 
ranchers and farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, actually 
playing politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because on one hand they 
get up at these meetings and they make commitments to these 
producers. The producers leave thinking well at least this time 
we’ve got the provincial government onside backing it. 
 
In this case it was a feasibility study that the Deputy Premier 
had made the commitment and promised to about 150 farmers 
that night, to the Beef Initiative Group, and they thought they 
were off and running. They thought they had a commitment to 
do the feasibility study and get on with what they had proposed 
to be a slaughtering plant, something that we’re told by that 
government has needed badly. And I agree; we definitely need 
these out there. But when we have a government that makes a 
commitment, we need a government that keeps that 
commitment, and we certainly are not seeing that for the last 
number of years — in fact I would say back about 13 years, 
since 1991. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think farmers find it amazing that last 
year this government found and had a windfall of probably 1.1, 
$1.2 billion. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s money more than they 
thought was coming in, attributed to the high oil and gas prices 
in this province and also attributed to the equalization dollars 
from the federal government. That is a big bonus coming into 
this province. 
 
What did they do? How did they get rid of that money, Mr. 
Speaker? Well we’re not sure because it certainly didn’t go into 
farm programs that this government has cut from farmers. In 
fact let’s talk about the CAIS program for a minute, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It took that government and that Agriculture minister 
until December to finally, at the last hour put his money into the 
CAIS program, causing far more stress than there needed to be 
because farmers knew it was not a bankable program when all 
they were going to get was the federal share of the dollars. 
 
And again this spring we’re seeing exactly a replay of what we 
saw last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . is that the Agriculture 
minister and the NDP government have said we can’t afford the 
2004 CAIS money to put in as our share. And far too often 
we’re hearing those same words out of that government, at the 
same time saying they’re behind the farmers. But when it comes 
time to put their money up, we’re not seeing that happen, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This year we know, again with the high oil prices, that probably 
revenues are going to be up at a minimum of 4 to $500 million, 
in fact at . . . valuing in the budget that a barrel of oil will be 
about $41. I think that’s a low guesstimate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and probably that the real number will be closer to 
another billion dollars in excess of what they actually had 
thought was coming into the provincial revenue and the 
provincial coffers. 
 
But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason for this is then they 
can cry poverty and say well this is why we can’t fund farm 
programs out there in Saskatchewan. And it’s a real myth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it’s certainly not fair to farm families out 
there. 
 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think for a minute the people on 
that side of the House — who always like to say they’re 
compassionate and are there to look out for people of 
Saskatchewan — understand for one minute what’s going on 
with farm families out there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know there are suicides happening out 
in rural Saskatchewan, and we know that you can’t totally point 
the finger and say it was directly because of what’s happening 
in agriculture. But any of the members on this side of the House 
that have had occasion, the unfortunate occasion, for something 
like that to happen in their community, knows that families do 
not talk about these things. We don’t advertise these things. 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know of situations where this 
has happened, and we all know in our communities what caused 
this problem. And it’s stress on farm families. 
 
It even goes further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we have 
family breakups in rural Saskatchewan because the stress has 
gone on and on and on. And there’s only so much farm families 
can actually do, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the problems that 
they got there. When you have a farmer that’s had his costs 
from last year not paid at this time of year and you’re worrying 
about how you’re going to put this crop in. We have examples 
of farmers saying, I might have enough money to put in 50 per 
cent of my crop, 60 per cent of my crop. They’re right up 
against it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s time this government 
backed up what it says and got behind farm families. 
 
[12:45] 
 
The set-aside program is another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where in most provinces, there was a $200 payout to farmers, 
that held feeders back on the set-aside program, and the farmers 
got their money upfront. 
 
What are we doing here, in Saskatchewan? Well they paid out 
the federal share of that money, and then they made our farmers 
wait till the end of March for a $30 part of what they were 
paying, and they’re going to make them wait till the end of 
October at least for the other $30. I had a farmer phone me and 
he said, do they really think that we’re not old enough to handle 
that amount of money at one time? And it makes you wonder 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because more often than not, we’re 
the only province that keeps lagging behind when it comes to 
funding for agriculture. 
 
Agriculture is a big part of this province. It’s a big part of the 
economy in this province. And there’s many, many families out 
there . . . are at wit’s end of how they’re going to get through 
till this fall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s causing hardship, day 
after day after day out there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talked of the suicides that are 
happening. We talked of the family breakups that are happening 
out there. This is a time when people in rural Saskatchewan 
need a government — their government, the one that represents 
them as government — to stand behind them, stand behind the 
programs that were supposedly designed to help those farm 
families get through bad times. And we in opposition would 
support farm families on that notion. 
 
Why on earth will this government, who says it’s there to look 

out for people — and we’re beginning to really question that — 
why won’t they get behind these programs, help farm families 
through the bad times such as we have now because of the BSE 
and the frost and low grain prices and things like that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to leave time for my colleague from 
Thunder Creek who wants to respond also to the problems out 
in rural Saskatchewan. So at this time, I will move the motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes that the plight of 
Saskatchewan farm families is worse this spring than it has 
been in decades, and the severity of cash flow problems 
this spring is causing severe distress and hardship not only 
in rural Saskatchewan, but in other parts of the province 
that rely on agriculture-based businesses. 

 
I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconded by the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — It has been moved 
by the member for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the plight of Saskatchewan 
farm families is worse this spring than it has been in 
decades and the severity of cash flow problems this spring 
is causing severe distress and hardship not only in rural 
Saskatchewan but in other parts of the province that rely 
on the agriculture-based businesses. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the House to adopt . . . I recognize the 
member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the agriculture industry is in peril in this province. 
Every sector of the industry is caught in a death grip with 
soaring fuel, fertilizer, chemical, and equipment costs making 
agriculture in this province a very cash intensive business 
indeed. 
 
On the income side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the situation is even 
worse. With widespread frost in 2004, coupled with a late 
spring and cold wet conditions through the summer, producers’ 
hopes were dashed by that killing frost in most of the province 
on August 20. 
On that night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the crop that had the 
potential to be the largest one in history was turned into an 
almost total disaster for many of our producers and, overall, one 
of the most financially devastating years for producers in the ag 
economy in our 100-year history. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, following on the heels . . . this is 
following on the heels of from two to seven years of pretty 
severe drought, depending on which area of the province a 
producer might reside. And, Mr. Speaker, low commodity 
prices — the result of ongoing subsidization of agricultural 
commodities by the US and especially by Europe — are another 
major challenge that now faces the grain sector in this province. 
 



2646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2005 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this country, the federal government 
made the decision — or perhaps abdicated making a decision 
long ago — to compete in the subsidy trade wars which have 
continued ever since. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason 
the producers in this country and especially in this province 
need farm programs to survive, farm programs that are more of 
an ad hoc nature; programs, Mr. Speaker, that in this country, 
right or wrong, are cost shared between provinces and the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are the 
most reliant on agriculture to oil the wheels of our economy of 
any province in the country. And while our producers suffer 
from these international subsidies and domestic programs, 
which frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are inadequate, the NDP 
government withholds funding to the CAIS program, which is 
the only game in town for our producers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
while they scrap with the feds over who should pay what 
percentage of the program. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that our federal government 
has abdicated its responsibility, true enough, to agriculture 
producers right across this country. And it’s because of that, it 
has chosen not to support our producers in the subsidy war, that 
we rely on programs like GRIP and CFIP and CAIS. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, we must play, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must 
play with the hand that we’re dealt. This NDP government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, instead of doing the things that would 
stimulate the growth of the agricultural sector in this province, 
and instead of recognizing the huge contribution that agriculture 
makes to our provincial economy, and instead of telling the 
story to urban people in this province — who are now mostly 
now one, two or three generations away from any real 
connection to or understanding of agriculture — this NDP 
government takes every opportunity to use agriculture as their 
excuse for the economic failure of this province under their 
watch. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a cynical, divisive, and 
destructive political approach to a problem that has practical 
solutions. 
 
The hog industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an industry that 
Saskatchewan is particularly well suited for. This industry is 
one that it is very cyclical in nature, with margins being slim to 
non-existent at times but quite substantial at others, but an 
industry that can be more competitive in this province than any 
other place on the continent because of our wide open spaces 
and price-competitive and abundant supply of feed. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is an industry that should be expanding in 
Saskatchewan even in times when no expansion can be justified 
in other jurisdictions, but it is not. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this industry, the hog industry, is not 
expanding in this province because this government doesn’t 
have the fundamentals right either. In terms of a 
business-friendly environment in which to invest, taxes, red 
tape, environmental compliance issues, as well as labour laws, 
are all issues that mitigate against investment in the hog 
industry in Saskatchewan — an industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that can provide a nearby market for feed grain as well as jobs 
that can keep people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 10 provinces in Confederation, only 

Alberta has suffered more under the scourge of the BSE-related 
border closure than has Saskatchewan. This BSE crisis has 
ended the steady businesslike growth of our cow herd in this 
province and for at least the time being, Mr. Speaker, killed any 
development of the feedlot industry in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must expand our cattle-feeding industry in this 
province if we are likely to attract a well-funded, professionally 
operated, major packing plant or plants to this province, the 
kind that can survive the rigours of brutal competition that the 
packing industry experiences in normal times. 
 
The cattle industry is not dead, Mr. Speaker, but it has suffered 
a serious blow and business will never be conducted again in 
that industry the way it was before May 20, 2003. Mr. Speaker, 
prior to the discovery of BSE in Canada, we were the largest 
exporter of beef cattle in the world, and as I have said before, 
most of those cattle originated from Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
In the last full year before the outbreak of BSE, our export 
market was worth $4.1 billion, Mr. Speaker, and in the month 
leading up to the BSE crisis, we exported about $23 million 
worth of cattle a month. 
 
Prior to May 20, 2003, Mr. Speaker, about 80 per cent of our 
beef exports found their home in the United States. Mr. 
Speaker, since the closure of the border, it’s clear that the 
solution to this problem for Canadian producers is the 
establishment of a packing industry in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reasons that we can’t seem to develop a 
packing industry in this province are the same reasons that we 
can’t develop a hog industry, or an irrigation industry, or any 
other industry. This government doesn’t have the fundamentals 
right and it doesn’t look like, after 15 years or so of continual 
governance, that they’re ever going to get them right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of acres of cropland will lie idle this 
year. Thousands upon thousands of acres are either being rented 
for taxes this year, and more and more acres are being rented 
for no charge at all, with the owners covering the taxes out of 
their own pockets just so something other than weeds can be 
grown on their land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my personal mail I receive what used to be 
called auction flyers, but what are now really auction books. 
These books are no longer full of farm sales of older people 
who have hung on to marginally viable farms maybe longer 
than they should have because they loved the life. Mr. Speaker, 
these auction books are now full of sales of large, modern farm 
equipment from moderate- to large-size farms on which the 
farm families have given up because they could no longer make 
a living or cope with the stress of juggling very large bills and 
having continually to go cap in hand to banks and suppliers to 
ask for more time to pay those bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the real cost to our hard-working farm families is 
stress, stress, Mr. Speaker, that is now reflected in serious 
family problems for many of those families who choose to stay 
on the land and to continue to be productive, contributing 
members of society in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they feel abandoned. They feel abandoned by this 
government which has continually refused and delayed to fully 



April 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

fund the CAIS program and other programs such as CFIP; this 
government that tore up signed contracts with them and the 
GRIP program some years ago; this government that has three 
years, or maybe is it four now, consecutively raised crop 
insurance premiums and at the same time in each instance 
reduced crop insurance coverage to those people. 
 
They feel absolutely abandoned, Mr. Speaker. And that stress 
that I speak of shows up in the form of depression, anxiety, and 
nervous, disturbed children, marital breakups, and most sadly of 
all, Mr. Speaker, in suicides. 
 
Many of us on this side of this Assembly have experienced that 
in our constituencies and our communities. And it’s a time 
when we see this that we want to forget about the political 
issues that seem to have caused it. It’s hard, as my colleague 
stated, to relate these suicides directly back to agriculture, but 
certainly the fingers all point in that direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farming and ranching families are proud and 
independent people by their very nature. Mr. Speaker, they find 
it difficult to ask for help of any kind, but they find it especially 
difficult to ask for help for the personal problems caused by the 
stress that they experience in their day-to-day lives. But make 
no mistake, Mr. Speaker, farm stress is manifesting itself in 
rural Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, accordingly I second 
the motion. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being . . . I’d just like the member to 
repeat. I was not able to hear. Did the member adjourn debate? 
No. Second the motion. 
 
It now being the hour of 1 p.m., the debate is deemed 
adjourned. And the House will be adjourned as well till 
Monday, 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2617 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2617 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2617 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2617 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2617 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2617 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2617 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant (Committees) ................................................................................................................................................2618 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2618 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2618 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2618 
  Kirsch.............................................................................................................................................................................2618, 2642 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2618 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2618 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2635 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Earth Day and Soil Conservation Week 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
 Earth Day 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
 Aspen Grove Heritage Fair 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
 Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2620 
 Wanda Constantinoff Celebrates 100 Years 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2620 
 North Central Regional Recreation Association Volunteer Recognition Awards 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2620 
 Weyburn’s Women of the Year Awards 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2621 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Compensation for Saskatoon Health Authority Management 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2621 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2621 
 Investment in Pangaea 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2622 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2623 
 Land Development Project in Regina 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2624 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2624 
 Feasibility Study for the Meat Packing Industry 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2625 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2625 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Regional Hospital to be Built in Swift Current 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2626 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2627 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2627 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2627 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Saskatchewan’s Building Independence Program 
  Iwanchuk .......................................................................................................................................................................2628, 2638 
  Hagel ..............................................................................................................................................................................2630, 2639 
  Bakken ...........................................................................................................................................................................2632, 2638 
  Crofford .........................................................................................................................................................................2633, 2638 



 

  Weekes ...........................................................................................................................................................................2635, 2640 
  Yates...............................................................................................................................................................................2637, 2640 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2638 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2639 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2639 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2640 
  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................2640 
  Hagel (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................2640 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 304 — The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2641 
 Bill No. 305 — The Saskatoon Foundation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2641 
 Bill No. 306 — The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis Repeal Act 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2641 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 304 — The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2642 
 Bill No. 305 — The Saskatoon Foundation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2642 
 Bill No. 306 — The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis Repeal Act 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2642 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 8 — Recognition of Distress in Agriculture Sector 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2642 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2645 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


