















































Hansard: March 30, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 81A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 30, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2231 
 March 30, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise on 
behalf of constituents of the region of Cypress Hills to present 
their concerns regarding forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the community of Gull Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Cabri, Hazlet, Pennant, and 
Abbey areas of the province, Mr. Speaker — excellent people 
and very good chicken hunting. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
constituents concerned about the level of residential support 
offered to people with long-term disabilities in Swift Current. 
The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from Pambrun, 

Saskatchewan and Neville, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise again today 
on behalf of people in my constituency who are concerned 
about the growing problem of crystal meth: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 

 
Everyone who has signed this petition is from Porcupine Plain, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions, 
signed by people who are concerned that the proposed changes 
to amalgamate 59 school divisions by January 2006 will not 
prove to be cost-effective. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the communities represented on this petition 
include Rosetown, Plenty, Brock, Sovereign, Harris, D’Arcy, 
Zealandia, Elrose, and Milden. And I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Melville, Duff, Fenwood, and Yorkton. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school division in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Craik and Aylesbury. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine that 
are very concerned about the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Halbrite, 
Midale, and Lampman. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation 
of schools. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Regina, Weyburn, and 
Midale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here dealing with forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 

amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Govan and Nokomis. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of citizens who are concerned with the effect that the 
TransGas Asquith natural gas storage project could have on the 
quality and the quantity of their water. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens from Saskatoon and Vanscoy. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present petitions signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are opposed to the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from a number of 
communities including Melville, Goodeve, Duff, Fenwood, and 
quite a number of citizens from the city of Regina have also 
signed this petition. I’m pleased to be able to present these 
petitions. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too also rise to 
present the position opposed to the forced amalgamation of 
schools. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good people of Regina. Thank 
you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 180, 637, 715, and 720. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
on day no. 86 I shall ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Premier: what new positions were included in the 
2005-2006 budget for Executive Council? What are the 
corresponding job descriptions and responsibilities? And 
what are the salaries for each new position? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, a number of members of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses who are here, seated in your gallery. They’ve been here 
today meeting with various members, and I ask all members to 
welcome them. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the members, along with the Minister 
of Health, I too would like to welcome the members of SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] here to the proceedings today. 
 
Sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — and I’ll ask them to 
wave; I won’t single them out that they have to stand up and 
stay standing, just a wave would be fine — would be Lynne 
Dielschneider, Deb Prevost, Fred Bordas, Jan Anderson, Linda 
McKinnon, Sandy Keating, Adelle Eikel, Paul Kuling, Louise 
Wilk, Cheryl Carlson, Eleanor Lenderbeck, Rita Nell, Susan 
Kotzer, and Grace Normandeau. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a chance to, as a caucus, meet with them 
before — earlier this morning, I guess — and certainly learned 
a lot from what they had to say and the situation that they face 
every day, whether it’s in the long-term care homes, the 
hospitals of our province, whether it’s in Blood Services, or a 
number of different areas that registered nurses and RPNs 
[registered psychiatric nurse] serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
Just on behalf of the official opposition, I would like to thank 
you for the work that you do under sometimes very trying 
conditions. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 20 grade 5 and 6 students seated in the west gallery 
along with their teacher, Ms. Sandy Jost. 
 
These students . . . I was trying to quantify or figure out how I 
was going to say these citizens of the future, and I realized how 
terribly wrong that is because these 20 students from Regina’s 
Huda School are citizens today, and they make me so proud. I 
was in their school earlier this month. We had a very nice visit 
with these students and the others in the Huda School in my 
constituency of Regina Coronation Park. 
 
These students epitomize all of the very best that young people 
have to offer Saskatchewan today and in the future. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all honourable members to help me join 
Saskatchewan’s future, the grade 5 and 6 students from Huda 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to take the opportunity to introduce to you and through you 
to the members of the legislature a friend of mine from 
Saulteaux Reserve who’s here today to sit in on the 
proceedings, Mr. Rod Gopher from Saulteaux Reserve, who’s 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

also a former grand chief of the Battlefords Tribal Council. I 
ask all members to welcome Rod to his Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
follow and welcome Mr. Gopher to the Legislature this 
afternoon. He’s really a constituent of Cut Knife-Turtleford, but 
it’s adjacent to mine. And on behalf of the people in that part of 
the country, welcome to Mr. Gopher. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Hanley Team Wins Elks National Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to talk about a remarkable curling team from Hanley. 
Daryl Grindheim and his two sons, Dean and Darren 
Grindheim, have been curling for a number of years and are 
very well known in the Hanley circles and the bonspiels up and 
down the line. 
 
This year they are entered in the Elks men’s curling, along with, 
they had Merlin Lee and Mark Burgess. These gentlemen 
recently competed in the Elks National Curling Championship 
that was held in Swan River, Manitoba. They did very well in 
the round robin competition during the week, thus moving into 
the playoffs on the weekend. Here they made it to the final 
game, beating Alberta by a score of 6 to 4 to win the 2005 Elks 
National Curling Championship. 
 
This team has curled very well over the years and looks forward 
to defending their national title at Saskatoon in 2006. 
 
I would like to personally congratulate the Hanley team on their 
success, and thank them for doing their part towards inspiring 
our young people to take up this very enjoyable and traditional 
winter sport. I would ask all the members to join me in 
congratulating the Hanley Elks and the curling team that came 
from there. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Nipawin Biomass-Based Ethanol Project 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, Nipawin already contributes 
to Saskatchewan’s renewable energy base with its hydro 
facility. But it will be making an even greater contribution to 
Saskatchewan’s green renewable energy in the future. Mr. 
Speaker, we are providing $950,000 to the community of 

Nipawin for their $2.1 million biomass-based ethanol project. 
The funding is being provided under the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Western Economic Partnership Agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project builds on groundbreaking work done 
by the Saskatchewan Research Council and includes technology 
development, plant design, and feedstock availability. There 
will also be an examination of potential markets for the end 
product. This project represents yet another step forward in the 
ongoing process of establishing a viable biofuels industry in 
Saskatchewan, with ethanol as one of the fuels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ethanol production is a good idea for many 
reasons. It is cleaner burning than traditional fuels, and it will 
help reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It promotes rural 
economic diversification and helps to create jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan. It takes us beyond primary production to 
value-added economic development. And, Minister Speaker, 
organic energy sources such as biofuels don’t run out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
people at Nipawin for their initiative and innovative thinking, 
and acknowledging the Saskatchewan Research Council for its 
valuable contributions in this initiative. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Avonlea Teams Win Provincial Hockey Championships 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
the warm weather brings the end of hockey season, and with 
that of course the crowning of many provincial champions, 
which I’m sure we’ll hear over the next few days in members’ 
statements. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the town of Avonlea southwest of Regina had 
a great season. The Avonlea Arrows won the 2004-2005 SAHA 
[Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey Association] senior D 
provincial championship last Friday night with a decisive 5-1 
victory over the Dodsland Stars. They won the best of 
three-game series two games straight. The Avonlea Arena was 
packed to watch the Avonlea Arrows win their first provincial 
championship. 
 
Although Avonlea won by four goals, the game was fast paced 
with plenty of scoring chances and end-to-end action. It was a 
crowd-pleaser for all. The Arrows defeated Montmartre, 
Rouleau, Kelliher, and Central Butte in this year’s playoffs 
before meeting Dodsland in the final. 
 
But that wasn’t the only victory, the senior team in Avonlea, the 
peewees, the Avonlea Thunder, won the peewee C provincial 
championship as well, defeating St. Walburg Eagles. On the 
way they had to defeat the Hudson Bay Hunters in the 
semi-final and then, of course, as I said, the St. Walburg Eagles 
with a score of 8 to 4 in a two-game, total-point. 
 
Congratulations to the teams in Avonlea on two provincial 
championships this year, and I’m sure many more in the future. 
Congratulations. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Students Win Regional Spelling Bees 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Four 
Saskatchewan students recently earned the right to represent our 
province at the CanSpell National Spelling Bee in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Anqi Dong, a 10-year-old Saskatoon student, who 
won the Northern Regional Spelling Bee, and runner-up was 
Brook Lennox of Archerwill. In the South, Swift Current’s 
Kaleb Adam took first place, and Bennett Reusch from my 
constituency was second. Anqi Dong and Kaleb Adam will also 
go to compete at the prestigious Scripps National Spelling Bee 
in Washington, D.C. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all four students impressed their teachers, parents, 
and judges as they rose among some of the top of thousands of 
students of Grade 5 to 8 from across the province. The winning 
students attribute their knowledge of spelling to their love of 
reading. One student said, “I read books for as long as I can 
remember.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, reading and writing are essential to the quality of 
life. While illiteracy is linked to poverty and exclusion, through 
investment in education we can reduce these levels and enhance 
human dignity and equality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank Air 
Canada for graciously offering to fly all of the contestants to 
Ottawa and Washington to ensure that they have the 
opportunity to compete in these prestigious events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also ask all members to join in recognizing all 
the teachers and parents and students who support them 
throughout the years and in congratulating these young winners 
for their outstanding skills and accomplishments. And I want to 
wish them all the very best of luck in the national 
championships. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Centenarians Honoured 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan celebrates its 
100th birthday, we have the opportunity to recognize the 
contribution of our pioneers. It is humbling to think of the debt 
we owe to our pioneers. 
 
Yesterday I was honoured to participate in the celebrations for 
three of the five centenarians who reside in the Jubilee nursing 
home in Foam Lake. I even shared a dance with Mr. Robert 
Barrowman, who was quick to point out he was just 99; he 
won’t be 100 until September. 
 

Gerald Holowaty, the reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of 
Foam Lake was part of the celebration and I’d like to share his 
very appropriate remarks to the centenarians. 
 

This centennial year offers an opportunity to honour fine 
people like the centenarians here today, people who had 
the courage, faith and fortitude to settle in an unknown 
land. You probably experienced more hardship than joy in 
your quest for new life and freedom. 
 
It has been said that we must know the past to understand 
the present to face the future. I stand humbly before you 
and thank God for those who lived before us and ask that 
we quit assuming that everything begins with us. 
 
We drink from wells we did not find. We eat food from 
land we did not develop. We enjoy freedoms we have not 
earned. We worship in churches we did not build. And we 
live in communities we did not establish. Our generation 
thanks you and we can only hope we adopt your strength 
and integrity to ensure a solid foundation for our next 100 
years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d add my voice to thanking the centenarians who 
reside in my constituency: Gladys Miller, Robert Barrowman, 
Rose Woitas, Elizabeth Letwenuk, Nick Hancheruk, Annie 
Shulko, Susan Messenger, and Dorothy Simmonds. 
 
I ask the Assembly to join me in thanking all the centenarians 
for making Saskatchewan a province we’re all proud to call 
home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

2005 — The Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 
is joining with First Nations leaders in proclaiming 2005 the 
Year of First Nations and Métis Women in the province. This is 
a time to acknowledge the vital role that First Nations and Métis 
women play within their communities and in Saskatchewan 
while recognizing their strengths and their struggles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year is an opportunity to create awareness 
about the vulnerability of these women and their families. This 
is not a celebration, Mr. Speaker, but a time to recognize and 
acknowledge the poverty and violence that many First Nations 
and Métis women face in their daily lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, acknowledging the hardships that 
disproportionately affect First Nations and Métis women is only 
a small step forward. The findings of the Commission on First 
Nations and Métis People and Justice Reform have been a 
wake-up call. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is vital that we as a province stand united on 
issues as important as the health and well-being of all women. 
This government is developing and implementing policies and 
investing resources in initiatives that will result in Aboriginal 
women and children living more secure and healthy lives. 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, First Nations and Métis women have contributed 
and continue to contribute immeasurably to this province. They 
are the backbone of their communities and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in giving 
First Nations and Métis women the recognition and support 
they so rightly deserve, and in acknowledging the important 
work done by the many Aboriginal women’s organizations in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Elks Annual Provincial Dart Tournament in Biggar 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the weekend of 
March 11 through 13, participants from across the province 
converged on Biggar to take part in the Elks annual provincial 
dart tournament. I had the pleasure of meeting and mingling 
with a number of those individuals at their banquet on the 12th. 
 
The tournament was hosted by the Biggar Lodge of the Elks 
and saw contestants vying for a position on either the 
eight-persons men’s team or the eight-persons women’s team 
and the opportunity to represent Saskatchewan at the Elks 
national dart tournament in Penticton, British Columbia. 
 
At the nationals every province and territory in Canada is 
represented by their 16-person teams with the goal of bringing 
home the national trophy which is presented to the province 
with the best showing at the tournament. This is determined by 
a point system over five events for each, the women’s and 
men’s teams, and the points combine for the provincial 
standing. I am proud to say that our Saskatchewan team have 
brought the national trophy home for the past three years and 
they are confident they will be coming home with it again this 
year. 
 
I was informed that even though darts is a highly-contested 
sport, the fellowship and camaraderie at these tournaments have 
led to many lasting friendships both at the provincial and 
national level. 
 
I’d like to congratulate the Biggar Elks for hosting a great 
weekend and also congratulate those who are moving on to the 
nationals in Penticton. Good luck. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Apparently the 
Minister of Learning found more than Easter eggs this 
weekend. It sounds like he found a basket full of money and 
had an Easter . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Just to remind the 
member to direct all his remarks through the Chair. Member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the Speaker 
would direct this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask . . . the member is not to 
comment on any orders of the Speaker. The member may 
proceed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just start over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the Minister of 
Learning found more than Easter eggs this weekend. He found a 
basket full of money, and he had a revelation about the talks 
that needed to be conducted with Saskatchewan teachers. 
 
After blaming teachers for high property taxes and repeatedly 
saying that there’s no money to move off of the 0,1, and 1, 
here’s what the Minister of Learning said to the teachers’ 
Spring Council this morning. He implied that he sat down with 
his officials over the weekend and found resources for a new 
offer. Just last week, Mr. Speaker, the minister was saying that 
they were going to stick to the wage mandate. 
 
How in the world can the minister explain to this House how he 
can go through a budget process as late as last week and not 
know what resources are available to negotiate with teachers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
do want to advise the members of the House the Easter Bunny 
was very good to me over the weekend and was very kind. 
 
This morning I did have an opportunity to address the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] council in Saskatoon, and 
I have extended to them and the trustees an invitation to return 
to the bargaining table as early as next week. It is our 
understanding . . . Certainly we saw from the sanctions vote that 
was taken that there is a very strong resolve on the part of the 
teachers. 
 
And I think over the weekend in the discussions that we had, 
internally we understand that there is a need for us to find a 
negotiated settlement. Nobody in this province will win if 
there’s a teachers’ strike. Teachers understand that; we 
understand that. And negotiations are built on compromise. 
That’s the approach we’re working on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, surprising as it seems, it 
seems as if the Minister of Learning actually was listening to 
what we were saying this last two weeks about the way you 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

have to negotiate with teachers. But, Mr. Speaker, a concern I 
have is, if the minister is promising to be flexible, is he also 
going to be flexible and find what he got in his Easter basket 
and pass it on to the school boards so that they are able to meet 
the requirements of a new negotiated contract and not 
necessarily have to pass it on to property taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Over the next several days, we’ll be 
sitting down with both the STF and the trustees to share with 
them what we believe is the best way to resolve this and reach a 
collective agreement. And I think I owe it to those partners first, 
to share that discussion with them. I’ll be very happy once we 
have a tentative agreement to share the details with the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Collective Bargaining with Public Sector Workers 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last week the Premier stood in his place and said and I 
quote: 
 

. . . this is a government that believes in collective 
bargaining with all of its public sector . . . 

 
Despite his supposed support of collective bargaining, this is 
the same Premier who has imposed a 0, 1 and 1 wage mandate 
on all of its public sectors. Mr. Speaker, this begs the question: 
how exactly does this Premier and his NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government define collective bargaining? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I think anybody who truly understands collective 
bargaining would know that no one ever goes into it with no 
understanding of the resources they have available at the 
negotiating table. And certainly I think we were very clear 
when we talked about 0, 1, and 1 being based on total 
compensation which was more than base-wage rate. It includes 
overtime. It includes other things. But as well, we indicated 
flexibility to solve problems such as recruitment and retention 
and health plan issues. So we have been flexible throughout and 
will continue to be flexible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’re going to have to 
clarify the definition of zero from that member before too long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps it’s time the NDP government pulled out 
The Trade Union Act and actually read it. Mr. Speaker, on the 
very first page of The Trade Union Act collective bargaining is 
defined as, quote, “negotiating in good faith.” Dictating a wage 
mandate does not constitute negotiating in good faith, Mr. 
Speaker, according to The Trade Union Act. In fact some might 
argue that a wage mandate constitutes an unfair labour practice. 
How can this NDP government say that it upholds the 
principles of collective bargaining on one hand and on the other 
hand engages in an unfair labour practice with its 0, 1, and 1 
wage mandate? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much. And I’m 
pleased to hear the new support that the member opposite has 
for The Trade Union Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can assure, Mr. Speaker, that we will 
hold them to that in future discussions around amendments to 
this important piece of legislation. And as well I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have settled 11 agreements to date, which I 
think speaks to the flexibility at the bargaining table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The definition of fair and collective 
bargaining, whether you refer to this Trade Union Act or 
anywhere across this nation, means the exact same thing. It’s 
fair and collective bargaining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last year the NDP government had an 
unexpected windfall revenue of nearly $1.2 billion, half of 
which came from the oil and gas revenues. How can this 
government plead poverty when it’s spending on movies, at 
least $50 million more on money-losing out-of-province 
investments, doubling the staff at the Premier’s communication 
office, and other frivolous expenditures? 
 
How about this idea, Mr. Speaker? How about investing in 
Saskatchewan workers? How about giving people a reason to 
stay in Saskatchewan? How about negotiating a contract in 
good faith? When will this government stop its unfair labour 
practices and drop its 0, 1, 1 mandate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, there’s hardly a member on the other side who 
hasn’t spoken in favour of the core services review done by the 
BC [British Columbia] government. That review resulted in a 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

rollback of wages that resulted in elimination of teachers, 
elimination of nurses, contracting out, privatization. I don’t 
have to think very long, Mr. Speaker, before I understand where 
this group of people would go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as the Chair of the public sector 
bargaining committee, at least we should expect an answer from 
that member. But no, she’s going to play that same game. Mr. 
Speaker, I would argue that this province has simply been 
educating our young people to export to other provinces. 
 
This morning a document distributed throughout the province 
by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses shows that Saskatchewan 
is the worst in Canada in terms of retaining its graduating 
nurses in the field of nursing. It is the worst at a 66 per cent 
retention. How can we retain professionals like teachers and 
nurses in this province if our wages are not competitive with 
those of our neighbouring provinces? 
 
Mr. Speaker, next door in Manitoba some teachers have settled 
for 3, 3, and 3, and collective bargaining continues for others in 
that province. This NDP government has piled on extra work 
for teachers with SchoolPLUS and then expects them to swallow 
0, 1, and 1. How does this NDP expect to retain our young 
professionals with a 0, 1, and 1 wage mandate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I would say as the grandmother of a 12-year-old that 
no one admires more than I do the work that teachers do in the 
classroom. I think it’s a very tough environment they have there 
today, and I think they’re doing a terrific job. 
 
Secondly I would say that we are very committed to collective 
bargaining, and I believe that we are showing the flexibility at 
the bargaining table required while at the same time working 
hard to create a sustainable budget line in the province — which 
I think we’ve heard criticism from the opposition on the 
balanced budget question. And I ask them to refer themselves to 
their speeches on that subject. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Nursing Resources 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the Minister of Finance told the media he expects to see a 
downward trend in health care wages. Can the minister share 
with us today how he expects and what evidence that he has to 
base that there will be a downward trend in health care wages in 
the next few years? 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, over the last number of 
years we’ve seen substantial increases in health care costs at all 
levels, and that’s happened right across North America — in 
fact right around the world. We know that a number of the 
different costs have started to level off, and that included 
everything from costs of pharmaceuticals, costs of equipment, 
costs of building, and costs of staffing. And a lot of these things 
do relate to the availability of people in the whole system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we try to look ten years out. The government on 
this side of the House here is looking and trying to figure out 
where we’re going ten years out. And many times you end up 
having to look at trends to make sure that you get your planning 
right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to clarify, 
not for the Minister of Health, but for the Minister of Finance, 
what he had to say to the CTV [Canadian Television Network 
Limited] on a budget interview last week. And I quote, Harry 
Van Mulligen said: 
 

I am hopeful that in the medium term, the next two to 
three years, that we’ll see some of the health care costs 
come down. The major portion of health care costs is 
salaries and wages, and we think some of those will start 
to trend down at about that time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, trend down, that means a reduction in where 
they’re at right now. Mr. Speaker, we thought zero, dash one, 
dash one was bad enough. To the Minister of Finance, does that 
mean zero, negative one, negative one to him — to the Minister 
of Finance? Or does he plan on taking a page out of their book 
of a couple years ago, and instead of dealing with the issue of 
waiting lists, they ended up firing nurses around the province. Is 
that how they’re going to deal with the problem? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, for a number of years we 
had challenges with the previous Health critic around the kinds 
of research and the kinds of advice that the member was 
getting. And Mr. Speaker, I think we’re seeing a similar 
situation here. When the Finance minister talks about bringing 
the trends down on all kinds of costs, that doesn’t mean a 
reduction in costs. That means the increases are not quite as 
great. 
 
We’ve already seen that in some areas in health. In the wages 
and compensation area, it hasn’t happened yet. But I think that 
we will continue to see fair wages for all the people who work 
in the health care system. But there is a recognition that each 
individual patient is also a taxpayer, is also a voter, and they 
end up having to try to make that balance between all of those 
different groups. We’re going to continue to provide that kind 
of leadership over here. 
 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the leadership that that 
minister just talked about is the worst record in Canada for 
nurse retention, Mr. Speaker. That is not leadership. And in the 
meantime the Minister of Finance is saying that we’re going to 
see a trend down in wages. How is that going to help the 
retention and recruitment of nurses to this province? 
 
Nurses are looking for full-time work. They’re looking for 
competitive wages, and they’re looking for good working 
conditions. And when we’re losing most of our graduates to 
other provinces, when we’re training nurses to export, that will 
not deal with the issue of waiting lists and so many of the other 
problems that we’re seeing in our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP expect to reduce the waiting lists 
that we are seeing in this province with a Finance minister 
talking about a downward trend in wages? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister last 
week announced money in both Health and in Learning for 
training more nurses. We have funds within the budget around 
retention of the existing nurses. We have funds to provide 
stability across the health care system, to make sure that the 
jobs that are there now continue, and that they continue to 
transform . . . 
 
We discussed before how in the nursing profession there is a 
transition taking place where many people our age — the age of 
most of us in this legislature — will be looking towards 
retirement and being replaced by newer, younger nurses. All of 
those things are part of our planning, Mr. Speaker. We’re going 
to continue to do that in a very straightforward way. In this 
province we’ve always had very good planning for the long 
term, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while all 
farmers in Saskatchewan are in desperate situations, I have a 
producer in my constituency facing a serious problem. He put 
down the required deposit under the CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] program. This CAIS deposit 
has now been waived until March 2006. He needs that money 
for spring input costs, but he can’t get it back. Can the Minister 
of Agriculture tell us what he’s going to do on behalf of my 
constituent and other producers across the province that have 
the same problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 

Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. I think it’s 
very important that producers know how this program is going 
to roll out. 
 
First of all, those who had their NISA [Net Income Stabilization 
Account] accounts roll into the CAIS program will be able to 
withdraw everything but the one-third deposit, the one-third 
deposit that is already in place. Until the federal government 
takes the right legislation, they’ll not be able to withdraw it. 
 
Our position at the meetings, federal-provincial meetings, was 
very clear, Mr. Speaker, that we wanted to see the ability to 
withdraw those funds immediately. That, Mr. Speaker, that 
position was not accepted by the federal government. And we 
will continue to push for producers to be able to withdraw their 
funds for CAIS deposit. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, like, that 
isn’t even a fair situation. The producers need this money now. 
My constituent did the right thing. The federal government 
urged him to participate in the CAIS program. Many producers 
had to borrow money to honour their commitment to this 
program. Now that deposit money, thousands of dollars, is 
locked in and can’t be touched. That money could be used to 
cover spring input costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Agriculture try to get that 
money into the hands of producers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, I most definitely will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support For Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the federal government took a step in the right 
direction; $1 billion will be distributed to ag producers across 
Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP Ag minister has all but 
ruled out maintaining a traditional 60/40 split with matching 
money from the province. 
 
So my question is: will he put any money at all into the renewed 
federal initiative? Will he make any commitment of putting any 
provincial dollars towards this program? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

We, the provincial ministers, met by teleconference yesterday. 
First of all it was agreed that we did appreciate the federal 
government taking their initiative, putting the $1 billion out. 
But since this was completely a federal initiative — no 
discussion with the provinces at all — it is their responsibility 
to fund it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where we can, in the programs that are necessary 
— including CAIS — we are seeking to try and fulfill our 
obligations. There are many challenges in doing that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, our commitment is to do our utmost to fulfill our 
obligations and to make sure that we facilitate the funding that 
is available for producers today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder if the Agriculture minister will answer this: if 
Alberta and Manitoba change their mind and decide to put their 
40 per cent in towards the program, will he reconsider and 
match their funds that they put in for their farmers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, in our discussions 
yesterday Alberta and Manitoba were both on the line; both 
agreed that they were not going to participate in this program. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t do our budgets based on what they 
do. We do them on what our fiscal capacity is. And sometimes 
we’re in a better situation than they are, sometimes worse. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, where we can put in funding, where we can 
provide that support for Saskatchewan farmers, we’ve done it. 
We’ll continue to do it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe the Ag minister 
should go and meet with the Education minister and find what 
basket he’s finding money in because our farmers certainly 
could use some of that money right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seeing that the Ag minister is reluctant to put 
anything towards the new federal program, let’s go back to the 
CAIS program then. What I heard farmers saying yesterday all 
over the province, and the calls I got, and from my local 
farmers, was that if this province won’t come to the table for a 
new program like this, the least they could do is put up their 
money for the CAIS program. Last year that minister and that 
government waited till the very last minute, the eleventh hour, 
before putting their money in, and that’s holding up the cheques 
coming out to the farmers that qualify now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Ag minister, will you at least then fully 

fund the CAIS program for 2004? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the critic from the opposition party was noting that he 
was, and I’ll quote: 
 

“I’d be a little hesitant to jump in and say the province 
should step up to the plate [regarding the federal funding, 
Mr. Speaker] . . . 
 

He’s obviously lost some of his hesitancy, Mr. Speaker. But I 
can tell you we have not lost our hesitancy in trying to pull 
together the resources we can to fund the CAIS program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to know is where that group is in 
terms of helping to get a change in the formula. They said last 
year if we fully funded CAIS, they’d be fully behind us. They’d 
be working hard to try and get a change in that formula. We 
haven’t heard a peep, Mr. Speaker, not a peep on behalf of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers and producers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if they’re going to stand by their word, it’s 
time they stood up and started trying to work for producers and 
get a better deal around CAIS. Mr. Speaker, we’re doing that. 
We’re trying to get the best deal possible. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, every farmer I talked to yesterday appreciated the cash 
injection from the federal government — $275 million 
approximately for Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, that 
includes cattle, livestock of all kinds. It includes the grain sector 
spread right across the country of Canada. I think what farmers 
are concerned about is when the money actually gets out here, 
the cheques are not going to be near as big as I think we’re led 
to believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, input costs have gone up dramatically in the last 
10 or 15 years. I remember back farming when — 1986, I 
believe it was — there was a $1 billion injection at that time. 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, it would take 3 or $4 
billion to even match what that would cover at that time to what 
our needs are now. 
 
This minister and that government, Mr. Speaker, has got to get 
to the plate sooner or later and fund the CAIS program. There’s 
enough stress in the farm community. Will he at least do that 
much today, seeing that they won’t jump in and fund other 
programs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I hope the member opposite is not suggesting that we should 
come out with the kind of programs that were out in the ’80s 
that threw this province into such incredible debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not what we’re about. We do actually have 
balanced budget legislation which we follow, Mr. Speaker. And 
in following that, Mr. Speaker, we need to do the very best in 
terms of our stewardship of the public resources. For us that 
means trying to get the best deals possible with the federal 
government on CAIS. We’re doing that, Mr. Speaker. We are 
committed to trying to get the formula changed. We’re 
committed to doing that, Mr. Speaker. When it came down to it 
in the end last year, we fully funded CAIS, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, our commitment is to try and get the very best deal for 
our producers this year as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Ag minister, I know the Western premiers are 
going to be meeting very shortly. And I guess the question 
many farmers in Saskatchewan and in fact everyone would like 
to know . . . if 60/40 is not adequate and the province doesn’t 
want to honour that commitment, what commitment would they 
honour? Ten per cent? Twenty per cent? Nobody seems to 
know at what level that government will back its farmers. Will 
the minister tell us today, what would be satisfactory? Would it 
be 80/20? What would it be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think I have provided the member opposite with both of the 
proposals which we made, which we would find acceptable in 
terms of dealing with CAIS. I will give him another copy if he 
doesn’t have it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we started off our first proposal with saying 
this province should not have to pay any more than three times 
the provincial per capita average. Today we’re at 10 times, Mr. 
Speaker. We should not have to pay more than three times. That 
was unacceptable on a broad base because it wouldn’t affect 
any other province, and we need other provincial support. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we went back to the drawing board. We came 
up with an alternate plan. In that alternate plan, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a sliding scale, and that scale changes that rate from 
60/40 to 70/30 to 80/20 to 90/10, depending on how far off you 
are from your own provincial average so that it would affect 
every province, Mr. Speaker. We think it’s very effective. We 
want to see the federal government adopt it, and we’re getting 
the support that’s necessary. We hope we can push it through. 
We’ve got changes in FIMCLA [Farm Improvement and 
Marketing Cooperatives Loans Act], Mr. Speaker; we’re going 
to keep pushing. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let’s take a minute here and review the NDP government and 
that Ag minister’s record. Last year they wouldn’t put money 
into the CAIS program until December. This year they aren’t 
putting any more money into the CAIS program, not fully 
funding it. 
 
What else do they do with our farmers this year? They raise 
crop insurance premiums, cut coverage. No cash injection 
provincially into the new federal announcement. They freeze 
municipal funding which, in turn, is going to raise taxes for 
farmers and ranchers. They also froze the foundation grant. This 
is also going to raise the education tax that farmers and ranchers 
pay. 
 
What other good news have they got for farmers, Mr. Speaker? 
Just tell the farmers of Saskatchewan one optimistic thing 
they’re doing for farmers this year. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think revisionist history is always a problem, and these guys 
are trying to provide it all the time for us. 
 
What I would like to do is point out very clearly the 
multi-millions of dollars that we have come forward with — 3 
per cent of Canada’s population supporting almost 50 per cent 
of Canada’s agriculture sector, Mr. Speaker, and this 3 per cent 
of the population has provided around BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] off budget, over budget, $85 million in the last 
couple of years, Mr. Speaker. That’s a lot of money for the 
people of this province but we’re there for our producers. We 
don’t resent it. We’re putting it forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that last year once we knew 
that we could get the resources and we had the final numbers, 
we did come forward — $210 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, that kind of contribution 
from 3 per cent of the population, 10 times the provincial per 
capita average, is astounding and I commend the people of this 
province for the kind of support they have. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 
guest that has joined us in the Chamber. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 
welcome to the Saskatchewan Legislative Chamber, and I am 
sure all members will join me in offering a welcome to a very 
distinguished Canadian who has joined us today in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, a former premier of the great province of 
Manitoba, former governor general of Canada, Mr. Ed 
Schreyer. He is in your gallery. I want to welcome him to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, just before I take my place, 
we all recognize the great contributions that Mr. Schreyer has 
made to his province and to our nation. But he continues to do 
so, whether it’s through Habitat for Humanity or, in fact, 
through other initiatives of which he is a part today. I want to 
thank him for his contribution ongoing to our nation and I look 
forward to meeting with Mr. Schreyer shortly after question 
period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just very quickly but 
sincerely, on behalf of the official opposition, we would like to 
join with the Premier in welcoming Mr. Schreyer to our 
Legislative Assembly, in your gallery. 
 
I’m not sure if we’ll get a chance to visit later on but I would 
relish that in terms of his knowledge of the history of Western 
Canada and of course for the nation as a whole. But we thank 
him for his commitment to his province and his country and 
welcome here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Massey 
Place on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — To ask leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I just want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, 
Elwood Cowley, who is a former member of this legislature and 
is sitting on the floor of the legislature behind the government 
benches. And I want to say as a minister of Finance formerly 

myself, and presently in charge of Mineral Resources, Mr. 
Cowley also held those positions and served the province with a 
great deal of distinction. And I know all members will want to 
welcome him to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . more time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I, as well, would like to introduce Mr. Elwood 
Cowley who is sitting behind the bar. Mr. Cowley was my 
history teacher in Thom Collegiate and a very good history 
teacher he was too. And I resent the implication that he taught 
me revisionist history. 
 
I hope that all members will welcome Mr. Cowley. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question 913. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 913 has been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place and the minister . . . The Chair 
recognizes the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity today to enter into debate on the 
budget. And in doing so, Mr. Speaker, offer my congratulations 
to the Minister of Finance and the Premier for putting together a 
budget that is pragmatic, cautious, and very forward-looking for 
the circumstances that we find ourselves in. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

Since budget day, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had personal meetings with 
community leaders, both in the Battlefords and in the city of 
Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that the response 
generally was very positive to the initiatives that have been put 
forward. There are things, of course, that we need to continue to 
discuss and continue to work at, some of which I will mention 
in my remarks. But generally, Mr. Speaker, the response was a 
positive one indicating that we’ve done a pretty good job of 
assessing the circumstances of the province and preparing us for 
the years ahead. 
 
In northwest Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we like the 
expenditures in health care; the new money for youth; the new 
integrated facility that’s being proposed or being brought 
forward in Maidstone; the continued twinning of the 
Yellowhead highway; and the addition of two new CT 
[computerized tomography] scanners for the Prairie North 
Regional Health Authority, one of those CT scanners, Mr. 
Speaker, for North Battleford and the other one for 
Lloydminster. This is all money well spent according to the 
people that I’ve been talking to in both of our communities. 
 
The northwest part of the province, Mr. Speaker, also 
appreciates the enhanced oil recovery initiatives that were 
announced just prior to budget. Everyone I talked to agreed that 
these incentives should continue to build on the economy that 
exists in northwest Saskatchewan. The people I talked to clearly 
see the long-term benefits of developing the industry and 
putting the education and training, as well as research and 
development activity, to work at the same time. Mr. Speaker, 
they talk about this program as visionary, to support the 
economy of northwest Saskatchewan. 
 
For some across the way, they argue of course there is no 
vision. For others — my constituents, Mr. Speaker — that 
vision is very clear and broadly supported: oil incentives, 
education and training, research and development, working 
hand-in-hand to develop an industry and an economy for the 
future of Saskatchewan, more jobs, improved quality of life, a 
better province for all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
My constituents also understand that 2005-2006 is very much a 
transition year and that one-time revenues cannot be used to 
fund long-term ongoing programs and expenditure. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a transition year because we’ve just settled on past 
grievances with the federal government on equalizations. Past 
grievances, Mr. Speaker, hard fought by the Premier of 
Saskatchewan with support from some sectors of the provincial 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, equalization is not clarified for the future. We’ve 
settled past grievances, but we still have to await the review of 
the review committee set by the federal government and, Mr. 
Speaker, we won’t know the circumstances that Saskatchewan 
will face on equalization until the end of this year and the 
response of the federal government to that. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we understand and recognize the volatility 
that exists in our non-renewable resource sector and the 
revenues that we’ve gained from that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, certainly it’s been an interesting and rewarding 
year for the people of Saskatchewan thanks to increase in world 
oil prices, natural gas prices, potash prices. But, Mr. Speaker, 
we also recognize that these prices are very volatile. Many 
members in northwest Saskatchewan clearly remember 1998 
when the price of oil in the world market was only $15 a barrel, 
Mr. Speaker, compared to the $50 a barrel that it’s at today. 
And of course everyone recognizes that the price of oil over the 
course of the last year averaged out at around 40 to $41 a barrel. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, given that this is a transition year 
between unfairness and unpredictable to a more fair and more 
predictable circumstance, my constituents give us high marks 
for being very cautious and being very pragmatic in the way in 
which we’ve approached our budgetary measures. 
 
While I’m on the subject, Mr. Speaker, more congratulations to 
the Minister of Finance I think are in order, who has managed 
to reduce our provincial debt to its lowest level in 14 years and 
secured this province, secured for this province, the 11th 
consecutive credit upgrade by the bond rating agencies of the 
world. This work provides us with tremendous positioning for 
the future, Mr. Speaker, in that we know that the bond markets, 
the credit rating agencies, those from outside who are looking at 
the way in which this budget, this government is being managed 
from a fiscal perspective, Mr. Speaker, goes a long way to 
giving us credibility for work that’s yet to be done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I resume my seat, I want to make 
some remarks about the municipal sector and what this budget 
does in support of the municipal sector. Mr. Speaker, the budget 
that we’ve got in front of us confirms the funding for a new 
infrastructure program with a total of $9.2 million in funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who read the budget document closely will 
realize that overall the spending of the province increases by 7 
per cent. The increase for the Department of Government 
Relations support for the municipal sector, Mr. Speaker, is 
increasing by about 12 per cent this year above the provincial 
spending average. Mr. Speaker, this is primarily because there’s 
$11 million to fund municipal infrastructure in this budget. This 
is money that’s in addition to previously committed 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program funding that was 
put in place over the last five years. 
 
The province was pleased to be able to announce our 
infrastructure program earlier in the year, Mr. Speaker, so that 
municipalities could submit applications for projects and be 
approved in time for this year’s construction season. 
 
This year under the Canada Strategic Infrastructure Fund, also 
previously announced, we are providing $2.5 million for the 
Saskatoon south downtown development project, $1.4 million 
to complete Saskatoon riverfront redevelopment project started 
in 2004, and $2 million for the Regina Exhibition multi-purpose 
building done in conjunction with the Canada Summer Games. 
This totals $5.9 million under the Canada Strategic 
Infrastructure Fund. These initiatives demonstrate the 
province’s commitment to focus on infrastructure for the 
coming year. 
 
I was also pleased on budget day, Mr. Speaker, to announce 
provincial funding for urban development agreements for each 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

of the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this funding 
will enable the province to conclude negotiations with the 
Government of Canada and the cities of Regina and Saskatoon 
under urban development agreements. It represents the first year 
of a five-year commitment that will see the province contribute 
a total of $5 million, 2.5 million for each city, to be used for 
project initiatives identified by the three governments as 
priorities in each respective city. 
 
The UDA [urban development agreement] signalled the 
beginning of a new relationship in Regina and Saskatoon 
amongst federal, provincial, and city governments and a new 
tripartite approach to addressing issues of shared interests in the 
two cities. The UDAs are to be cost shared on a 
federal-provincial-city basis. As a result, the provincial funding 
contribution together with each city’s contribution of 2.5 
million and the federal government’s commitment of up to 5 
million for each UDA will provide a total of $20 million over 
five years to be directed to urban development priorities and 
issues in the two cities. 
 
In providing funding for the UDAs in the ’05-06 budget and 
committing to funding the five-year term agreements, the 
province recognizes the importance of Regina and Saskatoon 
from a provincial economic perspective. They are a step 
towards making tangible investments that positively impact the 
residents of the two cities and that benefit the population of the 
province as a whole. 
 
When we look more specifically at the municipal sector, Mr. 
Speaker, municipalities are aware that the province is preparing 
to sit down with them to discuss options available to us with 
regards to future revenue sharing. They are also very 
appreciative that the additional money that we had available this 
year has gone to support their projects and infrastructure and 
with the expectation that new options on revenue sharing will 
be discussed seriously and in a straightforward manner. And I 
have made that commitment to the municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this budget, municipalities will find that this budget totals 
funding for municipalities of $130 million, Mr. Speaker, some 
of that flowing through from the federal government. That 
includes $85 million for revenue sharing, $5 million under the 
grants-in-lieu program, $2.65 million for the transit assistance 
for people with disabilities program, and $37.8 million for 
infrastructure through the completion of CSIP 
[Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program], the new MRIF 
[Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund], and other major projects 
shared by the province. 
 
In conclusion then, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity 
to thank the Minister of Finance, who I believe has done an 
admirable job positioning Saskatchewan’s finances to both 
support and lead the growth of this province for more stable 
years ahead. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to have 
the opportunity to respond to the budget this year. And I guess 

first off, Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing that a budget such as 
this would come out from the NDP government after last year 
having in excess of $1 billion windfall in the province from gas 
and oil revenues, equalization revenues from the federal 
government; $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, more that they thought 
they had. 
 
And now this year I understand that there may be anywhere 
from 400 to 500 million more than was usually the case when 
oil prices, gas prices were lower. That much more at a 
minimum probably, Mr. Speaker, because gas prices — if we 
watch downtown Regina and all over the province for that 
matter — have skyrocketed in excess of 90 cents a litre. 
Probably 400 to 500 million new-found money again this year 
is probably a very low estimate. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, and not knowing where the $1 
billion disappeared to, I find it amazing when it come to things 
like agriculture that the NDP government had to cut the 
agriculture budget about $140 million from last year. And I 
know that some of . . . led to believe . . . I know the Premier 
said the other day that they’re putting record amounts in 
agriculture provincially. 
 
Well that’s not exactly the way I see it, Mr. Speaker, because I 
believe if you go back to about 1990, Mr. Speaker, there was 
around $1 billion put into the agriculture budget in 
Saskatchewan. Right now we’re down to 264 million, Mr. 
Speaker, and what that is, that’s about 140 million less. The 
budget I see for last year that was spent from the province of 
Saskatchewan was about $404.792 million into the agriculture 
budget. That’s after they finally got up after the eleventh hour 
and funded the CAIS program fully, which they’re going to 
have to do again this year, Mr. Speaker, because our farmers in 
Saskatchewan cannot afford to not have the CAIS program fully 
funded. 
 
So at a time when farmers have had BSE problems for a couple 
of years, we’ve had frost last August 20, I know in my 
constituency and for that matter in many areas of the province, 
in fact all over the province, farmers are right up against it. 
They don’t have money to put this crop in. 
 
In fact many of the farmers I’ve talked to have not even finished 
paying off last year’s bills. Can’t get an operating loan until you 
get those bills paid off. The banking institutions are certainly 
not going to look at you and say, certainly we’ll back you on an 
operating loan or cash for spring seeding. You certainly have to 
have last year’s bills paid off. That isn’t happening, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Yesterday’s announcement by the federal government is very 
positive. I’ve heard nothing but good things from farmers 
yesterday that that announcement was made now before 
seeding. It was very timely. Let’s hope the cheques get out there 
very quickly. I guess our concern, and I think also farmers in 
the province’s concern, is that that $1 billion is spread right 
across the country of Canada. That injection of money 
yesterday is to cover everything. It’s to cover all forms of 
livestock, I understand, the grain and oil sector, the full 
spectrum, Mr. Speaker. And I think the concern all of us have is 
that when the actual dollar gets out to the farmers and ranchers 
of Saskatchewan those cheques may not be all that big at all. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

And I know it’s . . . in the past it sounds good to the federal 
government, in fact both levels of government — especially the 
NDP government — when they do something like this. They 
announce the full amount that they’re putting in but they really 
don’t break it down so that the average urbanite, the people 
living in the cities, can understand exactly what’s going out 
there. So it’s not the urban people’s fault when they think 
farmers are getting a big wad of cash put into the farm 
community. 
 
I think the problem sometimes is communications out there. As 
farmers, and I included myself as that when I was farming, 
maybe we don’t spread the word enough and explain these cash 
injections in the programs that we have out there. And these are 
not all just handout money. We put our share into the program 
such as crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, a third, a third, and a third; 
and the farmer puts his share in. 
 
Through good times, the federal and provincial governments get 
to return money to the revenue fund. They get to put money 
back in that they never spent that year. When bad times come 
and there’s more money needed, that would be the time to put 
that money back into these programs, crop insurance being a 
good example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the NDP government deal with things 
like crop insurance? Well we go over the past two or three years 
. . . I think it was two years ago they increased premiums by 52 
per cent, and about the same time cut spot loss hail from the 
program. Spot loss hail, Mr. Speaker, was the only reason that 
many farmers were actually taking out crop insurance at that 
time. The next year, I believe, they raised the premiums another 
13 per cent and kind of doctored the coverage a little bit. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, again at a time we can least afford it, 
this government sees fit to raise premiums on an average of 
about 9 per cent — in fact in some areas I understand it’s as 
high as 46 per cent — and at the same time cutting coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers are between a rock and a hard place when 
it comes to crop insurance. Unless they have crop insurance, 
they can’t get the cash advance. Unless they have crop 
insurance, they can’t get an operating loan in most cases from 
the bank. The financial institutions want that guarantee there. 
No matter how low it is and no matter how expensive for the 
farmers, that’s what they ask, and that’s what they insist on 
before you qualify for any sort of an operating loan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I think there’s a great 
appreciation out there for what the federal government did 
yesterday. I think that appreciation would have been extended 
to the provincial government should they have come to the plate 
and said, here we go, we’ll back our farmers. But that’s not to 
be. As we heard the minister say in question period today, there 
is no way that they’re going to put anything into this 
announcement. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, then at least the minister 
could have done was said, instead of putting into this program, I 
think what we’ll do is fully fund the CAIS program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s stress all over rural Saskatchewan out there 
— not just the farmers, not just the ranchers, but business 

people that are tightly affected by what happens in the 
agriculture community. And by funding the CAIS program, I 
think it would have give all those people that are reliant on the 
spinoff from agriculture, it would have given the confidence 
that there’s something there in case we have another bad year 
and to help cover for the year we just had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to look at a number of other things in the 
budget that actually affect my constituency. Talk on highways 
for a minute. I noticed in the budget that, I think, we’re froze at 
about the same amount of money as we were last year. Coming 
in this morning, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing the potholes that are 
showing up — not only in the urban places like Regina and the 
towns and that — but also on our highways in the province. 
And they’re going to take a tremendous amount of maintenance 
just to get them back to where they were before. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And with the normal rate of inflation out there, I believe what 
we’re actually doing by freezing that budget very close to what 
it was before is we’re going backwards. Because with inflation, 
we’ll actually be able to build less highways and less 
maintenance this year out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also talk about school divisions and what 
the money in the budget was for school divisions, especially 
seeing that the minister of Education is forcing school divisions 
out there, forcing them to amalgamate. 
 
Remembering back, Mr. Speaker, when I believe it was Mr. 
Melenchuk was the Education minister and asked school 
divisions to voluntarily amalgamate. And he did that and the 
school divisions all over the province took a look at it and a 
number of them actually did amalgamate — some two, some 
three — into one body. I think there was roughly $400 million 
put into that program to assist them to voluntarily amalgamate. 
 
They just got finished doing that, they did exactly what the 
minister at that time asked, and what does the government do? 
It comes along and says, well now we’re ruling that out; that 
isn’t going to work; you’re going to do what we say and we’re 
going to cut them away more. We’re going to get down to what 
— 12, 13 school divisions in the province? 
 
I want to use Melville-Deer Park for an example, Mr. Speaker. 
They had a really good system there where they shared a 
building, they shared office staff, they shared administration 
with the Catholic board and it was just a perfect, perfect 
situation. 
 
Now that the minister has saw fit to force amalgamation on it, 
has threw that completely out the window. And you know what 
that’s going to do, Mr. Speaker, for the public system and for 
the Catholic system? Because it won’t work now in the new 
set-up that we have with the larger divisions out there. It’s 
going to increase taxes in the local, to the local taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also mention that we have the pending 
teachers strike coming up and I have two of my kids are 
teachers. I have a son teaching in Yorkton, I have a daughter 
teaching in Eston. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting when we 
hear on the open line shows and that, some people phone in and 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

say, oh well teachers are overpaid and they’ve got all this time 
off. 
 
Let me make one thing very clear, Mr. Speaker, and I know 
myself I was a farmer before and was not that fully aware of 
what teachers did. But if people only knew the hours that 
teachers put in, it’s not a straight 9 to 3:30 job. 
 
I know my kids and I know every other teacher in the province 
puts in these extracurricular activity hours where it could be on 
a weekend, you could be going to volleyball tournaments, all 
sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. And then preparation for classes 
and preparation for the things they’re going to do tomorrow, the 
things they’re going to do after the weekend. 
 
Even on this Easter break that they’ve got right now, I know my 
kids and I think many other teachers in the province are already 
preparing for next week and on down to the end of the school 
year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, teaching is not an easy profession; it’s a very 
worthy profession. And I’ve learnt to have a great appreciation 
for it since I have two kids in it as teachers. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
hope the minister would keep that in mind when he’s 
negotiating a contract because I know the student loans that my 
kids had to take out when they went in to teaching, and I know 
the money that it cost the parents to put them through four, five 
years university. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very expensive and it 
would be nice to see the teachers getting a little reward, far 
more than the 0, 1, and 1 that’s being offered to them at the 
present time. 
 
I found it a little bit hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, of the 
government when they have all this money but yet they have no 
money for agriculture and they’ve got no more money for 
municipalities, froze the foundation grant, number of areas 
where they couldn’t find any extra money for, and yet the 
Premier saw fit to increase his funding for his office staff by 50 
per cent. It’s kind of do as I do, don’t do as I say and . . . or do 
as I say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noticed last year . . . we remember last year that 
the PST [provincial sales tax] was jacked up 1 per cent, which I 
believe brought in about $140 million into the provincial 
coffers. Wouldn’t it have seemed realistic then this year after 
the billion dollar windfall that the government had last year, and 
the 4 to 500 million extra dollars that are coming into general 
revenue this year, wouldn’t it have seemed a good thing to do is 
to cut that 1 per cent at least off the PST and return it to at least 
where it was when the former premier had left as premier of the 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of things in this budget I think 
that we find many, many problems with, as I’ve said before. 
Let’s just review some of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was no increase, as I said before, in revenue sharing for 
urban and rural municipalities. No reduction in personal income 
tax, which means the NDP continues to break an election 
promise on lowering taxes, and that’s not the only one, Mr. 
Speaker. No business tax reduction, something that we really 
need in this province if we ever expect to grow the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. No tax relief for low-income earners as a part of 

society that is in desperate need, pay lower taxes so they have 
more funds available to raise their families and to actually live 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. No commitment to fund the 
CAIS program, as I said before. No commitment to index the 
basic allowance for social assistance recipients. No 
commitment to additional treatment beds for those suffering 
from addictions, Mr. Speaker. No specific targets on waiting 
lists, Mr. Speaker. And I think each member on this side of the 
House has examples that they could show of people in our 
constituencies that have been caught in the long waiting lists 
whether it’s 6 months, 1 year, 18 months, 24 months. 
 
I know I had, the one that comes to mind right away, we had a 
lady in our constituency, Mr. Speaker, I believe had waited 18 
months for her surgery, got in here — I believe it was the 
General Hospital — was prepped for her operation, was right 
beside the operating room door about 10 to 4, and you know 
what happened, Mr. Speaker? The operation was cancelled 
because they would have had to pay overtime after 4 o’clock. 
 
Here’s a lady that waited for 18 months at least for her 
operation, got all prepped, was right ready to go. And Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve never been in that situation, but I imagine the 
stress that that puts on a person and you build up your 
confidence to have the surgeries done and the procedures done. 
And all of a sudden they tell you that’s not going to happen 
today; you’ve got to go home and come back another day. I 
don’t believe that lady has had that operation at this point. 
 
But what they don’t seem to realize is that lady had a three-hour 
drive into Regina for every appointment she had with every 
specialist in here. Then she turns around and has to drive back 
in, gets her courage up to have the operation. I mean do we not 
have any compassion for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to health care? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it all boils down to priorities of this NDP 
government. They seem to be able to grow the Premier’s staff 
but forget about the staff that’s really important in such things 
such as teachers and nurses, the professionals that we absolutely 
need in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the amendment that 
was put forward by my colleagues, and the amendment reads: 
 

“That the Assembly” be deleted and the following be 
substituted therefor: 
 
disagrees with the general budgetary policy of the 
government because the Premier and cabinet have 
betrayed low- and modest-income earners by not 
increasing the basic personal exemption for people who 
earn less that $35,000 each year, have not included 
indexation to the food allowance for people living on 
social assistance, have predetermined the outcome of 
collective bargaining for teachers and nurses, have frozen 
funding for the K to 12 education, have not committed to 
fully fund the province’s share of the Canadian agriculture 
income stabilization program, have not addressed revenue 
sharing with municipalities, and have not laid out a 
long-term vision for the province for the next 100 years, 
therefore this provincial government does not enjoy the 
confidence of this Assembly. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

I would support that amendment, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very 
disappointed in this year’s budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, pleased 
and proud to support the budget introduced into this Chamber 
by the Minister of Finance. 
 
There has been considerable reflection and comment this year, 
as is fit and proper, surrounding the fact and the event of our 
centennial as a province and how this is an opportunity both to 
reflect upon the achievements and accomplishments of our 
pioneers and elders, but also an opportunity to think in terms 
longer than, at budget year terms, longer than a term of 
government; to think in the future in terms greater than that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And although any budget deals with the revenues raised in that 
year and expended in that year — and that may seem like a 
simple concept, Mr. Speaker, but I think some people have 
difficulty grasping that — although any budget will have that 
annual effect and that annual focus, this is a budget that we’ve 
brought forward in our centennial year and, I think, reflects 
upon a future, looks forward to a future beyond the simple 
budget year. And I would like in my comments, Mr. Speaker, to 
centre upon the youth of our province and the important 
investments that this budget makes in our youth and therefore in 
the future of our province as we enter our second century. 
 
And if I may proceed chronologically through the stages of life, 
Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to speak just very briefly about 
the KidsFirst program, one of the initiatives to intervene, effect, 
change in positive ways the lives of children from zero to six. 
And KidsFirst provides intensive support to families in 
communities across the province where the need is the greatest, 
Mr. Speaker, and this is accomplished through partnerships 
with families, with communities, with community 
organizations, with schools, health authorities, Aboriginal 
organizations, and other governments. This program is based 
upon the concept of prevention. It’s based upon the concept of 
early intervention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, as the members of the House know, 
as some members of the public know, I am the Minister of 
Justice. And the justice system, particularly the criminal justice 
system, is a very reactive system, Mr. Speaker. When families 
break down, when families don’t work, when communities 
don’t work, when neighbourhoods don’t work, the criminal 
justice system is called in as the system of last resort to attempt 
to repair the damage that may very well have been prevented. 
The KidsFirst program is an important part of that kind of 
preventative programming. I think its successes, although some 
of them will be in the future — most of them will be in the 
future — some of them are already being seen. 
 
I think the concept behind it is so clear, so self-evident that I 
fully expect that it will be in the next pamphlet of the 
Saskatchewan Party, which I understand will be called 100 
more ideas to make us look more moderate and reasonable. 

Like many of the ideas in the first pamphlet, of course, it’s 
already in the process of being implemented. It includes 
dedicated mental health and addictions workers working with 
KidsFirst families and provides for 252 child care spaces for 
KidsFirst families. 
 
There’s no question that our communities, our province, would 
be a better place today if this program had been in place 20 
years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, you may be familiar with the 
Russian proverb about the best time to plant a tree. And the best 
time to plant a tree is 20 years ago. The second best time, 
according to the proverb, is today. And with the KidsFirst 
program, we have been planting trees that will bear fruit for the 
next generation and the generation after that. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the budget makes provisions for . . . 
again, with early intervention, with prevention, with building 
better citizens and therefore better families, better communities, 
better neighbourhoods for the future. Enhancements to early 
childhood and learning including in this budget enhancing the 
child nutrition development program and providing an 
additional $1.1 million to First Nations child and family service 
agencies. 
 
And we’re working with the federal government and with early 
childhood and learning. We are working with stakeholders, and 
I expect that we will be making considerable advances over the 
next very near future . . . and over the next year, two years, 
three years, making great advances in this area in respect to 
early childhood and child care. 
 
Also in this budget, Mr. Speaker, are investments in education 
in K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12]. Investments in education 
yield long-term benefits for individuals, families, and the entire 
province. Supporting youth to stay in school and succeed in 
learning are keys to success in life. In this budget, there’s $26.6 
million in capital spending for K to 12 school facilities. There is 
establishment of 15 school service areas to collaborate at the 
local level for the learning successes and well-being of children 
and youth. We are enhancing online resources for the K to 12 
system with a further $300,000, and we are expanding 
partnerships within the K to 12 system through the Aboriginal 
employment development program to promote a stay in school 
message. 
 
And there is nothing more important, Mr. Speaker, other than 
early intervention and avoiding the costs being borne within the 
justice system, than attachment to school and attachment to the 
neighbourhood that follows from attachment to school, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I’ve spoken about the very beginning of the youth’s life. 
I’ve spoken about the K to 12 and how provisions are being 
made in this budget for advancements and progress in both 
those areas. And I now want to address, Mr. Speaker, briefly 
investments that we are making in post-secondary education. 
 
Investment in Saskatchewan’s universities, regional colleges, 
and SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] campuses encourages our young people to build 
their lives and careers right here at home. I believe a keystone, 
or certainly one of the most important components of this 
budget, was the $6.7 million provided for the two Saskatchewan 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

universities in the form of the Saskatchewan centennial 
university tuition grant, which will allow those universities to 
hold the line on tuition so that we will see no tuition increase 
over the 2004 level, Mr. Speaker. Students asked for such a 
program. This government has delivered that program to them. 
 
[15:00] 
 
In addition — and this is over and above the tuition grant; it’s 
over and above the other spending in the investments in 
post-secondary education — $3.8 million towards the 
accreditation of the College of Medicine; $900,000 for the 
expansion of the nursing education program; $3.4 million to 
expand the bursary program so that approximately 10,000 
students will have additional non-repayable students’ assistance 
this year; and an additional 34 bursaries for Aboriginal students 
through a Crown Investment Corporation program. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, partnering with the Crown Investment 
Corporation, the First Nations University of Canada, there are 
plans to implement the Aboriginal student recruitment and 
retention office, the undergraduate student leadership program, 
and intercultural leadership centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have learned of the growing prosperity of our 
province. This is now a have province, Mr. Speaker. We have 
. . . Resource prices are high, Revenues to the government have 
increased. This has not escaped the notice of anybody in this 
legislature. It hasn’t escaped the notice of the opposition. It is 
important that this prosperity be invested in all the people of 
Saskatchewan. And you will note it in what I have spoken about 
already, both at the K to 12 level and the post-secondary level, a 
commitment to ensuring that Aboriginal students are well 
represented in the graduating classes of our schools and our 
universities and our other post-secondary institutions as we go 
forward. 
 
Crown Investment Corporation also has a math and science 
enrichment program at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 
for an estimated 50 students per year. Now some people might 
suggest that the Finance critic, the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs — some people call unkindly the man who 
would be king, having spent well over $1 billion out of a $900 
million increase in revenues — might benefit from this math 
enrichment program, but then again he might not, Mr. Speaker. 
I understand he was a political staffer here in 1980s, and if that 
didn’t teach him that you can’t spend more than you bring in, I 
don’t think anything will. 
 
In addition there is $3 million in capital to the U of R 
[University of Regina] for design and construction of a new lab 
building, the University of Regina; $1.8 million to SIAST, and 
$700,000 to the regional colleges for sustaining capital. 
 
And for the students who graduate from our post-secondary 
institutions, remain in the province, are employed in this 
province, making a contribution in this province, an increase in 
the post-secondary tax credit to $675 this year, up from $500. 
 
And in addition, Mr. Speaker, the budget makes provisions for 
transition to the workforce for young people. The government 
has played and will continue to play a critical role in developing 
skills individuals need for participation in the labour force over 

their lifetime and in responding to the needs of industry. 
 
Two million dollars has been put aside to increase training 
capacity for the JobStart/Future Skills program, adult basic 
education and apprenticeship programs by 1,000 seats. Crown 
Investments Corporation’s investing in young people by 
offering the grad works intern program. And as of March 1, 
2005, 38 crown internship opportunities are posted on the grad 
works website with an intent to provide 85 this year. The Green 
Team initiative will provide 100 students with career relevant 
employment in the environment sector. 
 
The centennial student employment program will provide 700 
students with career relevant employment in government, 
community-based organizations, and post-secondary 
institutions. 
 
These are all investments made in this budget in the youth of 
our province from preschool to post-secondary to transition to 
the workplace, Mr. Speaker. These are investments that show 
this government’s commitment to the future generation as we 
enter our second century. 
 
But there is another overarching commitment that we are 
making. And if I could speak just briefly, Mr. Speaker, of an 
event that I attended yesterday morning where I had the honour 
of presenting a medallion to a citizen in my constituency, who 
turned 100 years old this year, the same year as the province, 
born the year that we entered Confederation, turned 100 years 
old today, or this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were four generations of his family at this 
event, and his great granddaughter who’s 10 years old, rose to 
speak about her great-grandfather who was being presented 
with this medallion. And I tell you, a gold medallion, it’s a 
beautiful thing, Mr. Speaker — you’ve probably seen one, 
although I know you wouldn’t have been presented with one, of 
course. 
 
But it could not possibly, possibly match the pride he must have 
felt when this 10-year-old girl rose and gave an eloquent speech 
with no notes — that she had memorized but that she gave not 
as if it were recited but with feeling — and talked about her 
great-grandfather: when he was born, the youngest son, on a 
farm in Saskatchewan, and how he became a teacher. And how 
during the Depression, people didn’t have money to pay their 
taxes, and the school board didn’t have money to pay his salary, 
and he was paid in eggs and butter. And how he and his family 
lived through and endured and prospered. And her 
great-grandfather’s recommendation for a long life: balance, eat 
nutritious meals, exercise every day, and always do your 
homework. 
 
And this year we are taking this time to acknowledge the 
accomplishments of the great-grandfather. But what is as 
important is to recognize the importance of our investments and 
our attention in that great-granddaughter. Now her ambition — 
well she has two — she wants to be a plastic surgeon and she 
wants to be prime minister of Canada. Well I told her to be a 
plastic surgeon first. And her interest in being prime minister of 
Canada is because she doesn’t think we have the proper amount 
of attention directed to environmental issues and she wants to 
see those taken care of. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

And so our debt to her great-grandfather we well know. People 
like him built this province. Our obligation to her, we also have 
to pay attention to, both on providing a sustainable economy so 
that there is an environment there for her to continue to protect 
and hold in stewardship for her children and her grandchildren, 
but secondly there’s a responsibility — perhaps not as grand, 
but very important — to be responsible in our stewardship of 
the finances with which we are entrusted. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year we have seen the total public debt 
for the province of Saskatchewan at 28 per cent of the gross 
domestic product of this province — the lowest, the lowest it 
has been since 1982. This is a government on this side of the 
House that takes the responsibilities entrusted to it by the 
people of Saskatchewan to provide both a green and prosperous 
economy for the great-granddaughter, but also to provide the 
circumstances in which future investments can be responsibly 
made. That, Mr. Speaker, truly is a centennial budget. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers on his feet? 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave is granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The other 
day, Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of introducing six 
Borgersons to the House. I have the honour to introduce another 
Borgerson to the House, my sister Gail, Gail Smith, who is here 
from Stony Plain, Alberta. Whenever she wants to have a good 
experience of family and community, of course she comes from 
Alberta to Saskatchewan for a visit, and that’s why she’s here 
today. I’d like the members to welcome Gail to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join in on the budget debate in this Hon. Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government, or this province for that 
matter, has never seen such a windfall on the revenue side with 
revenues exceeding expectations in the budget year just ending 
to the tune of $1.1 billion — revenue generated by 
unprecedented oil and gas prices, steadily increasing prices for 
potash and uranium, and nearly half a billion dollars in 
unexpected, one-time federal transfers. That $1.1 billion was 
generated in the fiscal year just ending, Mr. Speaker, and for the 
new fiscal year that is about to begin they project an additional 
$400 million on the revenue side. 
 
Heady times indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, especially when one 
considers that the additional 400 million that is projected for 
this upcoming fiscal year is based on only $41.50 oil. Pretty 
conservative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we consider that oil is 
up around $57 a barrel and the fundamentals that we are aware 
of today indicate that it will likely stay up around the $50 mark 
for the year. That makes the government’s projection probably 
$10 a barrel or about 25 per cent low, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Conservative indeed. 
 
In other words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, never in the history of this 
province has any government had such an opportunity to show 
some leadership or to take a direction that will begin to propel 
us out of the economic and social stagnation that we have been 
mired in for six decades. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see no direction in this budget and 
no leadership. In fact there is so little direction and leadership in 
this budget that it looks like they just couldn’t agree on any 
kind of a direction and after squabbling for a period of time the 
Premier, or whoever’s in charge over there, threw up his hands 
and said okay, then we’ll just give every government 
department and agency a little money, we won’t do anything for 
the real people in this province, and we’ll once again abdicate 
our responsibility to lead. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I didn’t volunteer to speak in 
this budget debate until I saw the budget. I knew that the NDP 
government had a huge windfall of cash to spend. I assumed 
that they were smart enough to direct a good portion of that 
money where it could really make a difference. And I didn’t 
want to be put in a position of having to criticize the 
government for trying to do the right thing. But, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they missed the mark badly and they’re not making 
any kind of a serious effort to do the right thing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s examine some of the specific 
shortcomings of this budget. Since the early 1990s, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this NDP government has been downloading on both 
rural and urban municipalities. But not only have they been 
downloading costs and responsibilities on municipalities, they 
have at the same time cut back revenue sharing grants to both 
rural and urban municipalities. There is nothing in this budget 
to address that injustice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This will 
undoubtedly mean that property taxes will again be forced up 
right across this province, the province with the highest 
property taxes in all classes in the country. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, former Premier Roy Romanow got a lot of 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

credit for balancing the budget in the mid-1990s. He did that on 
the backs of every segment of the population except the 
provincial government, which continued to grow right through 
his NDP government. And no segment of the population, with 
the possible exception of farmers, paid a higher price for those 
balanced budgets than did property taxpayers. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, not only are high property taxes a burden on our 
families and our agricultural sector, but they are making us 
uncompetitive in all sectors of our economy and they are one of 
the big three taxes that discourage investment in this province. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this matter of high property taxes needed 
to be addressed as soon as the government had the financial 
capacity to do so. This NDP government had the financial 
capacity to address it in this budget, and they failed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, low income earners in this province pay 
the highest income taxes in the country. The Saskatchewan 
Party has a plan to give low-income earners the break that they 
so richly deserve by substantially increasing their personal 
exemption. Often when this tired, mean-spirited, old 
government can’t come up with a workable idea of their own, 
they steal ours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have never so sincerely 
wished that they would steal one of our ideas than I did in this 
case. 
 
We on this side of the floor have compassion for good 
productive people who work hard and still can’t get a break. 
And we have a plan to do something about it. This government 
had the opportunity and the financial means to do something 
about it, and they refused. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest business 
taxes in the country. The NDP don’t like business. They are 
socialists. They believe in the Regina Manifesto which is the 
document that their ideology is based on and it vows to destroy 
capitalism. What the NDP either don’t know or intentionally 
ignore is the fact that it takes a vibrant and growing private 
business sector to make the investments and create the jobs that 
will cause an economy to prosper. 
 
This province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has the highest basket of 
taxes not based on profit of any jurisdiction in Canada. These 
are taxes like corporate capital tax, PST, and property taxes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, business expects to pay a fair amount of 
tax in one form or another, but the taxes that they find most 
repugnant are those taxes that are not based on profit. And they 
will invest in jurisdictions where those taxes are lower or don’t 
exist, and they will continue to avoid places like this where they 
are unreasonably high. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 
had the financial ability to deal with these taxes that kill 
investment and prosperity in our province, and chose not to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget the government actually 
broadened the base of the corporate capital tax that applies to 
oil and gas industry by applying this job-killing tax to energy 
trusts. Is it any wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
incompetent government predicts less drilling starts this year — 
this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with $57 oil — than we had last 
year? And is it any wonder that there were less drilling starts 

last year than the year before? 
 
Our school teachers contribute to this province like they never 
have before, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These days they are expected 
to be social workers, policemen, psychologists, and parents as 
well as teachers. They have done their part to help this province 
and now, when they expect and need a little fairness in return, 
this NDP government imposes a 0, 1, and 1 wage settlement 
guideline on them which today we hear may not be firm after 
all. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but this NDP budget allows no new 
money for K to 12 operating grants, money that will be 
necessary to cover any kind of a negotiated wage settlement. 
Once again they had the means but refused to do the right thing 
by our teachers. This action, or inaction, has the potential to 
throw this province into a teachers’ strike and eventually drive 
more of our teachers out of the province. Since this budget 
allows no new money for K to 12 operating grants, any 
settlement this government makes with our teachers will go 
straight into property taxes and further exacerbate that already 
grim situation. 
 
Our agricultural producers have been this government’s 
favourite whipping boy since Roy Romanow and his bunch 
failed to honour signed GRIP [gross revenue insurance 
program] contracts with producers in 1992 and got away with it. 
This government signed on to the CAIS program knowing full 
well that the province’s share was to be 40 per cent. Then, Mr. 
Speaker, they capped the provincial contribution at $99 million, 
knowingly breaking their word and violating the terms of the 
agreement that they had signed with the federal government. 
They then steadfastly refused to live up to their signed 
commitment and fully fund the 2003 program until the dying 
days of 2004. 
 
At first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they claimed that the province 
couldn’t afford the program that they had already agreed to, and 
then, when oil revenues began to roll in at a rate that even they 
couldn’t conceal any more, they did what they always do when 
they’re in a tight spot. They blamed the feds. They said that 
they were misled by them, that they were told that 99 million 
would always be enough to cover the program in Saskatchewan. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, they began to challenge the 60/40 
cost-sharing arrangement that they signed on to in order to stall 
some more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everybody knew what the cost-sharing formula 
was, and everybody knew that $99 million wouldn’t come close 
to funding 40 per cent of the program in Saskatchewan. And 
nearly everyone said so. As the opposition Ag critic at the time, 
I said so publicly. How stupid are they? Or how stupid do they 
think the rest of us are? The very fact that they floated this 
series of distortions of the truth indicates with clarity the lack of 
respect and pure contempt in which they hold our most 
important industry, agriculture. 
 
They’re doing it again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now they’re 
refusing to fully fund the 2004 CAIS program and this budget 
makes no allowance for them to fully fund it. This at a time 
when they have the financial ability to grow the size of 
government in this province, particularly the communications 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

salaries in the Premier’s office which are up 58 per cent, from 
$856,000 to 1.35 million in this budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has gutted the crop 
insurance program. This will be the third or fourth consecutive 
year that they have increased premiums and reduced coverage. 
Crop insurance and CAIS are the only protection our producers 
have against the vagaries of our climate and a marketplace that 
is all too often interfered with by protectionist policies and 
products subsidized by foreign governments. They had the 
means to address these critical issues in agriculture and they 
turned their back. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the food allowance for recipients of social 
services hadn’t been raised for 20 years. The Saskatchewan 
Party has repeatedly brought this issue to the government’s 
attention and to the attention of the media. Finally in this budget 
they address the situation, but to such a small extent as to be 
totally meaningless. Neither is there any provision to index the 
basic social services allowance, Mr. Speaker. These are not 
measures that cost a lot of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
they do cry out for a commitment from this government which 
has once again turned its back on the poorest among us in the 
budget in favour of increasing the size of government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, drug addiction is a very serious problem 
in this province and has been for a long time. But the 
introduction to our province of crystal methamphetamine is a 
whole new ball game. Crystal meth is the most addictive drug 
that is known to exist, with many users being addicted after 
their first usage. After becoming addicted, the average life 
expectancy of a user is six years. 
 
My colleagues and I get too many calls and emails and letters 
from desperate parents who are watching their teenagers kill 
themselves on this drug. They tell us that there are not nearly 
enough treatment facilities, and that there is no specific 
program for this horrible drug that needs to be treated 
differently. This budget makes no provision for additional 
treatment beds for those suffering from addictions, and those 
caring families will continue to have nowhere to turn. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is rich with 
economic development opportunities, but it takes infrastructure 
to make development of the North’s rich resources possible. 
That infrastructure is the responsibility of no one but the 
government of this province. 
 
Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no provision in this 
budget for all-weather roads in the North, roads that could be 
the key to unlock the vast potential of northern Saskatchewan. 
This government had the financial ability to address this issue 
as well, but once again we see the interests of real people in this 
province take a back seat to this administration’s interest in 
growing the government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is sitting on a windfall in 
excess of $1.5 billion over and above what they expected in 
revenue at this time, and they are still trying to force teachers 
and nurses into a non-negotiable wage settlements of 0, 1, and 
1. Sadly there is no money in this budget to allow for higher 
settlements. And this government is on a potential collision 
course with these professionals that will devastate education 

and health care in the province and send more of our valuable 
professionals scurrying to more friendly jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even though this government had 1.5 
billion extra dollars to play with in this hapless budget, they 
managed to miss the mark on all of the important issues that I 
have discussed, and many more. 
 
But they still managed to overspend. The budget document 
clearly shows that even with this windfall of cash, this 
bungling, irresponsible NDP government managed to spend 
more than they took in. And that, friends and neighbours, is a 
deficit. In order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make this appear to the 
unschooled to be a balanced budget, they drew down $145 
million from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Most people surely 
know by now that there is no money in the so-called Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. It is nothing more than a bookkeeping entry 
and any money that is drawn out of this fund for any purpose 
must be borrowed by the province. That is what this budget 
proposes to do and it means that, clearly, there is a deficit this 
year of $145 million and correspondingly the debt of the 
province will increase by that amount. 
 
Last year this NDP government pleaded poverty and increased 
the PST by one point. This year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they had 
the opportunity to reverse that PST increase, but reducing taxes 
to real people flies in the face of their philosophical bent to 
increase the size of government so they didn’t do that either. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget should have used one-time 
windfall cash in a way that would build an economic future in 
this province and look after the least advantaged among us with 
compassion. It misses that mark badly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and accordingly I will not support the budget but I will be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s certainly my pleasure to enter into this debate on 
behalf of the fine people of Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on March 23 the Minister of Finance 
delivered a budget that is truly a budget that sets the 
foundations in Saskatchewan for the next 100 years. This being 
Saskatchewan’s centennial year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s only 
appropriate that this budget set the tone for the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I looked over the budget very closely to 
find the one thing that would reflect the theme of the budget. 
What I found was that there were many messages that would 
describe the thrust of our budget. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there was one message that stands out for me, and it was a 
statement by a Minister of Finance and I quote, this is 
Saskatchewan’s 12th consecutive balanced budget. That is 
amazing when you take into consideration that when the NDP 
became government in 1991, we inherited from the 
Conservative government of the members opposite a debt of 
$14.6 billion. 
 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s only because of good work, good 
management, good policies since 1991, Saskatchewan has 
enjoyed 11 consecutive bond rating upgrades. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when we look at the fact that in 1991 Saskatchewan’s 
debt to GDP [gross domestic product] ratio was nearly 70 per 
cent, while today Saskatchewan’s debt to GDP ratio is under 30 
per cent, simply put, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are two 
independent indicators that show that this government is on the 
right track. 
 
[15:30] 
 
This budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, contains many, many items 
that deserve mentioning. But time won’t allow me to mention 
them all. But I would like to share with you my approach to 
measuring the quality of this budget. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
identify different people who are either my constituents or 
people who I simply know. Then I ask, how does this budget 
affect them? 
 
First, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought of the retired seniors who 
live in my constituency. And I asked, how does this budget 
affect them? The seniors like the increased funding for health 
care that not only supports the health care services, but expands 
these services all across the province. Our seniors also like the 
millions in new funding for our youth initiatives, as they know 
their grandchildren will see the benefits. 
 
But most of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our seniors like to know 
that there has been a $179 million permanent debt reduction in 
2004-2005. And today, Saskatchewan’s government debt is the 
lowest it’s been in 14 years. Our seniors look at this budget and 
they say, this budget helps me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think about the small-business owners 
who live in my constituency and I ask, how does this budget 
affect them? The small-business owners see a strong and 
growing economy, and they like what they see. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the small-business owners see a budget 
that contains one of the largest capital budgets at almost $327 
million. The small-business owners see a projected real GDP 
growth forecast at 3 per cent, and they like what they see. 
 
The small-business owners know that the province’s economy 
is performing well and measures in this budget will ensure that 
the economy continues to grow. Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 
small-business owners look at this budget and they say, this 
budget helps me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think of the working women and men of 
my constituency and I ask, how does this budget affect them? 
First, Mr. Speaker, they see our government’s commitment to 
building a green and prosperous economy, and they like what 
they see. 
 
They see more than $20 million under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they see $5 million in rebates under the ethanol fuel 
tax rebate program. They see millions of dollars for our roads 
and our highways. Mr. Speaker, they see one of the largest 
capital budgets in Saskatchewan’s history, and they like what 
they see. The working men and women of this province look at 

our budget and they say, this budget helps me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think of our farmers across this province, who 
for the most part have had a hard time of it all. Farmers have 
been dealing with low commodity prices, they’ve been hit with 
the BSE issue, followed by closed borders to our livestock 
which drove the prices even lower, then last summer’s 
devastating August 20 frost which hit an already late crop, 
rendering much of that crop nearly worthless. 
 
Our farmers look at this budget and recognize the government 
is acting on the priorities of the ACRE [Action Committee on 
the Rural Economy] committee. Our farmers appreciate that this 
budget contains the support for agriculture through the fully 
funded province’s portion of crop insurance and maintaining 
the initial funding for CAIS. Mr. Speaker, our farmers know 
that in this time of real need, it’s only the federal government 
that can and should step up to the plate with financial aid to pull 
our farmers through very, very tough times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think of the young people and I ask, how does 
this budget affect them? Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we think of 
our youth, we think of the future. After all, that’s what our 
youth represents — the future. When the young people look at 
this budget, they see a one-time centennial university tuition 
grant of $6.7 million, which effectively freezes tuition until a 
full-scale review of the student funding can take place. 
 
When students look at this budget they see an increase of 6.8 
per cent in the education spending. They also see more than 
27,000 training places; they see funds that extend nursing 
programs; they see 600 training opportunities through the 
northern skills training program; and they also see the graduate 
tax credit increased to $675. Mr. Speaker, the young people 
look at this budget and they say, this budget helps me. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, I think of Emma Bradley, who is not yet 
one month old, and I ask, how does this budget affect her? Well 
this budget provides the tools to keep the economy strong and 
growing so Emma’s parents can continue to live in 
Saskatchewan and raise her here. This budget provides the tools 
to support our health care system so that if Emma needs health 
care, she will receive the health care she needs, and she’ll 
receive it in a timely fashion. This budget provides the tools to 
strengthen our education system so that when Emma goes to 
school — both K to 12 and post-secondary — she will receive 
the very best in education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Finance in this budget has laid the 
foundations for the future — a future of opportunity and 
prosperity — so that when Emma enters the workforce, she will 
do so here in Saskatchewan, and she will stay here, raise her 
family here because Saskatchewan is a happening place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have just touched on a few of the reasons why 
the fine people of Regina Northeast have instructed me to vote 
against the amendment and for the budget. And that’s what I’ll 
be doing. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Wood River. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
I’m very pleased to stand in the House today and enter the 
debate on the budget. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this centennial 
budget was touted by this NDP government as a budget that 
builds for the next 100 years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest that this budget didn’t see 
past 100 days. And in fact today we even witnessed from the 
Minister of Learning that the Easter egg basket was good for 
him, and so there’s been changes already to the budget with the 
financing for teachers. So it didn’t even make the 100 days, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It made only partial of . . . a portion of a week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about . . . This is a government 
release on the budget and what it says, and I quote — and the 
previous speaker also said — it’s the “12th consecutive GRF 
balanced budget.” Well I want to discuss that for just a minute, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. If you look — and this is their own 
document — and if you look on page 12 of the document and 
page 13 of the document, it says, revenues $7,006,800,000; 
expenses $7,151,731,000. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even in NDP math, that says to me 
that your expenses are more than your revenues. Now what do 
you call it if your expenses are more than your revenues? 
There’s no doubt in my mind that it is a deficit budget. So how 
can members over there stand up and face the public and say 
it’s a balanced budget? That is another, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
limited information estimation. It’s not being truthful with the 
people of this province. 
 
And I want to go back and just touch on a couple of quotes and 
surprisingly where these couple of quotes came from. And it 
says: 
 

Well now it all begins, it seems to me, with the simple 
truth: if you spend more than you bring in, you’re going to 
have a deficit and you’re going to have problems. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was the current Finance minister that 
said that. So therefore, going back to the budget document, 
where it says 7 billion, 100 million plus is in expenses and 7 
billion and 6 million in revenues, according to the Finance 
minister himself, that is a deficit budget. 
 
Now I’d like to continue with another couple of quotes from the 
current Finance minister. And he spoke on this in 1991, and he 
said: 
 

This deficit, this deficit, Mr. Chairman, is not so much . . . 
[a] result of fiscal and economic conditions in this 
province. This deficit is the result of an attitude. This 
deficit is the result of an attitude by a government that 
simply fails to recognize that if you spend more than you 
bring in, you’re going to get behind. 

 
Now, we have the current Finance minister that is operating 
with a deficit budget, contrary to what he and members opposite 
may think, but those were his words from before. 
 
I’d just like to throw another quote out from the current Finance 
minister: 
 

Why don’t you cut out the waste, cut out the 
mismanagement? Save the taxpayers some money. Waste 
not, want not. Why don’t you follow that approach for a 
change instead of gouging and gouging and gouging and 
gouging the way that you do? 

 
Well here we have typical of the NDP — says something one 
day, disagrees with it the next and does the opposite. Flip flop; 
flip flop totally. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another quote from the Finance minister, 
and how these come back, how these come back to kind of 
haunt them: 
 

Saskatchewan people know that, and one of the reasons 
that they’re fed up with these people, they’re fed up with a 
government that tries to deny the facts. They’re fed up 
with a government that’s always trying to pull the wool 
over their eyes. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a government now that has been 
doing that for some time, is pulling the wool over the eyes of 
Saskatchewan people, and no longer will they be taking it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no doubt that this budget is a 
deficit budget. Now the other day, the other day the Finance 
minister got up and it was after we had introduced our 100 ideas 
for the 100 years. And the Finance minister got up and he said, 
well that’s gimmickry; that is just gimmickry. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what is this so-called balanced budget, 
what it is not, if it’s not gimmickry? 
 
Here we have, here we have a Finance minister on one day is 
saying it’s gimmickry if it doesn’t suit his personal agenda, and 
yet he turns around and produces a budget that is basically 
based on gimmickry. And I would like to expand on that just a 
little bit because the next bullet in their release, the news release 
by this NDP government, it says, “No tax increases.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at, if you look at what’s going 
on within the budget, if you read it, it talks about the corporate 
capital tax surcharge on oil and gas income. And I want to 
repeat that because it’s extremely important, because we have 
men and women on that side of the House that will stand up and 
say exactly that because they’ve been told to say it — there’s no 
tax increases. But then it slaps the corporate capital tax 
surcharge on oil and gas income . . . trusts, and that amounts to 
an additional $20 million this year and up to $40 million in the 
future. Mr. Speaker, no, no matter how you look at that, that is a 
tax increase. 
 
So looking at the document that’s produced by that government 
for media release it says, “No tax increases.” Well they just 
don’t match. They say one thing and they do another. They’re 
taxing, they’re taxing the oil and gas companies, which the 
Finance minister had said the other day and suggested that we 
have awoke a sleeping giant. Well one of my colleagues said 
today, we have awoke a sleeping giant and with this tax we cut 
down the beanstalk. And that is just exactly how this NDP 
government works. So gimmickry, gimmickry again. I want to 
express that because again the minister used gimmickry. 
 
And while I’m on it, it’s just a little off the beaten track on this, 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

but look at the gimmickry that’s been used in the past by this 
NDP government. How about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company]? And that’s one of my 
favourites. SPUDCO was gimmickry. It was another limited 
information estimation to the people of this province, totally 
untruthful to the people of this province, so it was gimmickry. 
 
How about the ethanol? How about the Belle Plaine fiasco in 
ethanol? That was nothing but gimmickry. So here we have a 
Finance minister that in one day has the audacity to stand up in 
front of this House and say, well they’re just using gimmickry 
over there, where he, himself, is using gimmickry to say that 
we’ve got a balanced budget. They have used gimmickry to say 
that SPUDCO was good for this province. They used 
gimmickry to say that ethanol, we’ve got this whole ethanol 
strategy that never went, that was strictly gimmickry. So, Mr. 
Speaker, you can see that this budget to me is a bunch of 
gimmickry. 
 
So now, now I’d like to . . . Now just on the corporate capital 
tax, just a week before, the Premier was so proud, he got up and 
he talked about royalties, that he was going to help oil 
companies in this province, come into this province and do 
more work. And then he turns around and slaps a corporate 
capital tax on trusts. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And this is the NDP motto. This to me should be the NDP 
motto forever — we got what it takes to take what you got. 
Because that’s exactly what they’re doing with the oil 
companies. And I want to repeat that because I think that’s a 
motto that they really believe in — we got what it takes to take 
what you’ve got. And that’s how they’re dealing with the oil 
companies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about what this 
budget does not contain. And one of my colleagues talked about 
it a little earlier, but talked about no increase in revenue sharing 
for urban and rural municipalities. Again, we have a 
government that will stand up and say we don’t have tax 
increases. But there’s no increase in revenue sharing, so what’s 
going to happen to the municipalities? 
 
We already know. And members over there should have these 
numbers imprinted in their mind — four and seven. Because 
Regina has already stated that they’re going to have to up their 
taxes by 4 per cent, and Saskatoon by 7 per cent. Is that a tax 
increase? The NDP will say no, no, no that’s not us, that’s the 
municipality that’s doing it. 
 
Well what caused it? It was caused by this government not 
negotiating a fair-share agreement with the municipalities. 
They’ve downloaded for years and years and now say no, no, 
it’s not our fault; we didn’t put up taxes, just as the document 
says — no tax increase. But it’s forcing tax increases. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Government Relations 
was talking, he talked about well, don’t forget about the 
infrastructure fund that we’re putting out for the municipalities. 
Well let’s look at that fund. It’s a 25/25/50 per cent fund — 25 
per cent from the feds, 25 per cent from the province, but 50 per 
cent from the municipalities. Well, Mr. Speaker, with no fair 

revenue-sharing formula, no fair-share revenue device, how can 
the municipalities afford the 50 per cent for revenue 
infrastructure? So on one hand it sounds good — yes, we’re 
putting money on for revenue sharing. But 50 per cent of it has 
to come from the municipalities anyway and they don’t have 
the money to do it. So what value really is that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, no reduction in personal income taxes, which 
means that the NDP continue to break, to break its election 
promises on lowering taxes. No business tax reductions means 
our business community will continue to face the highest taxes 
in the country. No relief for, no tax relief for low-income 
earners, which means those needing the break the most will 
continue to pay the highest taxes in Canada. Mr. Speaker, this is 
sad. This is extremely sad for our low-income earners. They 
had the opportunity, they had the millions, in fact over $1 
billion to deal with. And yet those that are suffering the worst in 
this province did not see any tax relief. 
 
No new money for K to 12 operating grants — this may result 
in a teachers’ strike. No commitment to fully fund the CAIS 
program for 2004. And we hear the Agriculture minister, 
always boasts about how he supports the agriculture sector in 
this province, and I’ll speak more to that after. But here we 
have . . . we’re diddling around again saying we’re only going 
to fund CAIS 2004 to the 2003 level — initial level — which is 
90-some million dollars. And so again farmers are left in the 
lurch. And no promise to go off of the 0, 1, 1 public sector wage 
mandate and no money for roads in the North. 
 
Those are just some of the things that were not in the budget, 
Mr. Speaker. Now I want to get into the budget document and 
what it basically talks about. On page 8 of the document it says, 
create a positive business climate. Well isn’t that a dichotomy. 
We have a socialist government that wants to create a positive 
business climate when, right in their own document, own 
document, and I’ll quote it from the manifesto, it says: 
 

No socialist government will rest content until it has 
eradicated capitalism and put into operation the full 
program of socialized planning. 

 
Well how can you on one hand say that you are going to create 
a positive business climate, when on the other hand you’re 
talking about how you will not rest until everything is 
socialized. Mr. Speaker, that is a real laugh. 
 
Now we’re talking about creating the business climate. Well 
how do they, how are they creating a business climate? What 
are they doing? Are they reducing business tax? Are they doing 
anything on the tax side of the business climate? No. They’re 
going to review it. And going through this document, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know how many times you pick up the word 
review or study. There’s no action. It’s review or study. 
 
Now we talk about creating a positive business climate. And 
this little . . . [inaudible] . . . can come up in a number of places, 
but I’m going to throw it in right now. Creating a business 
climate — in where? The rural sector? Don’t think so. Urban 
sector? What’s there to create business? What’s there for a 
business climate? 
 
And I want to talk specifically . . . And I like talking about this 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

every year because this government has done nothing to help 
when it comes to the rural Saskatchewan. And I’ve mentioned 
this in my previous discussions on the budget and Throne 
Speech. We in this province right now, Mr. Speaker, ship 
750,000 head of cattle to the province of Alberta to be fed. Now 
is there anybody over there that thinks that is correct? Why 
would we be doing that? Why? 
 
Now not only that, Mr. Speaker. Behind every truckload of 
cattle that we send to Alberta to feed out, we send barley from 
Saskatchewan. Now I ask members over there again, do they 
think it’s right? Do they think it’s right that we should send two 
very important commodities from this province to Alberta? 
 
But it gets worse because behind every one of those B-trains is 
a carload of our young men and women that are going to 
Alberta to feed Saskatchewan grain to Saskatchewan cattle. 
There is three very, very important resources that we ship out of 
this province to Alberta. And I ask members over there, any one 
of them, if they could stand up in their place and say that’s the 
right thing to do. 
 
So how do we stop this? We even had the Deputy Premier a 
year or so ago say, we’ve got to do something to change this. 
What has been done? Has there been anything in the business 
climate change to stop that from happening? Have we done 
anything in this province to help industry and business move 
back to this province? Why are we shipping three of our most 
valuable resources to some other province so they can create the 
jobs, have the economic spinoff, and have the salaries that go 
with it? Why? Is there anybody over there that thinks that is 
right? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I do not. And there is nothing in this budget, 
nothing in this to create a positive business climate that’s going 
to change that. And that’s something that really needs to be 
changed. Because look at the spinoff industries and businesses 
that can come from that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how things are going in rural Saskatchewan right 
now is extremely, extremely tough. And I’m not sure who the 
author of this is, but I would like to read it into the record, 
because I think it is extremely touching. It says: 
 

Please open your hearts to hear a very important message 
from rural Saskatchewan. Remember, you are responsible 
for us, too. [I think maybe some members over opposite 
should listen.] I still can’t believe you’d take away all 
hope from the ones who are feeding you. You shut out all 
our goals. What about us? Hey, we’re hurting too. And 
every cent you don’t share with us, we still give back to 
you. What makes you want to continue to push down our 
country folks until they drown? What could you possibly 
gain to take away a life that’s honest, yet you filled with 
strife? You’re making men go insane. What will it cost 
every man, woman, and child? Once you’ve trapped us in 
your city jail, can’t you see we need to be wild to do the 
work God intended us to do. I don’t believe you can hear 
him when you do these things you do. 
 
So give it one more try, to be fair and realize it’s what 
Saskatchewan needs to get back on its feet. You’ve got to 
get us off our knees. Don’t try to keep on taking what we 

don’t have to give. Hey, we’re just like you. We have 
needs to live. Look into your soul. The answers lie within. 
It will get our province on our feet when fairness does 
begin. Please stop biting the hand that feeds you. If you 
believe in justice, stand up now and be counted. Come 
back with a budget that also reflects the needs of those 
who produce your bread and butter, and you literally save 
hundreds of lives just this year alone. Got a price tag on 
that one? 

 
I think that’s very touching, Mr. Speaker. Now here’s the real 
touching part — recently widowed with three children by a 
hard-working and proud farmer who had no more hope. 
 
I think that members over there should be listening to 
something like that. And they laugh. And they laugh. That’s 
pretty serious, and members over there are laughing at it. That 
in itself is extremely sad. That is sad, Mr. Speaker. They must 
be very, very proud of that, to have a very serious item like that 
and they laugh at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to go into some other issues in the 
budget. And just thumbing through the book a little bit, my next 
page that I come on to is health care. . . provide the best health 
care in Canada. Well this is a spin that’s put on every year. We 
know health care in Saskatchewan is getting worse and worse 
and worse — not the care itself; it’s the waiting lists. 
 
Now what has this government done and talked about in the last 
while? Well I want to read you just a little bit of background — 
2001 Throne Speech: 
 

This province introduced medicare and will continue to 
provide health care that is a model for the rest of Canada. 

 
That’s 2001 — going to provide a model. That’s good. Well 
how did they make out? How did they make out? 2001. 
 
2002: 
 

One of my government’s highest priorities in its action 
plan for Saskatchewan is the provision and renewal of 
sustainable, publicly administered health care that is 
accessible to all. 

 
How are we making out? How is this province making out with 
accessibility to our health care? The longest waiting lists in the 
country. Well that was 2002. 
 
What did 2003 say? 
 

A surgical registry is being implemented to manage 
waiting lists province-wide. 
 

Well that sure did an awful lot to take people off of waiting lists 
didn’t it. The waiting lists get longer and longer. 
 
2004 what did they say? 
 

We will do more to reduce waiting times for surgery and 
diagnostic imaging . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how are we making out. It’s the age-old 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

question, how are we doing on that. 
 
So what do we say this time in the budget?  
 

Timely access to surgery and diagnostic services are 
important to the people. Work has been taken under way 
for some time to better monitor and manage [the system] 
. . . 

 
Monitor. It doesn’t do anything to help people that are on 
waiting lists. The waiting lists get longer and longer. They just 
don’t get it over there. They get longer and they talk about it. 
All they can do is talk about it. 
 
And there’s another interesting note in the budget document, 
Mr. Speaker, and I really have to touch base on this one because 
it says, “Increase capacity in other specialized imaging areas to 
improve access (i.e., nuclear medicine).” 
 
Nuclear medicine. Well, I wonder if the member from 
Greystone will support a budget document that talks about 
nuclear. I mean he’s such a strong proponent of the nuclear 
industry. 
 
How about the Minister of the Environment, his talk about 
nuclear. In fact I think his quote was, as long as I am Minister 
of the Environment there will never by another nuclear reactor 
in this province. Well, I didn’t even know we had one. So he’s 
extremely against the nuclear program. 
 
How about even the Premier? What did the Premier even say? 
How is the Premier going to support this, because the Premier 
has said, the Premier has said and I’ll give you a quote from the 
Premier: “And this isn’t a clean source of power. It’s probably 
the dirtiest.” Talking about nuclear. 
 
And here it’s in their budget document of how they’re going to 
create nuclear medicine. I wonder how many people on that 
side are actually going to vote because it’s got the word nuclear 
in it. And I’m a supporter of the nuclear industry, Mr. Speaker, 
but I know there’s members opposite that definitely are not. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about building a future for the 
youth, keeping young people in the province. Well, we get the 
same old rhetoric, the same old, same old, and I want to go back 
again to the 2001 Throne Speech. It says, “We plan for a bright 
future for our children and ourselves.” Yes, we sure do. How 
many children have we lost age 19 to 40 since 2001. It’s 
thousands and yet we’re planning for a bright future for them. 
2000, later 2001: “Connecting to young people means 
connecting to the future . . . ” Young people are the future of 
this province. I couldn’t agree more. Why are we chasing them 
away? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You are. They’re going to 
seek work elsewhere, where there’s work, where there’s 
full-time positions, where there’s jobs. When we chase 
businesses out of this province, how do we expect to have work 
for young people? 
 
[16:00] 
 
“It is a vision where all children will have the opportunity . . . to 
build successful families and careers here at home.” Well how 
are we making out? In the chronological order of this, Mr. 

Speaker, it just shows that this government has absolutely no 
vision, it has rhetoric and rhetoric alone. 
 
2004: “Saskatchewan will become more youth friendly and the 
first choice of opportunity for all of our youth.” Well that again 
is a laugh. That is just totally laughable, because if it is that 
good why are our young people leaving? Why are our young 
people leaving this province? Because there is no, no jobs. You 
have to have jobs to sustain our young people, to keep our 
young people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity, just recently I spoke to a 
grade 12 class. There’s 35, 35 students in the grade 12 class, 
and at the end of their quizzing me for a while, I said, okay I’d 
like to quiz you. I said how many of you plan on staying in 
Saskatchewan after you finish high school, trade school, or 
post-secondary? Thirty-five students, and three put up their 
hand. Three out of thirty-five said that they would stay in 
Saskatchewan. And I said, why? What would make you go? 
Well I want a career and I want a job someplace. I can’t stay 
here. 
 
And you know if you talked to those same people and said, if 
we had jobs in this province, good jobs in this province — like 
if we expanded our energy sector, our nuclear sector, if we had 
jobs that had some career factor to them — how many of you 
would stay? And I think it switched around to about 32 out of 
the 35 would stay if there is jobs. 
 
After the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, and here we again have 
people opposite saying, oh we’ve done everything in here to 
keep our young people in the province. Well the day after the 
budget here’s what one young fellow said from Regina. What’s 
the most important thing in the budget for you? He said, 
highways and education. Sounds reasonable, right? Highways 
for safety and education to give young people the tools to get 
out of the province. That’s after the budget. 
 
And here we have men and women that are sitting there saying, 
we’re doing everything in our power to keep young people in 
the province. Now, Mr. Speaker, we talk about helping youth 
stay in the province, why would this government have a 
projection that the population is going to remain stable over the 
next 20 years? Talk about a backward way of thinking — that 
it’s going to remain stable. Why can’t we be a little proactive 
and say, let’s grow this province? In one hand we’re saying 
people in this province are getting older, and so if they’re 
getting older where’s our workforce going to be? Who’s going 
to be here to work? 
 
And yet we don’t have a business climate that allows businesses 
to prosper in this province. Again prosper, because profit is a 
dirty word to a socialist. So how are we going to keep people in 
this province and here, at the government’s own . . . their own 
book says we’re going to stay stable. 
 
And also they talk about losing 30,000 students in the next . . . 
to the end of this decade. So how can we look forward and be 
progressive when in fact that’s all we’re doing? We’re doing 
nothing to create businesses in this province. 
 
We look at the economic outlook and we get the same thing. 
2001, “Saskatchewan economy is strong and it is growing.” 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

Well I would submit we weren’t and we were in a deficit 
budget. And we’ve had one budget that has not been a deficit in 
the last number of years and that was no thanks to the 
management of this NDP government; that was thanks to high 
oil prices. That was 2001. 
 
2002, “Saskatchewan is quickly becoming Canada’s province 
of opportunity.” We’ve always had the opportunity here, we 
just haven’t had a government that will set the framework to 
allow our opportunity to flourish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2003: 
 

The ultimate goal of our province is to build an economic 
foundation in Saskatchewan to achieve the status of a 
‘have’ province within the Canadian Federation. 

 
Well that was short-lived because we’re in a deficit budget 
situation as of today. 
 
“New industries in tourism, culture and information technology 
will continue to diversify and expand our economy.” How have 
we made out? How has that done? This is again a series over 
the last four years of what this government says; now we look 
at what they have done. And what they have done is impede the 
growth of this province through taxes, highest taxes, through 
numerous ways that they have hurt this. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, talk about Government Relations just for a 
minute. Now it is extremely unfair this revenue sharing, and 
that’s what we’ve seen in this budget for Government 
Relations. There’s no increase in urban, rural, and northern 
revenue sharing. That is totally unfair. 
 
With the amount of money that this government has been 
working with — the surplus, surplus of 1.1 billion last year, 
400-plus million this year — that there could be $10 million in 
there for revenue sharing . . . they say oh no, no. This is 
one-time money. We can’t do anything with one-time money, 
except blow it of course. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it is 
unreal how this group get together and shotgun approach to 
their spending in this budget. 
 
There is no increase in transit assistance for the disabled. No 
increase in grants in lieu of property tax. And I’ve already 
explained the four seven and that should be imprinted on the 
minds of the people because, again, most of them are from the 
urban setting of Regina and Saskatoon, and yet four and seven 
is going to be what they should be confronted with on a daily 
basis from the taxpayers of those cities, is four and seven. 
 
Now again in agriculture, and I’d just like to touch base a little 
bit more on the agricultural side. And we’ve heard it from my 
colleagues on this side of the House. Crop insurance premiums 
have increased and coverage is declining. That is one good way 
to help rural Saskatchewan, isn’t it? Not fully funding CAIS . . . 
where are the farmers? Where are they going? They don’t have 
the resources. They can’t go to the bank and borrow money on a 
whim and a prayer from a socialist government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, their support to agriculture is a laugh. So what 
are they doing? What are they doing? I missed it in here, but it’s 
in the book where they’re creating a new Department of Rural 

Development. Well how did the department of rural 
depopulation make out? Or no, it was called the Department of 
Rural Revitalization, but effectively it was the department of 
rural depopulation. As far the depopulation, it was very 
effective. As far as rural development, it was pretty sad. I don’t 
know if any member over there can get up and say one thing 
that that department did for rural Saskatchewan in the time that 
it was there. Is the new one expected to do any better? I doubt 
it. It’s again smoke and mirrors. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s other people that want to get 
involved in this budget, but I think I can sum it up. I think I can 
sum it up the best by a statement that was told to me right after 
the budget. As an individual said to me, anybody that thinks this 
is a good budget should visit a proctologist and have a cranium 
scan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to join 
in this budget debate to brag, to talk about our 12 consecutive 
balanced budgets — 12 out of the last 12 budgets, balanced, 
consecutive budgets. 
 
And we hear Sask Party members talking and complaining 
about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund like it’s some evil, sinister 
fund put-up and that’s how we somehow balance the budgets. 
Well let me just remind you, Mr. Speaker, that the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund was created by this government. We created 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, the rainy day savings fund, so that 
we could draw it down on years when the revenues aren’t as 
full as they are on other years. And naturally you top it up on 
years when we have excess, particularly oil revenue, which 
we’ve got this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a such a wonderful problem for us to all have. Here we are 
in Saskatchewan, the third province in Canada that is a have 
province. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker — Ontario, Alberta, and 
Saskatchewan, have provinces. Three of us. Three. And we are 
a province they’re saying that the cup is half empty, or even 
less, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well most of my life Saskatchewan’s been a have-not province, 
meaning we have benefited from fiscal stabilization from all of 
the other . . . the rest of Canada, particularly the largesse of 
Ontario and the largesse of oil-rich Alberta, oil- and gas-rich 
Alberta. Well now it’s our turn to take a little bit of time in the 
sun. It’s Saskatchewan’s turn thanks to record high oil and gas 
prices, Mr. Speaker, which . . . and all kinds of things, some of 
which we can directly take credit for, some of which we’re just 
in the right place at the right time, and I don’t think there’s a 
government member that would argue with that basic 
fundamental tenet. 
 
We’ve made some very good decisions along the way, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s why we’re 12 for 12 balanced budgets. I 
remember, I remember, I . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Canora should have been here 
when I talked about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund because then 
you would know we’re 12 for 12. Then you would know we’re 
12 for 12. I look forward to your trying to somehow recreate 
history — 12 for 12 balanced surplus budgets. 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

That’s why we have, after this year, we’re going to have more 
than $600 million in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s why this year, in this year’s budget, we were able to 
invest a record amount of money in health care. We were able 
to invest a record amount of money in education, Mr. Speaker. 
We have done very many things in Saskatchewan, one of . . . 
Well we talk about health care and the record amounts of 
money that have come in this year — the oil and gas money 
primarily, but other parts of the economy that are performing 
very well with a notable . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and 
thank you, the member for Canora says potash. You’re right, 
with a notable — and thank you, the member from Canora says 
potash; you’re right — with the notable exception of problems 
that we’re having in the grains and oilseeds industry and in 
livestock, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Imagine my consternation spending the Easter weekend at my 
son-in-law and daughter and two grandchildren’s farm where 
last year they actually got a crop. They’re in a dry, dry part of 
the Palliser grain belt. They actually got a crop last year, but 
they rely on livestock. And in this their third year of farming, 
things are pretty tough out on the farm. 
 
And I don’t need a lecture from members opposite to tell me 
how tough it is to try and make a living farming. We know it. 
That’s why this Minister of Agriculture had spent record 
amounts of money or arranged for record amounts of money to 
be spent in agriculture last year. That’s why we’re again 
stepping up to the plate this year. 
 
Is it enough, Mr. Speaker? Probably not. You know, it depends. 
What’s your definition of enough? You know, never are you 
going to hit a situation where there’s enough. 
 
But back to health care. We’re spending some one-time money. 
Mr. Speaker, $58 million in health capital for buildings and 
equipment, for funds and facilities, like my first city, Swift 
Current, Ile-a-la Crosse, Preeceville, Moosomin, Maidstone, 
Outlook — which was our last port-of-call before we moved to 
Regina many years ago — Humboldt, Saskatoon and Regina all 
getting capital for buildings and equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of that $58 million. It includes 
1.2 million for the first steps towards the new provincial lab 
which has $27 million committed in total to that lab. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re spending a 160 million in total to fund more 
than 27,000 training spots. 
 
I am very proud of this budget. I’m also proud of . . . despite all 
of the cries about there being no tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know how you square that with $110 million being spent on 
education property tax relief this year and next. 
 
And it’s there in the budget. Anybody can read it. Anybody can 
see it. And 110 million strikes me as real money for real 
education property tax relief and the promise to review that 
whole situation and look at it and hopefully be able to do 
similar things in the future after the two-year program is done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done all of this and at the same time, our 
percentage of debt to our gross domestic product has just driven 
down from 1993 when it was at a peak of 69 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s GDP, gross domestic product . . . was 

provincial and Crown corporation debt, imagine 69 per cent. 
This year it’s going to 28 per cent, Mr. Speaker — from 69 to 
28 per cent of the GDP. We’ve done that through paying 
attention to detail to the budget. We’ve done it through paying 
down debt at every opportunity, including in this budget there 
is, I believe, it’s $179 million. Someone tell me if I got that 
number wrong, but $179 million in real and permanent debt 
relief, debt reduction. 
 
[16:15] 
 
This year again we’ve done it. Every year we’ve reduced some 
debt, and we continue to do so. Our interest payments on the 
total accumulated debt are driving down, down, down. It’s a 
fraction of what it was. It’s the lowest debt — as my colleague 
says — the lowest debt load payment we’ve had to make in 14 
years. 
 
For that we’ll take some credit because some decisions have 
been made on this side of the government in the time I’ve been 
around. I don’t attribute them to me personally necessarily, but 
I’ve been a part of the team, Mr. Speaker, that has made some 
decisions. Many of the decisions have been real easy to make. 
Many of them have been fun. Some of them have been quite 
frankly challenging and very tough, very hard for my 
colleagues and I to make. But, you know, at every turn, at every 
turn we have proudly stood up and done the very best that we 
can — day in, day out. 
 
We’ve stood . . . I’ve watched my colleagues. I’m proud of 
every one of them. None of us are perfect, with the possible 
exception of you, Mr. Speaker. None of us are perfect, and the 
member for Canora maybe is close as well. The member for 
Canora may be close to perfect. I can just see that quote going 
around now, Mr. Speaker. Though I’m fond of the member, 
perfection is not exactly what I’d have thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard the member for Wood River talking 
about Saskatchewan and about how members on this side were 
kind of proud that we’re able to keep our population at 1 
million people. And he said how terrible that is. Well you 
know, Mr. Speaker, in the North American Midwest plains — 
the great western plains or great central plains many of us know 
it as — in that entire area that includes something like 10 states, 
US [United States] states, and the three prairie provinces, 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan have relatively static populations. 
All — without exception — of the American states in the great 
western plains have had fairly significant and sharp population 
reductions in the last 50 years. The populations have diminished 
by hundreds of thousands of people in every instance, Mr. 
Speaker, and here we are holding our own. 
 
And I hear, what about Alberta? And I’m . . . Just have 
patience, have patience. Alberta is the only province or state in 
the great central plains to defy that, to fly against, to fly against 
that reality — if I can describe it that way — of life on the great 
central plains, oil- and gas-rich Alberta, which has oil and gas 
eleven times the size of Saskatchewan’s reserves. 
 
And I mean, I’m happy for my relatives that live in Alberta. I’m 
happy for my friends that live in Alberta, you know, but I’m 
happy for my relatives and friends, the majority of whom are in 
Saskatchewan. I’m happy that our day in the sun is here, Mr. 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

Speaker. I’m happy that we’re enjoying the benefit of a 
record-setting oil and gas industry right here in Saskatchewan. 
We are enjoying record prices and record potash production 
right here in Saskatchewan. We’re blessed with the reserves. 
I’m happy for a great many things that are happening to keep 
our economy humming right along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just wanting to move to a different part of my speech, Mr. 
Speaker, because I want to contrast the picture that I’ve just 
painted. Our side, we believe in Saskatchewan. We believe in 
the future. We believe that the sky is bright. We’ve named 
Saskatchewan the land of living provinces. And what do we 
have on the other side? We have this quote from a former leader 
of their party and now just a key player in the Sask Party 
putting together, in the back room, and the quote is out of the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix, January 20 this year. And what’s the 
quote? It says: 
 

The Conservative side has always worn the pants in this 
marriage and the core of the party has always been rural 
conservativism. Not coincidentally, [Bill] Boyd remains a 
key player in the Sask. Party to this day. 

 
You know . . . [inaudible] . . . He said . . . For those who are 
hard of hearing the quote is: 
 

The Conservative side has always worn the pants in this 
marriage and the core of the party has always been rural 
conservativism. 

 
You can deny that quote from The StarPhoenix all you want, 
but it’s in January Star Phoenix this year. What did the member 
for Wood River have to say when he was the leadership 
candidate for that party? He said, general downsizing of 
government . . . yes, general downsizing of government, yes, 
what did the member for . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What’s 
wrong with it? he says. Nothing if that’s what you believe in. 
Not a thing, not a thing wrong with downsizing government if 
that’s what you believe in. It’s not what we’re believing in on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the member for Melfort Tisdale have to 
say on this? He says. and I quote — while he was the leadership 
candidate — I quote: “Once reviewed, government should be 
redefined because it cannot offer all the same services it does 
now,” says the member for Melfort Tisdale, when he was the 
leadership candidate. 
 
Well what is it? Define what it is less that the government 
would do? Define what it is less? We know that at one point 
they were saying they wanted to do away with Crown 
corporations, Crown corporations like Crop Insurance that 
pumped $1 billion into rural Saskatchewan last year. They 
wanted to do away with that and more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ultimate winner of that leadership race, the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose, said one initiative that I believe 
holds tremendous value for Saskatchewan is a project launched 
by Premier Campbell of BC called the core services review. 
The quote goes on, a Saskatchewan Party government will 
launch a similar core services review in this province within 30 
days of taking office. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they’re not 
going to take office. Can you imagine that, while they’re 

moaning about our inefficient civil service which I want to tell 
you is one of the most efficient and professional civil servants 
. . . services in the universe, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is 
blessed with a great many hard-working, dedicated and loyal 
civil servants who put Saskatchewan number one, 
Saskatchewan first, and they’re proud of it. 
 
While, while they’ve been saying, while they’ve been saying 
that the civil service is . . . should be decimated, while the Sask 
Party, Conservatives, want a review — review, a Gordon 
Campbell review — New Democrats have . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . What have we been doing? We have funded 
health care in record amounts year after year after year. Health 
care funding has grown every year. Education funding has 
grown every year and, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan has 
become Canada’s third have province. 
 
When I was growing up, when I was a little guy — I know it’s a 
fair number of years ago, Mr. Speaker — but I can remember 
when we had have provinces, when equalization first came 
about. And it was Ontario, British Columbia, Alberta were the 
have provinces. They were the three have provinces. 
Saskatchewan flirted with it in the late ’70s; we flirted with 
being a have province, Mr. Speaker. Then along came the 
Conservatives and boy, it’s just by the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Downhill ever since. 
 
Mr. Trew: — It’s been downhill for the most part ever since. 
We’re now back firmly entrenched as a have province for three 
years now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember when BC was a have province. BC is 
not a have province now. Can you tell me why those 
Conservatives there would try and take a lesson from BC’s 
Conservatives? Can you tell me that? When BC’s 
Conservatives cost one in four civil servants their job in British 
Columbia — one in four — how in the world can you possibly 
say that that’s a good policy? Well, Mr. Speaker, unbelievable. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, and then, Mr. Speaker, we have, we 
have . . . I’m going to come to the 100 points of light. They 
might like that and they might not. They had Grow 
Saskatchewan before the last election. And what did they say 
about their Grow Saskatchewan document? They said, they said 
and I quote, Mr. Speaker:  
 

[This] represents the very first time in 60 years that any 
political party has understood how we can grow this 
economy in a lasting way. 

 
So my question is, if that was your view a year and a half ago, 
well what has changed so radically that now Grow 
Saskatchewan’s out and now you’ve got 100 points of light? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I just remind the member to 
direct all comments to the Chair. I recognize the member for 
Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the question is, how 
is it that Grow Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was a great policy a 
year and a half, two years ago, and now they have 100 points of 
light program? Well what has changed, Mr. Speaker? What was 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

wrong with the Grow Saskatchewan program? Or is this the 
second time in 61 or 62 years now that a political party has 
understood how we can grow the economy in a lasting way? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to just remind members opposite we 
formed government way back in 1991, which in some ways is a 
long time ago. But we were faced at that time with a 1.2 billion, 
$1.2 billion annual deficit, Mr. Speaker — 1.2 billion annual 
shortfall. The accumulated debt was the wrong side of 13 
billion. It grew, it grew to about fifteen and a half billion dollars 
before we are able to stop that growth. Because it was in our 
third year in office that we achieved a balanced surplus budget, 
Mr. Speaker — from a 1.2 billion annual shortfall that they left, 
to the surplus. 
 
Now, we have come a long ways. I outlined how the debt, 
percentage of debt to GDP has gone from 69 per cent to 28 per 
cent under our watch, Mr. Speaker. I’ve talked about record 
health care funding. I’ve talked about record education funding. 
Fortunately, we’re able to put some money into highways again. 
We’re doing twinning. And there’s more twinning announced in 
this year’s budget — east and west, there’s twinning happening 
everywhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have gone, we have gone . . . 
While they’ve been putting together this Grow Saskatchewan 
and 100 points of light, we’ve been quietly and busy putting 
together Saskatchewan’s economy and making Saskatchewan 
the third have province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Right here in 
this province, my colleagues and I and all of the people in 
Saskatchewan have participated — thankfully most of them, 
thankfully most of them willingly — but I confess, not all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not anxious to continue this speech forever, 
and I know that members opposite are not. But while I’m on the 
budget speech, I do want to point out that there’s some 
interesting things have happened budget wise and interesting 
things have happened just before the budget was delivered — 
just a day or two or three days before. I didn’t take the time to 
check Hansard. But members opposite were calling for the 
firing of my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture. They called 
for his firing. They asked the Premier to fire the Minister of 
Agriculture. Why, why? Because he wasn’t getting enough 
money for Saskatchewan farmers. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 
Imagine that, he wasn’t getting enough. Well they’re kind of 
quiet now today, kind of quiet now today on that front. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the members opposite, 
when a caucus worker did a play on words around a certain US 
president’s name, led the charge, led the charge — fire him, 
said they, fire him. Fire him, how dare him make a play on a 
president’s name. Well, Mr. Speaker, it could have been a 
serious thing. Could have been a serious thing, Mr. Speaker. 
What about, what about, what about when an MLA says, my 
choice to be killed is. That’s not a very, a very good thing. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of this year’s budget. I am proud that 
we have the 12th consecutive balanced budget. I am proud that 
there’s $110 million in there for education property tax relief. I 
am proud that Saskatchewan is the third have province in 
Canada. 

I am less enamoured with the repeated calls that we spend this 
one-time wealth, one-time windfall money, and build it into the 
base of ongoing spending. We can spend it on capital, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have. I read a list of health care facilities and 
integrated health care facilities and hospital, regional hospital in 
Swift Current, and other facilities and equipment. I read that 
into my speech earlier, $58 million in capital expenditures. 
 
We can spend capital because that’s one time and it improves 
the situation for all Saskatchewan people. That’s what 
government really should be about, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very 
proud that we’re able to do that. I am less proud of those who 
would have us build into our budget on an ongoing basis 
one-time revenue because it’s a recipe for disaster. 
 
It’s a recipe that would take us right back to the 1980s, Mr. 
Speaker. The then-premier, Grant Devine, has moved on from 
the political scene here, but the policies — the Conservative 
policies from the ’80s — are alive and well. They’re alive and 
well and we hear it. We see it every single day in every single 
way from Sask Party members opposite. They say, spend, 
spend, spend. They say, you’ve undervalued the price of oil and 
underpriced the value of gas in the budget. 
 
Well that’s not what they did in the ’80s. In the ’80s, Mr. 
Speaker, they overvalued all the time, consistently. And so 
consistently they were 11 for 11 deficit, deficit budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. Eleven for eleven, that’s their record. Can you 
imagine? Their record is so bad. 
 
Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, the Premier introduced Ed Schreyer 
from Manitoba. And we were all kind of proud because that’s a 
New Democratic Party premier from Manitoba. Our chests kind 
of stuck out. I was proud because I’d actually spent the best part 
of a day building fences on the Ed Schreyer build in my 
constituency, which is a bit of a different story. But we were 
very proud, and what did they have to do? They said, us too; we 
want to recognize Ed Schreyer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a history . . . And it’s appropriate that you would 
recognize him. My point is, we have a history and we’re proud 
of it. The Sask Party, the only history you’ve got is 
conservatism and Grant Devine. Mr. Speaker, I will happily be 
voting for this budget. I just am so proud of my colleagues; I’m 
proud of the Minister of Finance for putting this budget 
together. 
 
Could we do more? Well I wish it were such that we could do 
more. And we will do more next year, and the year after, and 
the year after, and the year after that. We will do more, Mr. 
Speaker — our work is not complete. We have begun and we 
have moved where we’ve cut the debt almost to one-third in 
real terms of what it was when we formed government. 
 
We have moved into being a have province. We have opened 
the chequebook for health and education, highways twinning, 
all kinds of good projects in this province. We have built the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund this year, which is appropriate because 
the revenues are not always going to be there, but we can 
smooth it out. 
 
And just watch. Next year I predict we’re going to have a 
balanced surplus budget, Mr. Speaker. And I predict the year 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

after, we’ll have a balanced surplus budget. And I hope, I hope 
that we’re planning, I hope we’re planning well enough that we 
can deliver a balanced surplus budget three years out. I hope 
that. 
 
I’m confident we will, but you know our revenue sources are up 
and down in Saskatchewan. Right now we’re blessed; we’re 
blessed with a high in virtually everything except agriculture 
which is troubled. But you know what? We’ll get a bounce on 
agriculture and things will get better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, proudly I support this budget. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to be able to enter into the budget debate, 
this historic budget, the budget of our centennial year, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think it’s important that all members — or at 
least as many members who wish to enter into this debate — be 
given the chance to express their thoughts on this year’s budget. 
 
And I have been listening to the members on both sides of the 
House presenting their views on the budget and pointing out the 
shortfalls of this budget — of which there are a number — and 
pointing out some of the successes of this budget and there are 
also a number that we could say are at least a step in the right 
direction. 
 
But overall, Mr. Speaker, the impression that I am getting from 
constituents in Last Mountain-Touchwood and citizens around 
the province and friends and neighbours pretty well coincide 
with thoughts that I’ve had — and many of my caucus 
colleagues have had — and that is that this budget is really a 
budget of missed opportunities, Mr. Speaker. We are in our 
centennial year. We are starting the second century of this 
province and this was an opportunity for this government to set 
this province, or at least outline a vision for this province, and 
we certainly don’t see that in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact if one looks at the budget document, there’s no name on 
the budget. You know, you would think in a historic budget 
such as this that the Minister of Finance and his colleagues 
could have thought of an appropriate name for this budget. But 
because this government doesn’t have a vision and a plan for 
the future I guess it’s quite appropriate that perhaps we could 
call this budget the no-name budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s in fact what it is. It seems to attempt to increase 
spending in certain areas and make a few minor adjustments 
here and there, but when you add it all up there’s really . . . 
nothing’s really changed. We hear members opposite talk about 
how proud they are of this province, that we’re one of only 
three have provinces — and certainly that is something to be 
proud of. We on this side of the House are also proud that 
Saskatchewan is a have province. 
 
But really, if one looks at the reasons why Saskatchewan has 
become a have province this year, there’s very little that this 

government can take credit for. I don’t think that the sheik from 
Mount Royal went over to OPEC [Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries] and helped determine world oil prices — 
$55 a barrel. Certainly this provincial government had very 
little if any influence in that, I would suggest no influence in the 
high price of oil — and that if one looks at the budget 
documents we can see, and the government readily 
acknowledges, that that is one of the reasons why Saskatchewan 
is a have province. 
 
The other reason, of course, is the federal government. Federal 
Finance Minister Goodale has addressed some of the inequities 
in the equalization program and certainly we have supported 
this government’s effort in all cases to address that inequity. So 
as some of the speakers on both sides of the House have said, 
this is one-time money and we should look at . . . but it’s not 
necessarily one-time money if we look at what’s happening 
with oil prices. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that oil prices will continue at the 
fairly high levels that they are currently and will continue 
probably for the rest of the year and into the following year. If 
you follow what some of the analysts, market analysts, in the 
industry are saying, they seem to think that this will continue to 
happen as the demand for oil products grow and the resources 
of the various oil-producing countries are being tapped to the 
limit in some cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But this also presents a huge opportunity for Saskatchewan. We 
have known resources, huge resources of oil that are there to be 
recovered. Certainly some of them are heavy oil resources that 
are more costly to recover, but at $55 a barrel I would think that 
that price is more than sufficient to recover some of those oil 
resources and put them into the pipeline and so on. 
 
But as I said, Mr. Speaker, the one criticism that I’ve heard over 
and over again is that there just seems to be no vision on that 
side of the House, and this budget is a prime example of that. 
I’ve listened to the former . . . previous speaker, the member 
from Regina, talk about how proud he is of his colleagues and 
the budget, this particular budget, and how this government has 
stepped up to the plate in agriculture. 
 
Well if you look back over the short period of four or five years 
you’ll see that the expenditures this year barely exceed the 
expenditures that were estimated last year. Certainly there was 
some money put in in the interim, and we are hopeful that, 
particularly with the CAIS program and so on, that the 
government will see fit to step up to the plate. But if we go back 
a number of years, go back three or four years, the budget 
estimates for agriculture were $333 million. This year they’re 
about 264 million, 265 million. So we’re not really stepping up 
to the plate, Mr. Speaker. What we are doing is by and large 
maintaining the status quo in some of these areas. 
 
I’d like to talk about a number of issues, Mr. Speaker, that are 
important to the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood 
constituency. And these are issues that are not only important to 
those citizens, but a number of them are issues that are 
important to people across this province. And as I’d already 
mentioned, agriculture, being my constituency is a rural 
constituency . . . If you’d like a definition of a rural 
constituency, come out to Last Mountain-Touchwood. We don’t 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

have any large regional centres in our constituency. In fact the 
largest town in my constituency is about 800 or 850 people. 
And we’ve got quite a few smaller, very few small communities 
as a matter of fact, and we have seven First Nations 
communities in the constituency. So we have a number of 
issues that are unique to Last Mountain-Touchwood, but they 
are not unlike issues that are important to other areas of the 
province. 
 
So as you can imagine, agriculture is the number one issue 
because it’s the number one industry in that part of the province 
and it is largely, hugely important to the province of 
Saskatchewan. I know the members on the other, on the 
opposite side of the House falsely believe that the importance of 
agriculture is declining and I can understand why they would 
believe that. If they look at the way sectors of the economy are 
reported to contribute to the overall provincial economy and the 
method of reporting, that would lead one to believe, unless they 
dug a little deeper, that agriculture, the importance of 
agriculture is declining because at one time it was maybe 15, 20 
per cent of the provincial economy in recent years and now it’s 
down to 7 or 8 per cent. And there’s a reason for that. 
 
As I said, part of the reason and the confusion is the way the 
reporting is done, the way agriculture and other sectors of the 
economy, the way the reporting is done. As far as the amount 
they contribute to the provincial economy, in the case of 
agriculture the value of the goods and services provided at the 
farm gate is totalled and then added to the provincial economy 
and then of course the percentage is worked out. There is no 
consideration given as far as spinoffs and those sorts of things 
and therefore oftentimes this could be misleading. Certain 
sectors of the economy provide a whole lot more spinoffs to the 
overall economy than other ones do. And I would suggest that 
agriculture would probably be at or very near the top of the list 
as far as sectors of the economy that contribute in spinoff 
fashion to the economy. 
 
So as I said, agriculture is a very important concern to many 
people in the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood: things 
like CAIS, which we’ve discussed in this Chamber on number 
of occasions; of course the BSE, ongoing BSE crisis is having a 
huge negative impact to many producers, since many producers 
in my constituency are mixed farmers such they produce 
livestock and they also produce grains and oilseeds and many 
specialty crops, and so on. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I think to maybe have the people of this province and 
particularly members on the opposite side of this House 
understand the nature of the crisis that we are undergoing in 
agriculture at this time, I should relate a conversation that I had 
with an independent business person who conducts business in 
my constituency. And this individual is an independent fertilizer 
and crop input merchant. 
 
This individual, as you can well imagine, is very concerned 
with the state of agriculture, very concerned with the lack of 
cash flow that many producers are experiencing. Not just those 
producers who chronically from year to year are in a cash flow 
position, but all producers, including the very most efficient and 
top and best managers, are experiencing a very, very serious 

cash flow problem, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the frost of 
August 20, the BSE crisis, and the ongoing and long-term 
decline in the prices for agricultural commodities. 
 
And it’s all seemed to have come to a head in the fall of 2004. 
As I said, the BSE crisis was ongoing in 2004 and it continues 
today, much to our disappointment. We thought perhaps by this 
time that problem would have been at least partially resolved. It 
isn’t. And as this individual said to me, when individual 
producers, farm managers become quiet and don’t talk about 
their problems and become withdrawn, that is a serious 
indicator of some very, very serious problems. And there are 
many, many examples of that out in rural Saskatchewan today. 
 
And certainly a provincial government can’t deal with 
commodity prices on the world stage and those sorts of things. 
But what a provincial government can do is help address the 
cost side of the equation, help reduce income, or production 
costs. And that is something that a provincial government can 
do. 
 
Property taxes are one thing that a provincial government can 
do. And in this budget, this government crows about, we’ve got 
$55 million that’s going to address the property tax issue. And I 
see one of the members, the member from Athabasca, being 
very proud of that. Well maybe for that member’s edification, I 
could present him with a few facts. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has undergone a reassessment 
and the net effect of reassessment is that overall the assessed 
values of properties is on the rise. In certain areas of the 
province it’s going to rise, it’s going to increase by a greater 
percentage than other areas of the province. There may be a few 
areas of the province that will see a bit of a decrease. 
 
But I just actually this afternoon got off the phone from, off the 
phone with . . . and had a conversation with an RM 
administrator. And this administrator did a little bit of work for 
me in a very short period of time and I would like to thank her 
for that extra effort. But this is the message that she gave to me 
as far as the overall effect of reassessment in her RM. 
 
The overall assessment is going to increase by 9 per cent. So 
what that will mean that if mill rates stay exactly the same in 
2005 as they were in 2004 — and there’s no guarantee that 
that’s going to happen — that taxes would go up by some 9 per 
cent. 
 
Certainly there’s going to be a bit of a credit for the education 
portion of taxes, but we’re already hearing from cities and 
towns that due to the increase in costs and the lack of extra 
revenue in this budget that they may be forced to increase their 
mill rate, Mr. Speaker. And if they increase their mill rate, that 
bit of a credit that this $55 million is going to provide to their 
tax bills is going to be eaten up very quickly. In fact, it’s very 
possible, Mr. Speaker, that many property owners will pay 
more for property taxes in 2005 than they did in 2004. Even 
though this government is putting $55 million towards property 
tax relief, we won’t see any real property tax relief because we 
don’t have a long-term, sustainable plan to deal with property 
tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we often hear and particularly from SARM [Saskatchewan 



March 30, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

Association of Rural Municipalities] who has talked about 
property tax and the need to fix the way we fund the K to 12 
education system, and many people — particularly those people 
who aren’t involved in agriculture or don’t own agricultural 
property — probably don’t understand how serious a burden 
property tax . . . property owners in rural Saskatchewan and the 
burden that they’re bearing as far as paying education tax. 
 
I had an individual in my office during the Easter break who 
brought his income and expense documents for his farm 
operation along, and we sat down and we looked at them. And 
we looked at the various cost factors in his overall operation 
and this individual keeps very intricate and detailed records of 
his farm operation. And one thing that caught my eye and this 
. . . I know the operation that this individual owns and manages 
along with his family, and it’s an average-size farm. It’s not a 
large farm. It’s a farm that’s probably by today’s standard is the 
size of a farm needed to support a family. And that farm paid 
over $6,000 in education tax alone, plus an additional $2,200 in 
municipal tax. 
 
So you can understand why owners of agricultural property — 
farm people and other business people who own agricultural 
property — have been saying for a long time that we need to fix 
this situation and that problem of funding the K to 12 education 
system. Certainly those people recognize that other property 
owners in small towns, medium-size towns, cities, pay an undue 
portion or bear an undue burden as far as property tax and 
education property tax. 
 
This is an issue that if it was addressed would certainly improve 
the competitive position of not only the agricultural producers, 
but other businesses within our economy. It would alleviate 
some of the pressures that residential owners are facing as far as 
taxes. And it would allow some flexibility for municipal 
governments to address some of their current issues and needs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there was a plan that was put forward here just a little over 
a year ago, and I have a copy of that report, and that was the 
Boughen report. And Mr. Boughen, he laid out a plan, certainly 
there was perhaps a few flaws with it, but it was at least a plan 
that would address and put in place a long-term plan to deal 
with property taxes. 
 
And I’ve heard the Minister of Learning say, well Ray Boughen 
recommended the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
Well maybe he did and maybe he didn’t. I’d like to read into the 
record what that recommendation . . . And by the way, there 
was 12 recommendations in this report and the recommendation 
dealing with forced amalgamation of school divisions is 
recommendation no. 5. If you listen to the Minister of Learning 
and other members on that side of the House, you would think 
that that was Mr. Boughen’s first recommendation; in fact it 
was recommendation no 5. 
 
And what does he say in his report? He says: 
 

The province establish a task force to recommend to the 
Minister of Learning revised Saskatchewan school 
division boundaries to increase equity among school 
divisions and maintain local responsiveness and 
accountability. 

Nowhere in this, in his recommendation does it say that the 
Minister of Learning should force the amalgamation of school 
divisions. But because of a plan to address the K to 12 funding 
issue, this government had to, was forced to deal, at least to 
respond to this report in early April of last year. And so what 
did they do? They brought out this amalgamation issue and 
used it as a smokescreen to deflect attention from the real issue 
of how we fund the K to 12 system. 
 
And they don’t have the foresight, the vision as to how they 
should tackle that problem. So we’ve got . . . they’ve got a little 
extra money, Mr. Speaker, and so okay we’ll put a $110 million 
towards it — $55 million this year and $55 million the next 
year. And hopefully that’ll get us by and then maybe the 
problem will go away. 
 
Well I’ve got news for them. The problem isn’t going to go 
away; it’s going to get worse. And because they haven’t got an 
idea of how to deal with the situation, maybe I could offer a 
suggestion. The Minister of Government Relations, I believe, 
called the representatives of SARM and SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association] and the School Boards 
Association together to seek advice as to how they should 
distribute the $110 million. And once that advice was given, I 
understand that’s the last time that that group met. 
 
Well I would suggest to this government that perhaps they call 
those same three bodies together and they sit down with them 
and say look, this is a serious issue; property tax is a serious 
issue. We need to deal with it and let’s sit down, roll up our 
sleeves and see if we can come up with a long-term solution, a 
long-term plan on how to deal with that problem. But I don’t 
see any, any initiative on this government’s part at all to deal 
with that issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I barely touched on some of the topics that I would have liked 
to cover, Mr. Speaker. I see the hour is getting late. But I would 
like to conclude with a couple of comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I started out I said that this budget lacked vision, it lacked 
direction. And one of the disappointments that I have, and I 
know a number of other people around the province have, is in 
this province we have a golden opportunity. And you would 
think that in our centennial year that this government would 
have seized that opportunity. 
 
And the opportunity I’m talking about is the innovation agenda. 
We have the Canadian Light Source up and running in 
Saskatoon. That could be the nucleus of an innovation agenda 
that we could create a whole sector, a new sector in our 
economy that would be shielded from the vagrancies of the 
commodity markets, whether they be the oil prices, whether 
they be the canola prices, whether it be the potash prices. And 
we have an opportunity to develop that sector of the economy. 
 
There’s members on that side of the House that I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, barely know what the synchrotron . . . 
where it is, what it does. They make no effort to inform even 
our science students in our schools. In fact the Canadian Light 
Source people had to hire a classroom teacher to prepare lessons 
so that they could be distributed to classroom teachers so that 
the classroom teachers could inform our new, our young 
scientists in our schools about the synchrotron. Now that pretty 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2005 

well would sum it up as far as the initiative on innovation from 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in conclusion, I would certainly like to state that I will 
certainly not be supporting the motion but I will be supporting 
the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being very close to the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House will stand adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 
p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2231 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2231 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2231 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2231 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2231 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2231 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2232 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2232 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2232 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2232 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2232 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2232 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2232 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2233 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2233 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2233 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2233 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2233 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2233 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2233 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................2234 
  Calvert  ....................................................................................................................................................................................2242 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2242 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2242 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2242 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2249 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Hanley Team Wins Elks National Curling Championship  
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2234 
 Nipawin Biomass-Based Ethanol Project  
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2234 
 Avonlea Teams Win Provincial Hockey Championships  
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2234 
 Students Win Regional Spelling Bees 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2235 
 Centenarians Honoured 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2235 
 2005 — The Year of First Nations and Métis Women 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2235 
 Elks Annual Provincial Dart Tournament in Biggar  
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2236 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation  
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2236 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2236 
 Collective Bargaining with Public Sector Workers  
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2237 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2237 
 Nursing Resources 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2238 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2238 
 Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2239 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2239 
 Support For Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2239 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2239 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2242 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2242 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2242 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2244 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2247 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2249 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................2251 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2253 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2257 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2261 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


