

















































Hansard: April 26, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 99A  TUESDAY, APRIL 26, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2679 
 April 26, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 
a desperate need for some attention to be paid to Highway 32 as 
indicated by this particular petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these four pages of petitions are signed by the 
residents of Lancer, Abbey, and Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people who are concerned that this 
government has decided not to recycle plastics within the 
Regional Authority of Carlton Trail: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to reintroduce recycling of plastics 
within the Regional Authority of Carlton Trail. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Naicam and 
Kelvington. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
on behalf of the staff, participants, and families of the 
Wheatland Regional Centre Inc. and other like centres across 
the province that provide services for individuals with 
disabilities. The signatures on this petition are concerned that 
the Government of Saskatchewan is not meeting the needs of 
most vulnerable people, of the most vulnerable people in this 
province. And the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly will please consider implementing the 
minimum compensation recommendations for staff 
members who support people with disabilities as outlined 
in SARC’s human resources plan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
fine community of Beechy, and I’m pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Briercrest, Baildon, and Moose Jaw. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who are very concerned about the crop insurance premium 
hikes and coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Radville, 
Colgate, Weyburn, and Minton. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the deplorable state of 
Highway 35. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville and 
Weyburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from parents in my constituency 
of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much-needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Kutz Crescent, Budz Green, Peters 
Cove, and Sears Cove in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want the government to repair and resurface 
Highway 15 from the junction of Highway 11 east to the 
junction of Highway No. 2: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Hanley, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read 
another petition opposed to possible reduction of health care 
services in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Wilkie Health Centre and 
special care home maintain at the very least their current 
level of services. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue the reorganization of school divisions on a 

strictly voluntary basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this multiple-page petition is signed by citizens of 
Kerrobert, Major, Coleville, and Luseland. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper no. 72, 640, 666, 715, 720, and 730. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 104 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: is the Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw 
scheduled to be closed in the next five years? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of the legislature a number of EMTs [emergency medical 
technician], paramedics, and dispatchers that work for Crestvue 
Ambulance in Yorkton, that were outside in front of the 
legislature today trying to receive wage parity with a number of 
other health districts and their same health district in Melville 
and areas like that, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government members, I also welcome the emergency medical 
services workers from the Yorkton area, and I look forward to 
having their issues resolved at the bargaining table. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to introduce 56 grade 7 and 8 students that are 
in the east gallery along with their teachers. Twenty-eight of 
these young people are from Victoria School in Saskatoon, and 
28 are from Kingston, Ontario. They are accompanied by their 
teachers, Mrs. Thomson and Mr. Hesketh from Kingston, along 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

with Saskatoon teachers Mr. Brusky, Mr. Olfert, and Mrs. 
Diederichs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young people are visiting Regina today. 
They are going to have a visit with myself at the end of question 
period; we’ll have drinks and refreshments. For the next 25 
minutes they’re going to observe question period, and I know 
that we will all want to welcome them to the legislature. 
 
On a personal note, one of the young people in the gallery is the 
nephew of a member of the legislature, and that’s Tor Nilson 
Lokken. He no doubt will hear his uncle John answer some 
questions in question period this afternoon. So I would ask all 
people in the legislature to welcome these young people to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
an honour for me today to introduce to you, and through you to 
members of the Legislative Assembly, individuals sitting in 
your gallery who represent Saskatchewan’s local municipalities 
in various capacities and who have worked collectively and 
collaboratively in the creation of The Municipalities Act that 
will be given second reading in the Assembly later today. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have from SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], Mr. Ken 
Engel; from the Rural Municipal Administrators Association, 
Kevin Ritchie. From SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] we have Barry Gunther, Allan 
Earle, Cam Baker, and Keith Schneider. And we have legal 
counsel, Merrilee Rasmussen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these individuals have sat on the committee 
that has developed The Municipalities Act, and I cannot thank 
them enough for their dedication to the people and 
municipalities of the province. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are individuals from 
the Department of Government Relations who have played a 
vital role in the development of the consolidated municipalities 
Act, and I would like to thank them on behalf of government for 
their work: Mr. John Edwards, Noela Bamford, Keith 
Comstock, Rod Nasewich, and Allan Laird. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, but certainly not least, I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
legislature, Sandy Schnell, legislative Crown counsellor, and 
thank her for her work in taking the effort of The Municipalities 
Act committee and crafting the legislation that is before us for 
second reading today. 
 
I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join me in 
welcoming these people and thank them for their hard work in 
crafting The Municipalities Act. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 

River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
the minister, on behalf of the official opposition, and welcome 
the members from SUMA and SARM and the delegation here 
today. I know they’ve done an awful lot of work on the 
municipal Act and the consequential municipal Act, and they’re 
here today to hear the first reading. 
 
But I think you can understand, with all of the changes, why the 
other Act was actually repealed. And hopefully we’ve got this 
one right this time. So again, welcome, and enjoy your 
afternoon in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature, in 
your gallery, Jennifer Nowoselski. She is a constituent of 
Saskatoon Fairview. She is a grade 12 student at Bedford Road 
Collegiate, an active member of the Saskatchewan Youth 
Parliament, and she’s here to observe us today. But mostly 
she’s here visiting a friend of hers, one of our Pages, Arielle 
Zerr. I’d like all members to welcome her to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to stand today and introduce to you, through you, and 
to all members of the Assembly Mr. Larry Hubich, president of 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, with us here today. 
 
And he’s sitting with some members of the Health Sciences 
Association. Some of the names that I’d like to read into record 
are Chris Driol — he’s the president of the HSA [Health 
Sciences Association of Saskatchewan] from Saskatoon; Dennis 
Tarr — he’s a care paramedic in Yorkton and the union rep for 
Yorkton; Jim Jeffrey, staff rep of the HSA in Regina; and Mario 
Kijkowski, labour relations rep out Regina for the HSA. And 
I’d like to welcome them to the legislature today, especially 
when we have second readings of some labour legislation and 
adjourned debates. So welcome to the legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce to you and to all members my legislative 
intern who’s working with me — actually, I don’t own him, 
he’s actually just working with me; he actually owns me in a 
way — is Mr. Kevin Chernoff. And I notice he’s sitting with 
Cam Baker, a veteran of the Saskatchewan legislative internship 
program. So I’m not sure who’s teaching whom more up there. 
But if all hon. members would welcome Kevin to the House 
today. 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery, the west gallery, is a friend of mine and a 
constituent from Buffalo Narrows, Mr. Brian Morin. 
 
Mr. Morin, of course, was in Weyburn over the weekend. He 
has two sons trying out for the hockey team there. And both of 
his boys also played with the La Ronge Ice Wolves and have 
been very active in minor sports throughout the North. And, Mr. 
Speaker, his wife was a good athlete. 
 
So I want to take just a moment to welcome Brian to the 
Assembly, and ask all my colleagues to join us in welcoming 
Mr. Morin to the Assembly today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you an out-of-province guest seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery today. Mr. Hasani Ngobeni is a 
Sergeant-at-Arms, travelling to us all the way from Limpopo 
province, South Africa, which was incorporated four years ago 
in the year 2001. And he is the special guest to our 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw. 
 
Mr. Ngobeni has come to our legislature on an attachment to 
look at the security hardware and security policies in place in 
Saskatchewan and to compare practices in Limpopo with what 
we do here. May your visit to our province and our legislature 
be a rewarding one, Mr. Ngobeni. It’s reassuring to me to have 
a backup Sergeant-at-Arms. Members, please join me in 
welcoming Mr. Ngobeni to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Whitewood Community Drama Club Performance 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
happens to a cruise ship full of passengers when they are 
shipwrecked on a not-so-deserted tropical island? Mr. Speaker, 
a few weeks ago, actually a couple weeks ago, the Whitewood 
local drama club hosted three dinner theatres which were sold 
out each evening. And they answered that question. They 
performed the play Lagooned. And, Mr. Speaker, they did an 
excellent job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just having had the opportunity of attending that 
dinner theatre, and having good food, and just the privilege of 
enjoying the fellowship of people around us, and then to note 
how well 27 local people performed when they performed this, 
did this performance of Lagooned. And how they shared with 
us the story of this crew and the shipwrecked cruise ship and 

the final results and the outcome of that drama. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment the Whitewood Community 
Drama Club — the 27 actors, the eight backup personnel who 
did the lighting and the sound, and most certainly the director, 
Donna Beutler, for her hard work, her dedication, and for a job 
well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Transit Service Employee Recognition Awards 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Public 
transportation services provide all of us with greater access, 
opportunity, and choice. They strengthen our community by 
reducing fossil fuel consumption and traffic congestion and 
foster a healthy and safe environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently I had the pleasure of attending the 52nd 
Transit Services Branch Employee Recognition Awards 
Banquet in Saskatoon, where some 300 men and women were 
honoured for the high-quality services they provide. The 
evening brought together colleagues from all sections of the 
branch to congratulate those who achieved the highest standards 
in both workplace safety and in the safety of delivering the 
city’s transit passengers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the strength and success of transit services branch 
in Saskatoon are its employees. Every day, all year long, they 
ensure the citizens of Saskatoon have the access to safe, clean, 
and reliable public transportation in all types of weather and 
traffic conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s most notable award went to Roanne 
Olfert, a Saskatoon transit operator, who was selected by her 
peers as Transit Employee of the Year. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
my colleagues to join me in congratulating Ms. Olfert on her 
achievement and in recognizing all Saskatoon transit service 
employees for the important and valued transportation services 
they provide. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Selnes Family Inducted into Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame announced that the Selnes brothers — 
Jack, Arnie, Henry, Lyle, Roy — and their cousin, Hans, have 
been chosen to be inducted as a family. 
 
Sons of Norwegian immigrants, the boys learned how to play 
ball at their one-room school. During the 1930s through to the 
1950s, they contributed to the success of their senior Meskanaw 
hardball team. The blazing fast ball and the hard hitting skill of 
the Selnes boys were renowned and often utilized by 
neighbouring teams. 
 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

Henry, the sole living member of the group, lives in the 
Pleasant Valley area. His memories revolve around the group’s 
love of the game, events like travelling to sports days as a team 
in the back of Beacher Jack’s truck, playing ball all day, usually 
staying for the dance long into the night, and landing home in 
time to change for a day’s work on the farm. 
 
The boys played the game because they loved it. They thought 
nothing of walking 3 miles to play a game, then walking home 
afterwards and doing chores. I dare say most of us would really 
think we’d achieved something if we’d done that even once. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, please join me in 
congratulating Henry and the families of Hans, Jack, Arnie, 
Lyle, and Roy Selnes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Clearwater Aviation 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 
Clearwater River Dene Nation in my constituency of Athabasca 
began operating Clearwater Aviation, a company that offers 
charter and ambulance services to local residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Clearwater River Dene Nation has an 
impressive portfolio of businesses that includes trucking, 
catering, and forestry services, and now the first ever locally 
owned and operated aviation company in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Clearwater Aviation began after the First Nation decided it 
wanted to improve local services. Since then, the company has 
met its projections and flies approximately 70 hours a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Clearwater Aviation plays an important role in the 
health and well-being of local residents. It has dramatically 
saved time with medical evacuations and eventually hopes to 
build a solid tourism trade. 
 
The Clearwater River Dene Nation, headed by Chief Roy 
Cheecham, has an ambitious economic development plan that 
has created sustainable and profitable jobs and provides vital 
services to the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in acknowledging the 
Clearwater River Dene Nation near La Loche, and of course 
their chief, Roy Cheecham, and the council for their 
commitment to economic development in the North and 
improving the quality of life for many northern Saskatchewan 
residents. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Congratulations to Helen Grandy on 100th Year 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 

3, it will be Helen Grandy’s 100th birthday, Mr. Speaker. Ms. 
Grandy was born in Illinois and her family immigrated to 
Canada when she was very young. They moved to a farm site 
south of Oxbow. 
 
She then took her normal school training and became an 
elementary schoolteacher. And her first job, Mr. Speaker, was 
in southwest Saskatchewan where the school was 50 miles from 
the nearest town — not a lot different than today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She married Thomas Whitfield Grandy in 1931, and at that 
point she quit teaching, Mr. Speaker. They had four children. 
She’s in excellent health and continues to live in her own home, 
Mr. Speaker, with the aid of a housekeeper. 
 
One of the things that Mrs. Grandy did is she taught 4-H, Mr. 
Speaker. And she taught yoga to the 4-H. Yoga and Oxbow, 
Mr. Speaker, in my mind, are not synonymous, but I’m glad to 
say that Mrs. Grandy did an excellent job with the 4-H. And I 
would like to congratulate her on her 100th year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Corrections Exemplary Service Awards 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Corrections officers 
often make a difference in the lives of people in conflict with 
the law. They work to keep our communities safe and play an 
important role in helping turn troubled lives around. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 31 individuals received Corrections 
Exemplary Service Awards for their contributions to the 
provincial and federal corrections systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Corrections Exemplary Service Awards 
acknowledge the special obligations and hazardous conditions 
that peace officers experience in their work with adult 
corrections or young offender programs. They recognize 
officers with at least 20 years of full-time exemplary service 
who have spent at least 10 years working as a peace officer in 
an institution or with a parole or probation service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 17 members of the federal service and the 14 
provincial employees who were honoured have helped many 
offenders return to successful and productive lives in their 
communities. Through rehabilitation programs these officers 
have demonstrated respect, fairness, and dignity for the people 
they serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating the 2005 recipients of the Corrections Exemplary 
Service Awards on their accomplishments, and in thanking 
them for their dedication and courage in sometimes difficult and 
dangerous circumstances on our behalf. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

Biggar Writer Receives Saskatchewan 
Arts Board Award 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A friend and 
neighbour of mine, Biggar writer Jeanne Marie de Moissac, was 
recently awarded $12,000 to create a new manuscript of poetry 
by the Saskatchewan Arts Board. A prolific writer, de 
Moissac’s works have appeared in Grain, Dandelion, Arc, 
Fiddlehead, Playgirl, and have been broadcast on CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Radio. Her first book, 
Second Skin, was published by Coteau in 1998. 
 
Jeanne Marie de Moissac was born and raised near Biggar and 
currently lives on a farm in the Bear Hills area. Jeanne Marie 
has had many interests. She has been a farmer, including raising 
sheep, and kept busy raising her children while working at 
Angie’s Hair Salon & Barber Shop in Biggar. 
 
Jeanne Marie de Moissac read from her latest book, Slow 
Curve, during a book launch last October. 
 
I look forward to the next time Jeanne Marie gives me a haircut, 
where we can discuss politics and her latest endeavour in the 
literary world. Please join me in congratulating Jeanne Marie de 
Moissac on her latest achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland. 
 

Saskatoon Credit Union Anniversary 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, over the weekend I had the great 
pleasure of attending the 65th anniversary celebration of 
Saskatoon Credit Union. There were over 300 people in 
attendance and it was a great evening, enjoyable for a lot of 
different reasons. 
 
For a number of years I had the honour and privilege of serving 
as president and Chair of the Board of Directors of Saskatoon 
Credit Union. I am extremely proud to have had the opportunity 
to serve an organization that has been extraordinarily 
successful, not only in terms of business but also in terms of 
putting into practice the social and co-operative values upon 
which it was founded. 
 
And so I was more than pleased to have the chance to say a few 
words in praise of all the Saskatoon Credit Union has achieved 
in its 65-year history. But the high point of the evening, Mr. 
Speaker, was the performance by Saskatchewan centennial 
2005 youth ambassador, Theresa Sokyrka, who treated the 
audience to a number of songs from her debut album which is 
released today. Mr. Speaker, given all that the Saskatoon Credit 
Union has accomplished in its 65-year history to benefit not 
only Saskatoon but the province as a whole, I think it’s fitting 
that this anniversary should coincide with the Saskatchewan 
centennial celebration. In fact the theme for the evening was 
100 years of heart and 65 years of fulfilling dreams. 
 
I invite all members to join me in congratulating Saskatoon 
Credit Union for 65 great years as an integral and vibrant part 
of the community. We look forward to many, many more. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Strike by Emergency Medical Technicians in Yorkton 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
striking Yorkton ambulance workers are here in Regina today 
and have been picketing the legislature. These workers want 
wage parity with other ambulance workers in the province. 
These Yorkton workers earn 5 to $8 less per hour than 
ambulance workers just a few kilometres away in Melville. This 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government has the power to fix 
this problem. 
 
Will the minister commit today to ensure wage equity for these 
Crestvue ambulance workers so they can get off the picket line 
and go back to work where they want to be, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the workers who are here 
today are bargaining their first contract with a private employer. 
They’re not employees of the Sunrise Regional Health 
Authority or of Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Funding for ambulance services right across the province are 
provided to the private operators on the same basis, and the 
contracts are then negotiated with the workers, with those 
ambulance services. And I encourage the members to go back 
to the bargaining table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s not much use 
going back to the bargaining table until that minister and that 
government decides to fund them properly and make a fair, 
level playing field throughout the province. He said there is a 
fair, level playing field; there isn’t. 
 
You get the situations like Moose Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon are 
treated different than they are in Yorkton. We have a private 
contractor in Yorkton that these people work for and all they’re 
asking is wage parity with people in the other part of the health 
district, such as Melville, that make anywhere from 5 to $8 an 
hour more. 
 
Will the minister make a commitment today to these people 
who’ve had to come in here, picket the legislature to get any 
kind of action, and hopefully they get action from this minister. 
Will the minister make a commitment today and deal with the 
problem we have in the Yorkton area? 
 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again the member from 
the opposition doesn’t get his facts together before he comes 
forward here. This is a first contract between employees and a 
private contractor. I think the member may want to discuss with 
his colleagues whether they should support Bill 87, The Trade 
Union Act, which allows for some very clear rules around first 
contracts which would assist these workers in a very, very clear 
fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts are that we provide the same funding 
across the health care system in Saskatchewan and that that 
funding is used by many other operators to negotiate contracts 
which do provide the kinds of wages that the member talks 
about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the minister. Once again, he does not provide the same funding 
across the province. That is part of the problem in this situation. 
Mr. Speaker, these people have been on strike for 20 days, but 
this problem has gone on far longer than that. This has gone on 
for many months, in fact, years. 
 
This is a government that prides itself on wage equity and wage 
parity and yet they sit back and watch what’s happening for the 
Crestvue Ambulance workers in Yorkton where they’re making 
anywhere from 5 to $8 an hour less than their counterparts in 
Melville in the same health district, Mr. Speaker. Not even a 
different health district. 
 
So maybe the minister would like to rise today and address to 
these people that he would be willing to fix the problem out 
there. I don’t know how on earth he can justify anything else. 
Let’s treat workers that are doing the same job with the same 
qualifications, let’s pay them the same. Will the minister do 
that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a first contract 
between a private contractor and the employees that are 
working for that contractor. The company involved is receiving 
the same funding as other private contractors across the system 
and those contractors have been able to negotiate contracts with 
their employees that provide the pay scale that’s there. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please members, order. Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the whole situation here is 
that we end up in a situation where we’re providing the funding 

on a standard basis right across the whole province. That 
particular contractor is working with the employees around a 
first contract. We all know that first contracts are quite difficult. 
I ask those members to support Bill 87, the amendments to The 
Trade Union Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday a family desperate and 
hurting came to this legislature to find out if their government 
could help them get their daughter back from the drug 
underworld. The family says their daughter is a 17-year-old 
drug addict who’s living with a known drug trafficker and they 
haven’t seen her in months. 
 
We understand the family met with ministers and several 
department officials yesterday afternoon. Mr. Speaker, this 
family is desperate. As a last resort, the family asked the 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment to help get 
their daughter back by using section 18 of The Child and 
Family Services Act. We understand that was not done. Can the 
minister tell us why not? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I would say that I spent considerable time with this 
particular family yesterday, and committed to do everything 
that’s within my power to do. 
 
Now I can’t speak to the specific case but I can tell you what we 
do in this kind of a situation. First of all, when a complaint is 
made of this nature regarding a child who’s under the age of 18, 
we investigate. So a worker would go out — a child protection 
worker would go out — would speak in person to the person in 
question, and determine whether or not they were lucid in terms 
of having the conversation, and would offer services and offer 
an exit from the situation that they’re in. And this would happen 
in every situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Aside from that there would be follow-up that would occur at 
subsequent occasions. Now there is a difference between a child 
who’s under 16 and one who’s over 18, which I will 
subsequently explain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, a young person on drugs — it 
doesn’t matter if they’re 16 or 17 or 15 — they really don’t 
know what they’re doing. And right now it’s clear that not only 
is the family powerless to get their daughter back, so is the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. 
 
Current legislation does not provide the family with the legal 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

tools necessary to save their child and to get her into the 
treatment and the counselling that she needs. Tomorrow I’m 
going to be introducing a private member’s Bill to give parents 
those tools. The family does not understand why this 
government wants to just wait and see what happens in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will his NDP government be 
supporting our Bill so the families aren’t put through an 
emotional wringer to try and get the kids that they love back 
and give them the help that they need? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to 
continue on with explaining the legal environment at the 
moment, a child who’s under 16 is determined to be under the 
care of their parents and there can be an order. If a child is over 
16, or in either instance, there has to be evidence presented to a 
judge — which is similar to the Alberta legislation — there has 
to be evidence presented to a judge . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. Order. 
Order. The Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, there has to be evidence 
presented to a judge, so there has to be sufficient evidence that a 
judge would consider necessary to judge that that child was not 
capable of making a decision. And certainly we are continuing 
to pursue visitation to determine whether or not in these 
instances there is sufficient evidence to put before a judge. But 
a judge makes the determination of whether you can move to 
the next step of apprehension. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Investment Saskatchewan Dividends 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, last week the SaskPower minister 
stood in this House and defended the NDP’s policy of taking 90 
per cent dividends from the Crowns and he said, I’d like to 
quote: 
 

I’ll tell you what we . . . [won’t] do. We . . . [won’t] take 
over 100 per cent like they did in the second-last year of 
the previous administration . . . we . . . [won’t] take over 
200 per cent like they did in the last year of the previous 
administration. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today Investment Saskatchewan released its 
annual report. It had a profit of $19 million last year. Mr. 
Speaker, do you know how much the dividend was that 
Investment Saskatchewan paid to the government? Forty-two 
million dollars. That’s $42 million, Mr. Speaker, and that is 220 
per cent of Investment Saskatchewan’s net profit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again the NDP says one thing and yet does 
another. How can this government justify stripping more than 
twice the net profit out of Investment Saskatchewan? 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — As usual, Mr. Speaker, the opposition says 
one thing, but the facts are something else. What the member 
did not tell the House, Mr. Speaker, but I will report to the 
House, is that during 2004, the year in question, Investment 
Saskatchewan had a number of major and unusual cash receipts 
from its investing companies — most notably, Mr. Speaker, 
$154.5 million from HARO Financial, and $9.3 million in cash 
receipts. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I would ask 
members on both sides of the House to stop pointing fingers 
and also to allow the debate to continue here. The Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So I’m pleased to 
report that not only did Investment Saskatchewan almost triple 
its net earnings, Mr. Speaker, but Investment Saskatchewan 
today, as the report revealed and the member’s well aware of it, 
Mr. Speaker, has over, I believe, $160 million in cash sitting 
into its account. And, Mr. Speaker, if Investment Saskatchewan 
did not pay a dividend to its shareholder, the people of the 
province, I would expect that opposition to complain about that 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the fact remains that Investment 
Saskatchewan reported a $19 million net profit and yet this 
government took $42 million in money from that Crown in 
terms of a dividend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Investment Saskatchewan’s CEO [chief executive 
officer] says that they were actually required to pay two 
dividends to this government. The first dividend was $17.3 
million, which was 90 per cent of the corporation’s net income 
for the year and then the government requested a special 
dividend of $25 million more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is, why that request? What was that 
about? Why did the NDP force Investment Saskatchewan to pay 
two dividends that total more than twice their net profit for the 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when Investment 
Saskatchewan is sitting with $160-some million in cash and 
when the people of the province have needs such as the need to 
fund the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 
program, Mr. Speaker, we make no apologies that profitable 
Crown corporations and agencies pay dividends to the 
shareholder, Mr. Speaker, which is the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we make no apologies, Mr. Speaker, for the fact that this 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

government believes that the Crown corporations should 
operate to the benefit of the shareholders who are the people of 
this province and they will continue to operate in that fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, this is the government that had 
$1.1 billion in unexpected revenues from other sources last year 
and then they had the nerve to claim another $25 million from 
Investment Saskatchewan. They couldn’t make do with the 
extra $1.1 million, another 25 million was needed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, idea no. 56 of the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 Ideas 
calls on the government to implement a Crown dividend policy 
that establishes net return levels adequate to meet Crown 
reinvestment requirements and directs excess Crown profits to a 
dedicated infrastructure renewal fund. 
 
Now, that’s a lot different from the NDP’s Crown dividend 
policy today. Mr. Speaker, their policy calls for equity stripping 
and using their Crowns like their own personal piggy bank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the NDP took a dividend from 
Investment Saskatchewan that amounts to more than twice the 
company’s net profit. Just last week, the Minister for 
SaskPower condemned that exact practice under the former 
administration. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker: why is the NDP once again saying 
one thing and doing another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as usual, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
opposition Conservatives who say one thing, but facts say 
something else. Now just the other day, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . and that member wants to talk about 
financial management. Under the leadership of the Minister of 
Finance, Saskatchewan received its 12th credit rating upgrade, 
Mr. Speaker, since 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the Dominion Bond Rating agency 
said what, Mr. Speaker? They said that the province was being 
well managed financially, Mr. Speaker. A far cry from this, Mr. 
Speaker, 23 years ago today a government was elected that 
virtually bankrupted this province, Mr. Speaker. And we have 
come back, Mr. Speaker, from the mess that those people 
created. And the last people we need to take fiscal advice from 
are those people over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Minds Eye Pictures 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, let’s do a quick review. So far 
the taxpayers . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Well, I 
would ask all members to take a deep breath. I recognize the 
member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So far 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have lost $7 million in Minds 
Eye Pictures. And now we discover today that the book value of 
our direct investment in Minds Eye is worth zero. Nothing. 
Nada. Zilch. Nothing, Mr. Speaker. They poured $7 million into 
this company. Did they do careful research? No. Did they 
carefully consider their investment? No. Did they do their due 
diligence before they spent taxpayers’ dollars? No. Did they 
lose everything? Yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what action will be taken to ensure these kind of 
errors are not repeated in the future? This government has 
learned nothing from Pangaea, nothing from SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], nothing 
from Navigata. When are they going to stop wasting taxpayers’ 
dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is correct 
that we have taken some writedowns on Minds Eye, but as 
usual, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative opposition does not talk 
about all the facts. 
 
They do not, for example, mention that Meadow Lake OSB 
[oriented strand board] recorded fifteen eight million dollars in 
earnings. They don’t report an increase of earnings from 
Saferco of 13.5 million. They don’t report, Mr. Speaker, 
earnings of $1.9 million from Centennial Foods. They don’t 
report about Big Sky Farms’ year being positive, and they don’t 
report $30.9 million interest income from HARO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Investment Saskatchewan had a very good year, 
and we will continue to have good years, Mr. Speaker, as long 
as we rely on the expertise of the model we’ve set up at 
Investment Saskatchewan. We’ve had a good year, and we’re 
on a roll, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member has 
any thoughts on the question, which was on Minds Eye 
Pictures. Documents released under access to information show 
that the president of Minds Eye threatened to shoot the Tommy 
Douglas movie in Manitoba unless he got more money. But an 
August 18, 2004 briefing note from the Department of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation recommended against providing more 
money, saying the project was receiving over $1 million already 
in tax credits. Then magically, Mr. Speaker, just like in the 
movies, the decision was reversed. 
 
Who decided to reject the department’s advice? Who promised 
the extra centennial money to Minds Eye? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the centennial gives us a 
great opportunity to recognize the many people that have 
contributed to the building of this province. And we do indeed 
have a great story to tell about Tommy Douglas. And he built 
the province. He made great contributions to the social fabric of 
this province and indeed to Canada. He was voted the greatest 
Canadian. 
 
And there are many economic benefits as a result of doing this 
film in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that includes rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, that does not excuse blowing 
taxpayer’s dollars. There’s more that was in the August 2004 
briefing note, and it states, and I quote: 
 

Mind’s Eye has established a consistent pattern of 
requesting last minute assistance . . . to offset financial 
crises that will result in negative publicity . . . [This] 
strategy has been unhealthy, not only for Mind’s Eye, but 
has negatively affected the industry as a whole . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, the question was, who promised this money? And 
why did the NDP government embark upon a course of this 
action its own officials — the officials of that member’s 
department — said was unhealthy and would hurt the industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that the 
department did recommend this Tommy Douglas Story to be a 
one-time grant through the centennial office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that department 
officials recommended against it. The briefing note also said, 
and I quote: 
 

There is no policy rationale to support investment in this 
project beyond the Film Employment Tax Credit . . . Any 
support outside the provisions of existing programs and 
policies would be subject to negative scrutiny. It would 
create significant precedent for other film projects and 
[would] have an impact on the credibility of the results of 
the film review. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the question was, who promised Minds Eye the 
extra money and why was the advice of the experts so 
recklessly ignored? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, there was a lot of due 
diligence done by our partners . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the grant from the centennial 
office was agreed to only after extensive due diligence done by 
our partners, including CBC, SaskFILM, and every other 
partner that’s involved. And this is a great story to be told to the 
province of Saskatchewan and to the rest of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the 8 million that’s being spent on this project, 7 million of 
that is going to be spent in Saskatchewan — including young 
people and rural Saskatchewan. In fact in a story today it was 
. . . There’s a story told about how much benefit it’s giving to 
the community of Gravelbourg, for example. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s appalling that this minister 
would stand there and say due diligence was done. This was a 
political decision because it was Tommy Douglas and that is the 
sole reason why this money was spent. The officials 
recommended against it. 
 
What due diligence? They’ve lost money again and this isn’t 
the first time that Minds Eye has lost money. What would 
Tommy Douglas say about that? 
 
On a day when we have health care workers picketing this 
Assembly, we find out that the government ignored the advice 
of the experts and caved in to political pressure. It caved in 
because it was too embarrassed to have this movie about 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

Tommy Douglas shot in Manitoba. It has no money for the 
health care workers, however it’s handing money over to a 
company for a movie while, at the same time, it’s writing off 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Would the 
member please put the question? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, who made the decision and 
how can they justify spending the money on a money-losing 
company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 
there was a lot of due diligence done on this work including 
from officials from our department who recommended to the 
Centennial office that this production be shot in Saskatchewan. 
 
And why would we not shoot it in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
when there’s so much economic spinoffs as a result of this 
movie being shot in this province. We have a great story to tell, 
Mr. Speaker, and the centennial gives us that opportunity to do 
so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again this displays 
how the government is saying one thing and does another. I 
question how due diligence was done when the report from her 
own officials recommends against spending this money. 
 
Could she possibly table some of the study that was done for 
the due diligence and could she possibly answer the question? 
Did the Minister of Youth, Culture and Recreation authorize the 
spending of the money to Minds Pictures . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again that the 
department did recommend this production being shot in 
Saskatchewan and that it did get, it does get one-time centennial 
funding. It’s creating all kinds of opportunities for our young 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, you know, the opposition says one thing, but the 
facts are there was a lot of due diligence done and it was 
recommended, and it’s the right time to tell the story of Tommy 
Douglas in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am extremely pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
government and table response to written question no. 1,015. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 1,015 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of Bill No. 106, The 
Municipalities Act. The Act represents a significant step in 
advancing the municipal-provincial relationship, and presents a 
significant opportunity to strengthen our urban and rural 
municipalities and to create opportunities for more effective 
local government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, earlier today I introduced a number of guests 
in your gallery today who are here in support of the Act. And 
I’d like to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that I inadvertently left out one 
of my introductions, and I would like to introduce to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and through you to all members of the legislature, Mr. 
Dale Harvey who’s also here representing . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . oh, I’m just . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister wishes to do an introduction. Is 
leave granted for an introduction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister will proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was just including it in my speech, but I understand the rules 
of the Assembly, and I’m very pleased to be able to 
accommodate. 
 
Earlier I introduced members of the local associations that are 
here today, and I wanted to introduce a member who I 
inadvertently left off my introduction list earlier, Mr. Dale 
Harvey from SARM, who was also active in the creation of this 
legislation. 
 
And I ask that all members welcome him to the Chamber today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much then, Mr. Speaker. 
I will proceed on The Municipalities Act. 
 
The foundations of the current framework of Saskatchewan’s 
municipal statutes are almost 100 years old. We have had 
separate rural and urban municipality statutes for nearly a 
century to accommodate traditional differences in the functions 
of these municipalities. The new municipalities Act will replace 
the current urban and rural municipalities Act and will provide 
smaller urban and rural municipalities with the tools and 
statutory framework they need in order to function efficiently 
and effectively in the 21st century. 
 
I believe it is appropriate that this significant step in 
modernizing municipal legislation and the municipal-provincial 
relationship is being taken during not only our province’s 
centennial year, but also the centennial year of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. Both 
organizations, Mr. Speaker, had tremendous centennial 
conventions earlier this year, and I was pleased to be a 
participant in both conferences. 
 
The impetus for this legislation came primarily from the 
municipalities themselves, and the drafting of The 
Municipalities Act has involved the full and direct participation 
of the municipal sector. I commend the proactive approach 
taken by SUMA in establishing a committee to review the 
provisions of The Cities Act to determine which provisions 
might be applicable to smaller urban municipalities. I also 
commend SARM for having the foresight to recognize and 
seize the opportunity to create change that will benefit local RM 
[rural municipality] councils across the province. 
 
As you may recall, Mr. Speaker, The Municipalities Act was 
introduced in the 2004 fall session. It did not pass at the fall 
session, and earlier this session, I made a motion to withdraw 
that Bill. 
 
As a result of the debate that arose in the legislature during the 
fall session, I committed at the municipal forum meeting held in 
December to undertake direct consultations with municipalities 
early in 2005 on the draft Bill for The Municipalities Act. These 
were to supplement the already extensive consultations with 
and presentations to the municipal sector that had been done 
during 2004. 
 
This commitment was to follow up concerns that were 
expressed by my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly when 
The Municipalities Act was introduced into the Chamber in 
November, concerns that the municipal sector was not 
knowledgeable about the new Act and that there needed to be 
even more opportunity for consultation with the sector. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I held regional public consultations in six 
communities during the second week of February 2005 — 

Weyburn, Aberdeen, Wilkie, and Humboldt in which I was in 
attendance, and Swift Current and Naicam where 
representatives of my department were present. I am pleased to 
report the following results of these consultation sessions to the 
legislature. 
 
Approximately 275 people attended the sessions. More than 140 
municipalities were represented, including 90 rural 
municipalities, 30 towns, and 20 villages or resort villages. 
There was media coverages at the sessions in Weyburn and 
Humboldt. Six of my opposition colleagues attended the 
consultation sessions and members of both The Municipalities 
Act working committee and SUMA’s town and village 
legislative review committee were in attendance at the various 
sessions. 
 
The tone and nature of the discussion at these sessions was very 
open, respectful and positive. No one in attendance took any 
issue with the overall intent or direction of the new Act. The 
sessions provided a good opportunity for people to obtain a 
greater understanding of the Act itself and various features of 
the new Act related to public notice, conflict of interest, rural 
election provisions, loans and guarantees, and debt and 
borrowing. There were no concerns raised with how The 
Municipalities Act handled these matters. 
 
There were a few suggestions for refinements. These were then 
taken forward to the working committee. The working 
committee also recommended other adjustments to refine the 
original Bill, and these changes have been included in the Bill 
introduced in the spring session and in front of us for debate 
today. 
 
In general Mr. Speaker, the consultations were well received 
and I believe the fact that there were very few differences of 
opinions or issues raised at the sessions is due to the quality of 
the final product. This in turn is the result of the success of the 
collaborative and co-operative process undertaken on behalf of 
SUMA, SARM, Government Relations, as well as the urban 
and rural municipal administrators’ associations in developing 
the legislation and in forming the municipal Act preparedness 
committee to assist with transition to the new Act. 
 
This committee is seen by individual municipal officials and 
administrators as a very positive step that will go a long way to 
ensuring that municipalities are prepared to come under the new 
Act and are comfortable with the new Act. 
 
It is clear that the municipal sector strongly supports and 
expects a new statute. As I indicated earlier, the primary 
impetus for the Bill has come from the municipal sector itself. 
SUMA’s work on new town and village legislation was 
approved by the SUMA membership and was a foundational 
element in the work on The Municipalities Act. And at the 
SARM 2005 spring convention, delegates soundly defeated two 
resolutions calling for a delay in the passage of the new Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I referred to earlier, a number of changes to the 
original Bill have now been included along with consequential 
amendments to other Acts impacted by this Bill. Approximately 
120 statutes require consequential amendments as a result of 
replacing The Rural Municipalities Act, The Urban 
Municipalities Act, so I felt that it was important to introduce 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

this Bill as an entire package rather than have these 
amendments brought forward and made either as House 
amendments or as subsequent amendments in a subsequent 
session of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate at this time for me to once again 
thank the volunteer members of the working committee that 
have continued to work diligently to bring this legislation to us 
today. 
 
I want to acknowledge each of them. From the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, Barry Gunther, Allen Earle, 
Keith Schneider and Cam Baker; from the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, Murray Percell, Ken Engel 
and Dale Harvey; from the Rural Municipal Administrators’ 
Association of Saskatchewan, Kevin Ritchie; and from the 
Urban Municipal Administrators Association of Saskatchewan, 
Mark Dubkowski. 
 
In addition to the volunteer members in the working committee, 
I want to recognize the work of the officials from my own 
department, Government Relations, and their colleagues in the 
Department of Justice. The development of this Bill was indeed 
a collaborative effort. By working together we’ve been able to 
lay the legislative foundation necessary to increase the 
autonomy of municipalities and to reflect the modern principles 
introduced in The Cities Act while staying true to the traditional 
values of local government and of this great province of ours. 
 
As I indicated to you last fall, Mr. Speaker, this government 
recognizes that Saskatchewan’s urban and rural municipalities 
are in the best position to make local decisions for the benefit of 
their citizens, and we are committed to working with local 
governments and their representative associations to increase 
autonomy and to reduce provincial oversight in matters that are 
of a truly local nature. 
 
The Municipalities Act recognizes and furthers this 
commitment, and, Mr. Speaker, I will take this opportunity to 
reiterate some of the things that this Bill will do. 
 
The Bill fundamentally changes and modernizes the 
relationship between the province and smaller urban and rural 
municipalities. The provisions of the Bill are crafted to enable 
municipalities to respond more quickly and efficiently to local 
issues as they arise and to encourage creativity and flexibility in 
how these local issues are addressed. Like The Cities Act, The 
Municipalities Act contains a statement of principles and 
municipal purposes to define the new relationship between the 
province, the municipalities, and their residents. These 
statements also form the basis of a new approach to local 
government accountability that I will talk about in just a 
moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act introduces the principles of natural person 
powers and areas of jurisdiction for urban and rural 
municipalities as was first introduced in The Cities Act. Natural 
person powers will provide municipalities with the same legal 
powers as individuals or businesses, and will enable local 
councils to administer their corporate affairs with more 
flexibility and less prescription. This new approach is more 
permissive in nature, and the legislation provides for limitations 
to a municipality’s authority only where it is appropriate and in 

the public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the establishment of areas of jurisdiction will 
provide municipalities with more flexibility to govern, regulate, 
license, and deal with a variety of local matters and future 
issues that are within municipal jurisdiction as they arise. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, this Bill uses the concept of a permissive 
approach, recognizing the capability of local governments to 
plan and act responsibly within limits being provided when an 
overriding public or provincial interest is present. 
 
The last important principle that I spoke of when the Bill was 
previously introduced concerns public accountability. We are 
taking steps to ensure that municipalities are directly 
accountable to their citizens as much as possible, as opposed to 
being held accountable to the provincial government. The Act 
contains a number of measures that improve the accountability 
and transparency of municipal governments to the public and to 
ratepayers. These include more consistent rules regarding 
closed council meetings, requirements for public notice 
policies, and for publishing a municipality’s debt and debt limit. 
The points I spoke about above have not changed from when 
the Bill was previously introduced. 
 
It is also important to note that, like The Cities Act, this Bill 
ensures that municipal bylaws or resolutions that conflict with 
any federal or provincial statute or regulation will have no 
effect to the extent of the conflict. This codifies the common 
law practice, Mr. Speaker, and ensures that when necessary 
provincial and federal laws will override those at the local level 
if a conflict occurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who have worked with the rural 
municipalities Act of 1989 or the urban municipalities Act of 
1984 will see many familiar provisions in this Bill. For 
example, despite the granting of natural person powers, a 
number of financial matters will continue to be prescribed as 
before, including budget requirements and appointing an 
auditor. These are important matters of public interest, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is critical to have a consistency of approach 
between and amongst municipalities. 
 
With respect to property assessment and taxation, Mr. Speaker, 
The Municipalities Act has essentially the same provisions as 
the previous municipal Acts, including the continuation of a 
simplified assessment appeal process to provide a less onerous 
and intimidating process for persons who appeal their property 
assessment without the aid of lawyers or appeal agents. As was 
also previously indicated when the Bill was introduced, there 
are no new powers of taxation for municipalities except for 
some expanded provisions regarding the use of special tax 
bylaws to raise revenues in all or a portion of a municipality to 
pay for a very specific purpose. I note that special taxes levied 
in this manner can only be used for services that can be 
completed and that . . . [inaudible] . . . properties can pay for 
within one year. 
 
As was the case with The Cities Act, the authority to 
supplement the Act with regulations has been included in 
several areas, so that additional public interests may be 
accommodated if and when they are identified. The existing 
regulations pursuant to the municipality or . . . pardon me, Mr. 
Speaker. The existing regulations pursuant to the municipal 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

Acts are currently being reviewed. After consultation with the 
municipal sector, new regulations will be prepared and 
approved prior to the Act coming into force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel it is imperative to emphasize what a 
significant piece of legislation The Municipalities Act is, and to 
repeat that its creation can be attributed in large measure to the 
spirit of co-operation and collaboration that has made this 
province strong. It only came about because of the dedication 
and commitment of the key stakeholders who worked diligently 
in the public interest of having a standard set of principles and 
authorities for all municipalities while recognizing in some 
cases traditional differences could and should be 
accommodated. 
 
As I said previously, our municipalities, Mr. Speaker, have 
much to offer in terms of social, cultural, and economic 
development. We have listened to the municipalities and 
support their request to modernize the legislation under which 
they are governed. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to 
move second reading of Bill No. 106, The Municipalities Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minster of 
Government Relations that Bill 106, The Municipalities Act be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to take a few moments just to comment on the Bill, Bill 
106, The Municipalities Act, before this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister indicated, the Bill of this nature 
was to be introduced in the Assembly in the fall of 2004. And at 
that time the opposition had raised a number of concerns, but 
we’d also indicated that there were . . . The Bill in general, we 
weren’t necessarily disagreeing with it totally, as a result of 
what the Bill was endeavouring to do. 
 
However, we had some major questions. And one of the 
questions that was raised, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that I’m not 
exactly sure if the stakeholders really understood the whole 
process of legislation and how legislation is introduced and the 
opportunity for opposition to review the legislation before it 
moves forward. And in the short fall session there just wasn’t 
adequate time to address all of the questions and certainly some 
of the issues that were brought forward. Now, Mr. Speaker, just 
some of the discussion we had at that time — certainly the 
people who had worked on the piece of legislation had 
indicated that they really wanted to see this legislation move 
forward. And there were a lot, there were and are a lot of good 
principles that were brought forward and are continued in this 
Bill. 
 
But as we did some more research into the legislation and did 
some consultation in the broader spectrum, Mr. Speaker, you 
are aware of the fact and members are aware of the fact that 
there were some questions that were raised at both the local 
level, whether with RMs or municipal councils. And one would 
have to suggest that in the development of this piece of 
legislation that . . . And I understand that there’s a lot of 
stakeholders involved. When you look at the number of RMs 

and municipal councillors and reeves across the province and 
urban municipalities, there are a number of stakeholders. And a 
Bill of this nature is no simple Bill just to send out and ask 
people exactly, well do you understand or do you understand 
where we’re going, or the intent of the piece of legislation, and 
get people to agree immediately. 
 
And so, well the Bill died in the fall or didn’t move ahead in 
2004. We’d indicated at that time to the minister and to his 
officials that we were more than ready to move forward after 
we had further consultation. Mr. Speaker, at the time we had 
raised some concerns. And the minister had indicated, in some 
quite private discussions, well if there’s some issues of concern 
we can address those down the road through amendments to the 
Bill. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Our suggestion to the minister was, if there are areas of concern 
and through further consultation we find out that . . . and I 
believe the minister has indicated there were some minor issues 
that they’ve raised and they’ve corrected in the new Act. And 
I’m pleased to see that the minister, while he may not 
necessarily have had to remove the old Act from the table, but 
I’m pleased to see that a number of issues were addressed and 
are introduced in this new Act. And we trust at the end of the 
day, once consultation has been completed, that we will find 
that all parties in general have come to a conclusion that this 
meets the needs that we’ve been required or we’ve been looking 
for. 
 
No doubt, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the fact that we’ve 
had an urban municipality municipal Act, we’ve had a rural 
municipal Act, we’ve had . . . and then it was combined with 
The Cities Act. We’ve had two major pieces of legislation 
which have now been combined under one piece of legislation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, you will appreciate — members of this 
Assembly will appreciate, the public will appreciate — when 
you come forward with a Bill of this nature and the thickness of 
the piece of legislation, some 200 pages, Mr. Speaker, you can 
appreciate the work and effort that has been done by everyone 
— whether it’s SARM or SUMA or representatives from those 
two organizations — and the work and effort they have gone 
into, and certainly the Department of Government Relations. 
And I would like to compliment each and every one involved 
for their work, their dedication. 
 
And we are pleased to see as well that, as a result of a number 
of questions raised last fall, that there were some meaningful 
public consultations so that individuals within the 
municipalities and across our province would have a better 
understanding of what this Act was doing to address the 
concerns that they were bringing forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a significant piece of legislation. It draws a 
lot of the two former Bills under one Act. It, as the minister has 
indicated today, hopefully simplifies the process of how 
municipalities and . . . rural and urban govern themselves, and 
how they deal with situations that crop up. And as we look back 
100 years, we realize that there . . . changes have taken place 
significantly over the past 100 years. And this Bill, and as we 
look into it deeper we will indeed assess whether or not what 
the minister has been telling us certainly meets the needs of the 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

municipalities and governments across our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this piece of legislation is before this 
Assembly today, one area that municipal governments are still 
looking at is how they’re funded. And we hope that down the 
road we can come to an agreement and come to an 
understanding and through recommendations, whether it’s 
municipal or rural politicians, we can find a funding formula, 
Mr. Speaker, that municipalities can deal with and cities can 
look at as they’re setting their budgets, rather than having to 
rely on waiting for the province to actually come down with its 
budget on an annual basis. A formula or a revenue-sharing 
agreement of some form, that municipal governments will know 
exactly where they stand on an annual basis, is certainly 
something that I hear out in my area people are looking for. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having made those few comments, I want you 
to know, Mr. Speaker, that my colleagues and I have had, 
initiated some discussion around this Bill that has just been 
reintroduced to ensure that the questions that were raised have 
indeed been answered. We take the minister’s word for it. We 
just want to do some follow-up and address any concerns that 
may come, so that when we move forward and eventually move 
this piece of legislation through the Assembly, at the end of the 
day all the stakeholders involved will say, yes, we’ve finally 
come to an Act, a piece of legislation, that deals with the 
concerns, that creates an opportunity for us as municipal 
governments to address the issues that we face. 
 
We understand that urban and rural issues aren’t all the same, 
but if there’s a level playing field, Mr. Speaker, we believe that 
when we look at how municipal governments have worked 
across this province, even as they do today, probably the most 
efficient form of government we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan is still at the local level. 
 
And I want to compliment our . . . all the local men and women 
who do really volunteer their time to provide leadership in their 
communities, and then leadership through their communities to 
the province and to the people of Saskatchewan. At this time, 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill 106, The 
Municipalities Act, be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 sur les modifications 

corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée 
The Municipalities Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to be able to open debate at second 
reading on Bill 107 and as such, Mr. Speaker, I rise to move 
second reading of Bill No. 107, The Municipalities 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, represents changes that are made to 
bilingual Acts as a result of the introduction of The 
Municipalities Act. I refer, Mr. Speaker, to The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act, 1997; The Education Act, 1995; The 
Interpretation Act, 1995; and The Traffic Safety Court of 
Saskatchewan Act, 1988 as the four Bills amended by this 
particular piece of legislation. All other consequential 
amendments are contained within The Municipalities Act itself. 
 
The changes being made to these statutes, as in all the other 
consequential amendments contained in The Municipalities Act, 
primarily do the following: replace references to the 
municipality, The Rural Municipality Act of 1989 and/or the 
urban municipalities Act of 1984 with a reference to The 
Municipalities Act; repeal the various definitions of 
municipality in favour of a new definition in The Interpretation 
Act, 1995 that identifies all of the specific types of 
municipalities and the different municipal statutes under which 
each type is governed; ensure that where intended and 
appropriate, specific provisions only relate to a specific type or 
types of municipality, such as rural municipalities or 
municipalities other than rural municipalities; and remove or 
replace outdated language relating to certain municipal 
positions and entities, such as secretary-treasurer, or 
maintenance area corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accordingly I am proud to move second reading of 
Bill 107, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 
2005. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 107, The Municipalities 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again just 
to make a few comments regarding the Bill 107 before the 
Assembly. I know it’s a Bill of general housekeeping, as the 
minister has already indicated — a Bill that addresses the issue 
of French language and which Bills of the Assembly certainly 
are brought forward, and indeed French translation is also 
offered to those pieces of legislation. 
 
And the minister mentioned that some of the Acts that are going 
to be clarified as well. We have a section under alcohol and 
gaming and The Education Act. Mr. Speaker, the general 
principles around this Bill, and I know this Bill is fairly simple 
and straightforward, and in making some of the corrections and 
addressing some of the issues that have come . . . will be 
coming forward as a result of Bill 106. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, our colleagues want to take a little more 
time just to review this piece of legislation a little more in depth 
to ensure it addresses all of the needs that is bringing forward, 
and the concerns. And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill 107 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005/ 
Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of The Education 
Amendment Act, 2005. It’s my pleasure to outline for all 
members the substance and purpose of the amendments 
incorporated in this amending Bill. 
 
Many of the amendments deal primarily with administrative 
matters. These matters include repealing sections that pertain to 
the Learning Resource Distribution Centre Revolving Fund, as 
the distribution centre is no longer operational, and thus as you 
might expect, there is no need for an associated revolving fund. 
Learning at this point covers the cost of all purchases — all the 
cost to purchase, sell, distribute, print, and for print and 
non-print materials to educational institutions through the 
learning resource distribution centre. The learning resource 
distribution centre was discontinued a few years ago because 
many of the school divisions found it more to their advantage to 
purchase the resources directly from publishers. 
 
Other amending provisions are included to allow expanded 
membership on the Board of Teacher Education and 
Certification. The Board of Teacher Education and Certification 
has a responsibility to recommend to the minister and to the 
university president changes to teacher training programs, to 
specify results to be expected from teacher training programs, 
to review course content of all teacher training programs, and to 
review regulations related to teacher certification, as well as to 
make recommendations with respect to certification of teacher 
applicants. 
 
The amendments will provide for the participation of 
representatives from the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents, the First Nations University of 
Canada, and the Gabriel Dumont Institute. Currently the Board 
of Teacher Education and Certification has membership from 
the Department of Learning, the University of Saskatchewan, 
University of Regina, and the teachers’ federation. 
 
Throughout the Act, reference to high school divisions and its 
superintendents of administration are repealed or clauses 
amended because we no longer have high school divisions in 
the province, nor the unique designation of superintendent of 
administration. Although many school divisions continue to use 
the title of superintendent, The Education Act of 1995 and 
subsequent regulations uses the designation of 
secretary-treasurer exclusively. 
 
In relation to school division secretary-treasurers, amendments 
are being made that will no longer require a prescribed form of 
guaranteed bond. And the department will no longer need to 
receive a copy of such a bond, as this is an employee and 

employer responsibility. 
 
Additions are being made to require members of a conseil 
d’école — which is the francophone equivalent of the local 
district board of trustees in the public system — to take an oath 
before assuming office and to vacate the position under 
specified circumstances. The change will make the provisions 
for participants of each of these to be consistent with those of 
members of local districts boards of trustees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members are well aware, we are implementing 
a new system of school division governance through the process 
of restructuring. This process will provide and have an impact 
on most school divisions throughout the province. 
 
As members of the Assembly will know, we have announced 
that the elections for the boards of education of the new school 
divisions will be held on June 15, 2005. The new school 
divisions will become operational on January 1, 2006. 
 
Minister’s orders have been issued to establish all the new 
school divisions. For the period of June 16, 2005, to December 
31, 2005, the existing boards of education will continue to have 
responsibility of operating school divisions that currently exist. 
As of January 1, 2006, the new amalgamated divisions will 
become operational. And the boards of education elected this 
coming June will assume the roles and responsibility for boards 
of education as provided in The Education Act. 
 
As I’ve noted, Mr. Speaker, one of the first steps to be taken 
when a new school division is established is the election of the 
board of education. As part of the planning process to assist 
boards of education in the transition to larger school divisions, 
last spring we reconstituted the restructuring coordinating 
committee. A similar committee has provided valuable 
leadership for the voluntary restructuring initiative undertaken 
several years ago. 
 
The membership of this committee included representatives of 
all the educational stakeholders. It’s the recommendation of this 
group that boards of education, elected as of June 15, begin 
work immediately to plan for the transition that’ll occur on 
January 1, ’06. Our existing legislation, however, does not 
make any provisions for boards of education assuming roles and 
responsibilities before school boards become operational. 
 
Through this amending Bill currently before the Assembly, new 
provisions are being incorporated into the Act which will — 
through the minister’s order establishing the new school 
division or through subsequent order — assign specific roles 
and responsibilities to the new boards of education for the 
transition period. 
 
On the recommendation of the restructuring coordinating 
committee, the roles and responsibilities delegated will allow 
these boards to strategically plan for the new school divisions to 
hire staff, such as the director of education and the 
secretary-treasurer, for the period of June 15 through December 
31, in order to provide leadership for the strategic planning 
process. 
 
I want to clarify that these legislative amendments will apply 
only to those school divisions that are part of the provincial 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

restructuring initiative. They will not apply to those that are 
otherwise unaffected. 
 
In these divisions — those that are being affected — the boards 
that were elected in the fall of 2003 will continue to have 
responsibility for the aspects of the operation of their school 
divisions in the restructured divisions until January 1, ’06. For 
those that are not being restructured, they will continue to have 
on the normal election cycle. 
 
The amendments that are before the Assembly will alleviate any 
confusion that potentially would exist during the transition 
period. Boards that were elected in the fall of ’03 will continue 
to exercise the powers and duties under The Education Act. 
Boards that are elected in the spring of ’05 will assume duties 
and responsibilities that relate specifically to the planning for 
the restructured divisions. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Also included in the amending Bill before the Assembly is a 
provision that provides for the abolition of corporal punishment 
in all public schools in the province. The prohibition of corporal 
punishment in schools is consistent with the recent Supreme 
Court ruling on interpretation and application of section 43 of 
the Criminal Code of Canada and supports the provincial 
government’s existing policy directions for children and youth. 
 
The court emphasized that parliament does not advocate any 
form of corporal punishment — of physical punishment — to 
children but at the same time provides protections to a limited 
group of persons — specifically parents and teachers — so as 
not to overextend the scope of the criminal law into a sphere 
where it has potential to harm family relationship or the role of 
teachers. The prohibition is being strongly urged by the 
Children’s Advocate. I would indicate that, as corporal 
punishment is seldom used in our schools today, the prohibition 
relative to the proposed amendment will have little effect on 
teacher practice. 
 
The final substantive amendment is to accommodate changes to 
the Lloydminster charter. Under the new provisions of the 
charter, the city of Lloydminster will use Alberta’s property 
assessment and taxation provisions. The city of Lloydminster 
will be required to submit assessment information as of 
December 31 to the Government of Alberta and to the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, SAMA. 
 
SAMA will prepare equivalency assessments for the 
Saskatchewan portion of the two Lloydminster school divisions 
by March 1. The equivalency assessment information will then 
be provided to Saskatchewan Learning for its use in calculating 
education foundation operating grants. The amendment is 
needed to allow the minister to use the equivalency assessment 
in determining the amount of foundation operating grant 
payments for the school divisions in Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that this is a largely housekeeping Bill 
that will allow us to move forward with restructuring, will allow 
us to update our procedures in terms of student discipline in 
accordance with current practice, and will allow us to make a 
number of other minor adjustments that will help Saskatchewan 
move our education forward through this period of 

restructuring. As such, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Education Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 114, The Education Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to rise and respond to the second reading of Bill No. 
114, The Education Amendment Act. And listening to the 
minister’s remarks regarding this Bill, for the most part it is 
housekeeping. It is a housekeeping Bill. 
 
I always find it interesting though when we start talking about 
this, and the minister will talk about, you know, how pleasantly 
like the restructuring is going, while on our side it’s forced 
amalgamation. Let’s really coin it for what it is. It’s forcing 
school divisions into amalgamated, integrative divisions with 
really little say from any of those divisions. But I’m going to try 
not to get too far down that road. Every time I’ve stood up in 
the House over the last few months I’ve talked an awful lot 
about the whole forced amalgamation and talked about the 
reasons for forced amalgamation and all of that. And I’m going 
to try and shy away from that. 
 
But I do remember talking to the minister at different times, and 
the minister had mentioned that really there’s nothing that needs 
to be done. We’ll just go ahead and do it. I don’t need any 
legislation; I can just go ahead and force these bigger boards 
and that type of thing. 
 
Now we’re starting to see that there are some things that need to 
be done legislatively to make it work properly. I think at one 
point there was only one piece of legislation that’s on the books 
right now that we’re talking — it’s in adjourned debate I 
believe — talking about the election dates of board trustees and 
the fact that we don’t need to have the election dates of the old 
boards. 
 
But there is more legislation that needed to be done obviously 
because we have this Bill in front of us. And any time we have 
a piece of legislation in front of us, it’s incumbent upon us as 
the opposition to go through it clause by clause and send it out 
to many of the stakeholders. 
 
I find it very interesting — even though some of the guests in 
the gallery have left now — about the municipal Act and how it 
came through, and it was going to be very, very straightforward, 
and all the homework had been done, and we can just 
automatically pass that Bill. Well unfortunately the homework 
hadn’t been done, and we saw what happened. They had to pull 
the Bill and reintroduce it. Not that we have anything wrong 
with the gist of the Bill, as with this Bill, not that we may have 
anything wrong with the gist or the intent of the Bill, but there 
does need to be homework done on these particular Bills. 
 
Because especially when you talk about school divisions and 
the uproar that this government has put rural Saskatchewan . . . 
not just rural Saskatchewan, I would say anywhere outside of 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

Regina, Saskatoon. This government has put that area, anything 
outside of Regina and Saskatoon, into a bit of an uproar. 
They’re not . . . in a state of flux. They’re in a state of flux. 
They don’t know quite what’s going to happen and how this is 
all going to work. 
 
Because many, many school divisions have been through 
amalgamation and the minister talked about reconvening the 
restructuring board to help these divisions through. They had 
been through voluntary amalgamation which really worked 
quite well, and many of the boards were very happy with the 
way that worked. Now they’re into the process of being forced 
into a school division with no sort of personality or corporate 
history at all. This is a brand new entity, and how is all that 
going to work? 
 
So I think people in, especially in rural Saskatchewan — I 
won’t necessarily say in the major centres, but in the smaller 
communities that are afraid of losing their schools — are really 
going to pay a lot of attention to any piece of legislation that 
comes forward. 
 
There’s a section in this piece of legislation that talks about 
assets and liabilities from a disestablished school board, be it 
separate or public. And what happens to those assets or those 
monies that that school division has saved and secured over the 
last number of years? 
 
And I can think of one myself. And it’s in a school division 
that’s in my constituency that I represent and know all the board 
members very, very well. It’s a very small school, it’s a very 
small school division. There is just a one-room school in this 
division, which is better than the division next door that doesn’t 
have a school, but this division actually does have a school. 
And this division has done great work within its division to save 
money. I’ve been out to that school a number of times and 
looked at the programs that it has to offer; looked at the assets 
that it has in that school. 
 
And their biggest concern is . . . And they have a bit of a bank 
account. They have a bit of money saved up because they 
thought they were going to have do some work on their school. 
They thought they were going to have to do a number of things 
to their building to keep it in good shape for the future of the 
kids in that area. And when I went out to that school division, or 
that school, and listened to their trustees speak, that was their 
biggest concern . . . is what is going to happen with the money 
that we have saved up in our area? We’ve charged taxes to the 
farmers and the property owners in our area. We’ve got a bit of 
a cash on hand. What is going to happen to that cash when we 
are forced into new divisions? 
 
And you know, they didn’t want to lose that money, and they 
kept thinking now, can we move it into a trust and then into the 
community rink which is having a hard time keeping going? 
Can we move it into a trust and into the community hall 
because that money has been raised around this area. 
 
And when we look at this Bill it talks about that very thing — 
dealing with some of the assets and liabilities. But in this 
situation, it’s assets that this school division has, and what’s 
going to happen to that? And it repeals the portion of the Act 
that says: 

The assets and liabilities of a . . . disestablished [public or 
separate board division] . . . shall be vested in the board of 
education [in the] . . . school division in which the . . . 
division is [located] . . . 

 
Well I would like the members of that school division to read 
that paragraph and then explain it to me and tell me exactly 
what’s going to happen with the assets because they’ll need to 
know this. They’ll need to know that the Act is changing. So, 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of changes to The Education 
Act. That’s section 60 to section 310. 
 
There are some other changes, and in section 42 it looks like it 
gives the minister some extra powers, which is always a little 
concerning seeing what the minister has done with the powers 
that he does have, and now to give him extra powers is always a 
little disconcerting to many. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time, until we are able to consult with 
divisions around the provinces — around this province, I should 
say — the divisions that haven’t been, that are still functioning, 
that will be functioning until the end of 2006 that have a truly 
vested interest in the education system of our province, many of 
those trustees will not be on the newly amalgamated boards. 
Very many aren’t. 
 
And it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on that point . . . 
I just about was wrapping it up there. But while I’m on that 
point, I heard an advertisement just recently asking for people 
to consider running for the newly amalgamated school boards. 
And I really thought that that struck me as strange, Mr. Speaker, 
that I don’t remember in the past having to advertise people in 
rural Saskatchewan to please get out and run for a school board. 
Because people took that on because it was a service that they 
were doing for their kids and their region, their community, or 
their school. 
 
But it strikes me rather curiously that now we have to advertise 
to get people to serve on these newly amalgamated school 
boards, these super-boards if you want to call it that. And I 
don’t mean super as far as really good, I mean super as far as 
huge, huge school boards, Mr. Speaker, that we have to 
advertise to attract school trustees. To me that would state that 
perhaps we’re having a hard time attracting people to these 
new, forced amalgamated boards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll get a chance to speak on that in a little bit. I think 
there’s another Bill coming up that may even address that 
further, and I’ll be glad to go a little bit further down that road. 
But any time, as I said, that there are changes to the Act — and 
especially education over this next year or two — people have a 
real sensitivity to it. And I know they’ll be glad to have a look 
at these changes and either agree or disagree into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on second reading of Bill 114 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I am indeed very pleased today to rise to move second 
reading of The Education Property Tax Credit Act, 2005. 
Members are aware that The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
will provide education property tax relief in the form of a credit 
that will be shown on individual property tax notices. 
 
The purpose of this amending Bill I introduce today is to 
provide the authority and details for the education property tax 
credit program that will be retroactive to January 1, 2005. This 
will ensure that these provisions will match the date the 
property taxes are imposed according to legislation. 
 
This Act was drafted by the departments of Learning and 
Government Relations. It’s based on an options paper coming 
out of the working group. That working group included both 
departments as well as the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, Saskatchewan association of urban 
municipalities, and the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association. Taking into account the recommendations of the 
working group, the Government of Saskatchewan is allocating 
$110 million to property tax relief over the next two years. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that this property tax credit program 
will see property tax payers receive an average 8 per cent credit 
on the education portion of their property tax notice for 2005 
and 2006. This should help shift the cost of education from 
property-tax-based provincial revenue sources and result in the 
provincial share of education rising from 42 per cent to 47 per 
cent. This uniform tax credit will be based on a percentage of 
the education property tax levy for the 2005-2006 property tax 
years. 
 
Residential and agricultural property owners and most 
businesses will see a reduction of an average of 8 per cent in 
education property tax levies for 2005. 
 
This is of course good news for property tax payers in this 
province. This education property tax relief will also be 
available to commercial, industrial, and multi-unit residential 
properties, although it will be capped at $2,500 annually. This 
cap will ensure that residential and agricultural properties, on 
which there will be no cap, will receive meaningful relief 
through this program. 
 
To ensure that school divisions are compensated, Saskatchewan 
Learning will provide a grant to each school division, in 
addition to the foundation operating grant. This grant will be 
based on the total education property tax credit provided to 
property owners within the school division boundaries. This 
grant provides payment on behalf of school property tax payers 
for the credits they receive. 
 
The Act also provides authority to the Minister of Learning to 
make payments to both school divisions for the purpose of the 
credit program, as well as to tax roll software vendors and 

municipalities to ensure implementation of the credit as has 
been recommended by the working group. These payments will 
be subject to the regulations and limited costs such as tax roll 
software programming, updated tax notice forms, and tax 
notices from manual based systems. 
 
The Act takes into account that, at present, municipalities have 
a very limited authority to cancel current year’s school property 
taxes. To implement this credit, municipalities will be provided 
with authority to reduce the current year’s school property taxes 
by the credits calculated in accordance with regulations. Also, 
municipalities will be required to show the credit calculated on 
tax notices for each property. 
 
I would like to state that a notwithstanding clause is included to 
ensure that municipalities have clear authority to implement the 
credit. 
 
Provisions are in place regarding the management of the 
compensation for school divisions. Municipalities will be 
required to prepare and submit a credit report to each school 
division in the prescribed form. Then school divisions will 
submit a credit summary report to Saskatchewan Learning for 
all municipalities in their boundaries to claim the grant. Finally, 
a general regulation-making authority is noted so terms or other 
provisions not covered in the proposed Act may be clarified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proposed Act demonstrates our government’s 
commitment to addressing the issue of sustainable, meaningful 
education property tax relief. It’s an important step forward in 
changing the balance in education financing. As you know, this 
government is continuing to work with local governments, 
municipalities, and school boards to determine a long-term 
solution to property tax relief that will see equity for both 
students and taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accordingly I am very pleased to move second 
reading of The Education Property Tax Credit Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill 115, The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
again to rise on Bill No. 115, An Act to provide Education 
Property Tax Credits. It was interesting as the minister was 
going along and talking about this property tax credit and how 
it’s going to work, and it’s going to be a credit back to the 
municipalities. And I remember what it . . . It just struck me as 
going back in this Assembly about five or six years ago, and 
listening to the minister of Education at that time say, we’ve got 
a tax credit for you coming where people are going to get some 
refund on their education portion of their property tax. 
 
Because as I said many times in this Assembly, I can tell you in 
2003, when I knocked on doors, one of the biggest factors, one 
of the most common concerns during that election was the over 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

reliance of property . . . of the property tax base to fund 
education. And it was a issue that was certainly spoke on at 
pretty much every door that I was at, where people owned their 
own property. 
 
Many of the people in rural Saskatchewan, ag land — of course, 
that has been a major, major issue in agriculture, well going 
back many years. But I can say since 1998, when I first started 
getting involved in the political process and going to tax revolt 
meetings in my constituency, property tax and the portion of 
education on their property tax bill was way out of proportion. 
 
And so what happened was the government then decided that 
they would put $50 million in and they would do a property tax 
rebate for $50 million and it was going to last two years. And I 
think at that time . . . I don’t know whether the government 
didn’t expect to look past two years or didn’t expect to be the 
government after those two years, or whatever it might be, but 
they addressed the issue for two years — $25 million a year. 
 
And that program was administrated mainly through the 
department, if I remember correctly. And I remember hearing 
municipalities were quite upset and school divisions were quite 
upset because the administrations cost of that program was 
going to be very, very high. They said that we could do it better 
through the RMs. And so I will applaud the government in one 
sense in that they are looking at the RMs now to do this 
education tax credit rebate. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Sutherland has 
asked leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you to the member for allowing me to interrupt his roll. 
 
It’s my great privilege and pleasure to introduce some guests 
that travelled all the way from Prince Albert. My sister-in-law, 
my niece, and my nephew are here; Wendy Temple — if you 
could give a wave — she’s my sister-in-law, and Stephen 
Temple is my nephew, and you’ll guess that Micheala Temple 
is my niece, so we’ll put it all together. 
 
So if hon. members would please welcome them here today. 
They’re visiting, attending a conference, and they’re already 
seen the IMAX, and they’re just touring around Regina. So if 
all hon. members would welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kowalsky: — I would like to just echo the words of 
the member for Saskatoon Sutherland and welcome the 

Temples, who are my neighbours — two doors down — from 
Prince Albert. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was talking about the property tax credit and I think it’s 
important that we have some context here as to why we’ve got 
to where we are today and this Bill today. And I think it’s 
important that we look at . . . This has been in issue in the 
province for many, many years and the government has tried to 
address it by putting $50 million in a number of years ago over 
two years. And what happened to that money? And that money 
was spent. 
 
People saw a slight credit on their property tax, on their 
education portion . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The minister 
from North Battleford is hooting from his seat, “8 per cent.” 
Well four years ago it wasn’t 8 per cent, Mr. Minister. You’re 
talking about $110 million today and we’re talking about $50 
million four years ago. It wasn’t 8 per cent. If you’re going to 
hoot from your seat, maybe you’d better follow along with the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I think . . . Order, 
please. Order. I would allow the member to speak and I would 
ask also the member to focus on the remarks through the Chair, 
please. The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regardless, we 
are talking about the history of the issue of property tax and 
how this government has failed over and over, and over and 
over again, to address this issue, Mr. Speaker. Whether we talk 
four years ago when they . . . or five years ago when they put 
$50 million in — 25 over two years — or this situation now. 
But of course when they put the $50 million and spread it over 
two years, it didn’t solve the problem. 
 
So what the government did is instead of addressing the 
problem, which is overreliance on property tax to fund 
education, they struck the commission, the Boughen 
Commission, which reported back to the government and told 
the government what it needed to do to properly fund education 
and some of the steps it needed to take, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the interesting part about the Boughen Commission was in 
the 2003 election, what the Premier had to say about the 
Boughen Commission. He said, we have the room to accept the 
Boughen Commission in the financial house that we have today 
which, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seems to be a theme that we have 
heard over and over again. They say one thing and do 
something totally opposite because they did not have, they did 
not have, the fiscal house to accept the Boughen Commission. 
That is obvious. Because if they did have the fiscal ability to 
accept the Boughen Commission, which is exactly what the 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

Premier said, they would have accepted it. 
 
But what they did is they couldn’t accept it because they don’t 
have the fiscal capacity to accept it so they cherry-picked the 
one thing out of it which was forced amalgamation, which was 
in the last Bill and I won’t go down that forced amalgamation 
road. But they did look at the Boughen Commission and told 
them what they should do to properly fund education. Well they 
ignored that. They went down the road of forced amalgamation. 
 
Now it just so happened that there was an extra windfall of 
money from the federal transfer. I remember a year or two ago 
they said, oh we’ll address property tax. It’s not a problem. 
We’re going to address property tax once we get the extra 
money from the federal transfer — which at that time, quite 
frankly, they didn’t have a clue whether there was a cent 
coming or not. Because there was at that time no money coming 
and they said, oh we’ll give the school divisions one-third of 
whatever money we receive from the federal government. As it 
turned out, they ended up getting $330 million from the federal 
government so they put one-third to that. So they put $110 
million towards the education portion of property tax for two 
years. It’s $55 million a year for two years, makes $110 million. 
 
Now if you go back, what exactly did they do five years ago? 
They had 50 million; they plunked it, they thought they’d put a 
bandage over the problem, get them to the next election. And 
what happens is, is after two years the bandage is pulled back, 
the wound and the hurt is just as great, people are struggling 
under extremely high property taxes. The highest education 
portion of property tax anywhere in this nation is right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So what did they do by addressing the problem, by putting $50 
million towards it five years ago? Nothing. And what are they 
going to do by putting $110 million towards this issue right 
now? In two years time they’ll have done absolutely nothing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. So what they are doing is they’re putting 
$110 million . . . Now the minister of Education and the 
minister of Municipal Affairs are both hooting from their seats 
now, saying that $110 million is nothing. And of course, they 
haven’t been paying attention because I said $110 million is a 
bandage, that’s what the $110 million is. It will cover a wound 
again for another two years. It will cover a wound for two years 
and I will guarantee you, in two years time, we’ll rip the 
bandage off and was anything solved or cured? Absolutely not, 
Mr. Speaker. The wound will still be there. 
 
And until this government finally decides that it needs to fund 
education, a greater portion of education from the provincial 
coffers and quit relying on property tax, that’s all this $110 
million is, is another bandage on a wound that will be just as 
infected in two years time, Mr. Speaker. The government fails 
to address the real problem and that’s funding education, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone has moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 108 — The Business Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 
2005. 
 
Amendments to The Business Corporations Act are needed to 
keep Saskatchewan legislation current, to respond to 
amendments to the Canada Business Corporations Act, and to 
respond to recent developments in securities laws. The 
amendments follow the lead of the federal Business 
Corporations Act by reducing the Canadian residency 
requirement for directors. 
 
Currently, a majority of the directors of a Saskatchewan 
corporation must be resident Canadians. Under the 
amendments, at least 25 per cent of the directors must be 
resident Canadian. The rationale for the reduction is that the 
majority requirement is unnecessarily restrictive, particularly 
where corporations are seeking to engage foreign expertise in 
their board. The ability to include more directors from outside 
Canada will increase the corporation’s ability to raise capital. 
This amendment is a necessary response to keep Saskatchewan 
competitive in this regard. 
 
The bulk of provisions in this Bill respond to changes in 
Saskatchewan’s securities law. Current provisions of The 
Business Corporations Act regarding the solicitation of proxies 
are at variance with the provisions contained in national rules 
which have been adopted as regulation of the Saskatchewan 
Financial Services Commission. Similarly, certain provisions in 
The Business Corporations Act dealing with the preparation, 
auditing, filing, and distribution of financial statements no 
longer correlate with the provisions in Saskatchewan’s 
securities law. 
 
Accordingly, the amendments provide that wherever 
corporations comply with the relevant provisions under 
Saskatchewan’s securities law, they will be exempt in the 
corresponding provisions in The Business Corporations Act. 
 
The Act also contains an expressed provision enabling the 
creation of regulations prescribing the qualifications of persons 
eligible to be appointed as an auditor of a corporation. 
 
Regulations will be introduced to assist Saskatchewan 
corporations in avoiding liability that may flow from receiving 
auditing services from someone who is not qualified. 
 
The Act also contains a number of housekeeping amendments. 
These amendments seek to maintain and enhance the currency, 
clarity, and consistency of the Act. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
move second reading of The Business Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the committee is 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

the motion put by the minister that Bill No. 108, The Business 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and to discuss this particular Bill. It’s always interesting 
when the NDP always bring a business . . . bring a Bill that’s 
dealing with corporations and big business because over the 
past they’ve never been known to be friends of big business, 
especially their grassroots people. 
 
And I remember at a lot of their conventions, they seem to 
attack them quite handily all the time, attacking big business. 
Yet in the House, their cabinet ministers will say they’re always 
trying to attract — which they should be — trying to attract 
business here. But I know from the grassroots end, their people 
have a distinct hate it seems like for big business over there. 
 
It was interesting on this particular Bill . . . I just met with 
constituents of mine that has a business. He’s looking to expand 
in my constituency, so I won’t mention the name of it, because 
just like everybody they get a little nervous of this government, 
when they have business. But what he’s been look for is equity 
outside of the province to expand. He says I definitely don’t 
want the government involved in my business, to come to them 
for investment. Which is good. I mean, he says, it’s time to 
grow. He says I have a chance to grow. 
 
But he said he was looking for money here in Saskatchewan 
and also outside. He’d been to Alberta. And the message he got 
there was people — the investment company there — was very 
nervous about Saskatchewan, coming here. He said you don’t 
have a very good business climate there to begin with. He said I 
don’t . . . the wording he was told was he doesn’t basically . . . 
they don’t want to invest in Saskatchewan. They’re very 
nervous about it. 
 
We can talk about the hours . . . they were still talking about the 
available hours legislation. Still mentioning there, the damage 
that has been done. So that message is still out there, Mr. 
Speaker, on that available hours legislation. And even as we 
speak right now, this government says that we’re going to 
amend that, and it has yet to come forward yet at that end of it. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So you think the business world isn’t watching them, Mr. 
Speaker, from inside of the province? They are, and they’re 
very nervous out there. So it’s very hard for people to raise 
investment outside of the province, Mr. Speaker, on account of 
that — on account of the meddling and the interference that this 
government has done with labour legislation at that end of it on 
big business. 
 
I know that there is some amendments on this particular Bill 
that may benefit some corporations, which are good. We need 
that money. We need corporations to come in here, and there 
are very good jobs to be growing with that. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I know that we want to study this Bill 
and also send it out to a lot of the business people out there to 
just see what their thoughts are on this particular Bill because I 

think that the government has to work with business. And I 
think maybe this government is starting to eventually learn the 
lesson that to grow this province that it has to work with 
business, along that end of it. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will 
adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les 

sociétés sans but lucratif 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Non-profit Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2005. Mr. Speaker, according to the most recent data 
gathered by Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan has the highest 
percentage of volunteer participation in Canada, with 42 per 
cent of Saskatchewan residents aged 15 and older volunteering 
on an annual basis. 
 
This government recognizes the significant contribution to 
Saskatchewan made by these organizations and the volunteers 
that devote their and energy to them. The Premier has 
recognized the importance of the work of non-profit 
organizations through the establishment of the Premier’s 
Voluntary Sector Initiative, an initiative which seeks to build on 
an effective and collaborative relationship between the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the voluntary sector. 
 
In 2003, this government enacted amendments to The 
Non-profit Corporations Act to provide . . . or to improve 
protection from liability for directors and officers of 
not-for-profit corporations. 
 
Today I rise to introduce further amendments to the Act that 
will enhance the environment in which non-profit corporations 
operate in Saskatchewan. The amendments update the 
provisions dealing with audits and financial reviews of 
non-profit corporations. Specifically the amendments will assist 
corporations in dealing with the increased cost of audit services 
by increasing the threshold below which a corporation may 
waive the requirement for an audit. 
 
To ensure that Saskatchewan non-profit corporations will 
continue to receive appropriate financial review, new 
regulations will be introduced prescribing the qualifications of 
individuals conducting audits for financial reviews. The voting 
requirements for resolutions to waive audits and financial 
reviews have also been amended. The current provisions require 
the unanimous support of members voting on such a resolution. 
The amendments will require an 80 per cent majority on such 
resolutions for charitable corporations and a special majority, 
i.e., two-thirds of those voting, for membership corporations. 
 
These amendments will avoid the potential for one or two 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

disgruntled members forcing corporations to obtain audits or 
reviews where they would not otherwise be necessary, but will 
at the same time reflect the higher standard required of 
charitable corporations that solicit donations from the public. 
 
The Act is updated by bringing the residency requirement into 
line with that contained in legislation in other Canadian 
jurisdictions. An amendment reduces the requirement for 
Canadian resident directors from a majority to not less than 25 
per cent. The requirement that at least one of the directors of the 
corporation be a Saskatchewan resident has been maintained. 
 
A new provision stipulates that the appointment or election of a 
director to a non-profit corporation will not be valid unless the 
consent of the new director has been obtained. This amendment 
will address problems created where individuals have become 
subject to the obligations and potential liabilities that may flow 
from being a director without their knowledge or consent. 
 
In addition, the Act has been updated by adding the power to 
create regulations that will allow for electronic communications 
under the Act. The regulations will include a provision allowing 
corporations to communicate with their members via email, 
where the member has consented to receiving communications 
in that matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the director of corporations will work with the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative to assist non-profit 
corporations in education and governance issues, and in 
particular the importance of appropriate and up-to-date mission 
statements and bylaws. 
 
The Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative and the Government 
of Saskatchewan seek to foster an environment within which 
non-profit corporations can effectively and efficiently govern 
their affairs and activities. This Bill will assist corporations in 
doing just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the committee is 
the motion put by the minister that Bill No. 113, The Non-profit 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and talk about this particular Bill, which I think is tied to the 
Bill we just previously on kind of piggybacked. 
 
The member was quite right when he talks about Saskatchewan 
for volunteerism. Saskatchewan has always been known 
throughout Canada as some of the greatest volunteerism 
participation over the years. I mean that’s what made this 
province great, that’s what’s maintaining the towns and the 
cities and the villages out there throughout Saskatchewan, at 
that end of it. 
 
And any way that this government can assist the organizations, 
non-profit organizations, from raising money, or from doing 
things out there, that’s good. We commend the government on 
that particular piece of legislation coming forward. 

It also needs to be looked at to make sure that the organizations 
and the business organizations are happy with it because we 
have to help them. The corporations are out there, non-profit, 
that are raising money to fight the many diseases out there from 
cancer to diabetes, to multiple sclerosis, to any number of cures 
that they’re working towards, that they’re raising money for 
that. Never mind that we talked about the service clubs out 
there — the Elks, the Kinsmen, the Lions — numerous service 
clubs that are raising money throughout the year to make this 
Saskatchewan a better place. 
 
I know it talks about changing the auditor status on that, I think 
which so far looks on the surface a good provision. Because I 
said before, anytime you can help an organization that’s raising 
money, that is helping to find a cure for the many diseases out 
there, I think that’s a good role of government in that end of it 
because they need help, all the help they can get when they’re 
out there at that end of it. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, we still want to study this Bill and 
also want to . . . I also have some corporations, non-profit that I 
know of and also service clubs that I belong to, that I would like 
to have a look at this particular Bill. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
will adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Bill No. 112 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading on The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this House will be aware that The 
Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005 is being introduced this 
session to implement the recommendations of the Small Claims 
Court review committee. This committee consists of three . . . 
excuse me, Mr. Speaker. This committee consists of 
representatives from the Law Society of Saskatchewan, the 
Canadian Bar Association, as well as Justice department 
officials. 
 
This committee was asked to provide recommendations to 
improve general efficiency in the small claims system and to 
improve access to justice with respect to small claims matters. 
While the majority of the changes recommended by the 
committee are being made in the other Bill, this Bill provides 
for an additional important change arising from the work of that 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides for the creation of a civil 
division of the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. Currently the 
vast majority of the work of this court consists of criminal 
proceedings. It was the recommendation of the review 
committee that a civil division be created that will be focused 
on addressing the specialized nature of civil matters brought 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

under The Small Claims Act. 
 
This Bill provides that, with the consent of the chief judge, the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may set the number of judges 
to be assigned by the chief judge to the new civil division and 
designate the location of such an assignment. The chief judge 
has the flexibility to assign non-civil division work to these 
judges where necessary or to assign additional judges to act as 
judges of this civil division where the workload is appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are being proposed to improve 
both the expertise and the efficiency of the court in dealing with 
civil matters. The Small Claims Court is intended to operate as 
a court for lay people rather than lawyers, and it’s a low-cost 
method of dispute resolution. The changes in The Small Claims 
Act, when combined with the creation of a civil division of the 
Provincial Court under this Bill, should greatly assist in 
achieving these goals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Provincial Court Act, 1998. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the committee is 
the motion put by the minister that Bill No. 112, The Provincial 
Court Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak briefly on Bill 112, An Act to amend 
The Provincial Court Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a while I thought that we were on the wrong 
bit of legislation, but I understand that the civil court is indeed 
going to have the prime responsibility for small claims issues. 
And therefore, Bill 112 and 111 are pretty much tied together so 
that they both deal with the same issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important that we make the small 
claims process easier to access. And if changing this court Act 
in order to provide for a civil court is going to improve that 
system for small claims, Justice of the Peace, and things of that 
nature, it is likely going to be a Bill that is worth supporting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to make sure that there’s nothing that has 
been overlooked or omitted from this legislation, we certainly 
are going to want to speak to people in the legal profession that 
will give their comment on this legislation. And in order for that 
to happen, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
that debate be now adjourned. Is the Assembly ready . . . Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Bill No. 111 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005/Loi 

de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créanles 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 2004, a Small Claims Court 
review committee was struck with a view to providing 
recommendations to improve general efficiency in the small 
claims system and to improve access to justice with respect to 
small claims matters. 
 
The committee consisted of representatives from the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan, the Canadian Bar Association, as well 
as Justice department officials. This committee also consulted 
closely with the judiciary, and it conducted focus group 
meetings with members of the public who had gone through the 
small claims process in order to ensure the practicality of these 
recommendations. This Bill is based on recommendations of 
that committee, and I take this opportunity to thank all members 
of that committee and the judiciary for their diligent efforts in 
this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of the recommendations of this 
committee do not require legislative changes to implement, 
including changes to the monetary limit for Small Claims Court 
and various other administrative steps designed to improve 
uniformity in the Small Claims Court process. 
 
In general terms the overall themes of the recommendations 
were to improve access to justice for the public in smaller civil 
claims and to ensure consistency in the administration of justice 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill furthers these themes through the 
introduction and implementation of a case management meeting 
requirement between the parties and a judge prior to the conduct 
of a small claims trial. In conducting the case management 
meeting, the small claims judge is specifically authorized to 
seek to settle the matter before the court without a trial. If a 
settlement cannot be reached, the judge is authorized to make a 
full range of other orders to manage the dispute and to 
otherwise expedite the resolution of the dispute if the matter 
must go to a trial. For example, orders could be made for the 
additional disclosure of evidence or for the preparation of a 
statement of defence prior to a trial date. 
 
These changes are intended to avoid unnecessary delays in the 
conduct of trials and to ensure that all parties to a trial are aware 
of their rights and have been diligent in preparing their cases. 
 
In addition to this major change in procedure, amendments are 
also proposed that would authorize the timely disposal of trial 
exhibits after the expiry of any possible appeal from a small 
claims judgment to provide for good faith liability protection 
for a clerk of the court who is seeking to assist a member of the 
public and to broaden the discretion of the court to assess costs 
in a small claims matter, other than lawyer-related costs, where 
the court deems necessary or appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the ongoing 
operation of a Small Claims Court that is accessible and 
efficient in its operations as a court for the average person 
rather than the average lawyer. We are confident that with the 
changes recommended by the Small Claims Court review 
committee as implemented by this Bill and by The Provincial 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

Court Amendment Act, 2005, this court will continue to provide 
a valuable service to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Small Claims Act, 1997. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion put by the minister that Bill No. 111, The Small 
Claims Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. I 
recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak briefly on An Act to amend The 
Small Claims Act, 1997, Bill 111. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, this Bill provides some 
important housekeeping changes to The Small Claims Act in 
order to streamline the small claims process. Mr. Speaker, there 
are interesting innovations like introducing pre-trial case 
management conferences and giving the presiding judge more 
latitude in terms of discretion as to how this may . . . 
recommendations that he can make in order to facilitate 
settlements of the small claim process. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also understand, in looking at this Bill, that there 
is greater discretion for the judges presiding to dismiss and to 
deal with frivolous claims in an appropriate manner, and it also 
expands the basis upon which a judge can award court costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important that the whole process of 
small claims be streamlined as much as possible because in 
many instances this involves people who have substantial 
amounts of their portfolio and their savings that could be at 
jeopardy in this small claims process, and to deal with these 
issues in a timely manner is very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many instances like this are going to require 
comment from the legal system and people that have had 
experiences with the small claims process. And in order to 
facilitate that, at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that this debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
estimates for Health. Will the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
pleased to have with me today John Wright, the deputy 
minister. And right behind him is Mike Shaw, associate deputy 
minister. And to Mike’s right, directly behind me is Duncan 
Fisher, the assistant deputy minister. And then to Duncan’s 
right is Max Hendricks, who’s the executive director of finance 
and administration branch. And to my right is Lawrence Krahn, 
who’s the assistant deputy minister. 
 
I also have with me members from the department: Bonnie 
Blakley, who’s the executive director for health human resource 
planning; Roger Carriere, from the community care branch; 
Deb Jordan, who’s with the community hospitals and 
emergency services, acute and emergency services branch; Bert 
Linklater, executive director of the regional accountability 
branch; June Schultz, who’s the director of the budget and 
financial planning in the finance and administration branch; 
Rod Wiley, who’s the executive director of regional policy 
branch; Tracey Smith, who’s assistant to the deputy minister; 
and Kevin Wilson, who’s the executive director of the drug plan 
and extended benefits branch. 
 
So I’m very pleased to have all of these officials with me today 
and look forward to the questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
subvote (HE01). Is the committee ready for the question? I’ll 
recognize the member from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I’d like to 
welcome all the officials here today for the minister. 
 
I’m not sure we’re going to be able to put all of the officials to 
work, but I do have a number of questions. One case file that I 
want to talk about . . . and I want to talk about some health 
promotion issues. And then I want to talk about the question 
that when I left off about two weeks ago, asking about the issue 
around recruitment and retention of nurses and overtime and 
I’ve kind of gone back over the statement that was said. So 
those are the three areas that I’m going to hit on in the time that 
I have. 
 
I also have a number of other colleagues that are going to ask 
questions; I think that they are probably more constituency 
specific. So I will be turning it over to them in a little while. 
 
But the one case file that I did have was a Regina man who is 
on CPP [Canada Pension Plan]. He is partially paralyzed and 
has a colostomy bag and requires a catheter. And he uses about 
10 disposable catheters per day. Because he is on limited 
income — so it’s very a very specific question — he cannot 
afford to purchase these disposable catheters. It works out to be 
around $5,000 a year. He’s had some help with this financial 
end of it for a while but has requested financial assistance from 
Sask Health. And I guess apparently the response that came 
back is that he was told that he didn’t qualify because he wasn’t 
in a wheelchair and only partially paralyzed. Which seems, you 



2704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

know . . . I guess there’s a certain criteria, but that seems a little 
stringent, I guess. 
 
He’s been having trouble with infections because he is not able 
to afford as many disposable catheters as he needs. So he’s had 
issues with infections which then of course causes him to access 
the health care system probably many more times than he really 
would have to had some of these . . . had he received some 
funds from Sask Health to cover what the disposable catheters. 
 
I guess I’ll leave it at that. What is the department’s policy on 
that, and can this person expect any help? Because I think if you 
were to take a look at the whole system, he’s probably costing 
the system much more than he would ever ask from the system 
if they covered the situation that he’s in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I think the 
specific plan out for the paraplegic has very strict definitions of 
how people qualify. And so it may be that some patients 
wouldn’t qualify for that. 
 
Then if that particular program doesn’t apply to an individual, 
then the normal course is that they would go to the Department 
of Community Resources and Employment for an assessment as 
to their income levels. And if they’re under a certain income 
level then they would have total coverage under the 
supplementary heath program. That assessment around 
individuals takes into account all sources of income. 
 
But if in fact a person is not qualified under the paraplegic 
program and their income is above the limit set in the, for the 
supplementary health program then these are the kinds of things 
that would not be covered. And often in that initial discussion 
it’s trying to make sure how they fit into that. But we don’t, we 
don’t have total coverage for this particular area. We provide 
cover for the people who fit the strict qualifications under 
paraplegia or if they fit the income requirements under the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll have to check 
then and see if this person has accessed all the other avenues 
that may be accessible to him. And I realize that there are 
parameters which you have to work in, it’s just how strict those 
parameters are. And it always seems that we tend to hear from 
the people that are just outside those parameters — not by 
much, but just outside those parameters. 
 
And so then of course the natural question is, could you expand 
those parameters to take into consideration someone like the 
fellow that I’m talking about here? But until I check and see 
what else he has done and what other avenues he’s followed to 
have some of this covered, we’ll just kind of leave it at that and 
I may be getting back to you directly. 
 
What I wanted to question you on then was health promotions. 
And could you just first of all give me kind of a broad overview 
of what Sask Health is doing in the area of health promotions. 
Certainly there’s more and more talk right now and with the 
smoking ban . . . And I’m going to get into that a little bit with 
health promotions. I realize that that’s only one part of health 
promotions. I’d kind of like a broad-brush overview of what is 
being done in health promotions. And then specifically I want 
to kind of target some of the questioning towards the tobacco 

reduction strategy that the Department of Health is working on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. This is a very good question 
because it covers a whole broad area of issues that we deal with. 
And so what I’ll try to do is a fairly concise description of 
different things that we’re working on, and then allow you to 
hone in on some other areas. 
 
But when you’re talking about population health in general, it 
relates to things like the population health action plan which we 
set out last year where you look at issues like smoking, obesity, 
healthy eating, and activities that you should have . . . the In 
Motion program, all those kinds of things. 
 
But also within the population health area is the whole public 
health issue. So there you have safe drinking water, you deal 
with West Nile virus, you deal with all of the vaccinations for 
the population in general, and you also deal with just the overall 
public health capacity as it relates to any kind of influenza 
pandemic or some other thing that would come like that. 
 
And so we end up having a very detailed strategy that sets out 
the . . . in the health promotion part, if that’s what you 
specifically wanted to talk about, and that does then relate to the 
tobacco or the substance abuse kind of things — healthy eating, 
the mental wellness issues, and then the active communities. 
Those are the four main themes we’ve chosen in Saskatchewan 
and, as you’ll see, they kind of hit the North American issues 
which are smoking, obesity, and some of those kinds of things. 
 
So I’m not quite sure where your question is going, and if you 
want to have a broader picture I can try to paint that. But maybe 
you can ask some other questions and we’ll continue. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess my first question would be, what is 
the dollar . . . What are we looking at in the estimates? And I 
probably should go through here, but the exact dollar figure for 
those four areas that you had mentioned — whether it’s mental 
health, active living, tobacco reduction, or obesity — what are 
you looking at for a dollar value spent on that in this upcoming 
year for the promotion of those four target areas? Or is that too 
hard to break down? Or just first of all health promotion, but 
then those target areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I will try to answer that. We have some 
provincial kind of programs or provincial coordinating roles 
that we provide. But most of the direct dollars around a lot of 
these programs are in the RHA [regional health authority] 
budgets, so the regional health authority individual budgets 
would set out that. I mean, I think it’s possible to pull some of 
that together. But one region might have a little heavier 
emphasis on the In Motion program versus the healthy eating 
part and there are some other things there. 
 
Some of our work that we’re doing actually through the 
provincial programs, the regional health authorities and the 
health quality council as we look at the chronic disease 
management, some of those fit in very carefully into that health 
promotion side, which is service provision. But then also how 
can you have people aware of things they can do in their own 
lifestyles which will help their health. 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2705 

So I think that some dollar figures if . . . Specifically you asked 
about the budget. We have about a half a million dollars for 
tobacco control in the provincial portions. There are about 1.5 
million for West Nile virus. Those are specific amounts. I think 
that in the health promotion strategy, which is the coordinating 
effort across the province, that’s about 270,000 that funds the 
people that provide the advice in Saskatchewan Health for the 
province. We can go through a whole number of different ones, 
but if you have some specific questions I can provide that as 
well. 
 
But to pull it all together, I mean arguably we’d like to say that 
you’re providing acute care with a lot of the money, obviously, 
but we’re also trying to shift to make sure that health promotion 
has a high priority. And some of these chronic disease 
management programs, some of the things we’re looking at 
around actually replacement of hips and knees — you’d want 
that to be your last and final resort — what are the things that 
you can do when somebody’s starting to get a gimpy leg early 
on that maybe will allow them to exercise or do other things 
with the physio. Well, that’s all health promotion but how you 
break that out is quite difficult. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess the area that I want to specifically 
target is the tobacco reduction strategy and you had mentioned 
that there is about a half a million dollars being put into that this 
year. 
 
I would be interested in finding out . . . I understand, I certainly 
realize that the health districts, or health authorities have 
ownership in a lot of this promotional material, and not 
material, but the strategy of educating people in their own 
districts, or regions, or authorities. But I would probably think 
that a lot . . . most of the tobacco reduction strategy is run 
through your department. 
 
So especially when you starting to develop information 
packages, and, you know, I guess the area that I really want to 
drill down into is what is being done for the retailers? People 
that are at the service stations and their employees that are 
selling tobacco products, what is being done to educate those 
people as to the . . . what the dos and the don’ts and how they 
determine what they can do in different situations. 
 
Some of these people are no doubt working part-time and 
they’re under the age of 18 and they’re, you know, put in this 
position of whether they can sell tobacco products or not, and 
they’re responsible, not the person that’s purchasing. 
 
So that’s kind of the area I want to find out about, is that it’s all 
fine and dandy to pass legislation and say that the owner of a 
convenience store, or the employee of a convenience store is 
responsible. But what type of education is being put out there so 
that these people know what is expected of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As we move forward with the tobacco 
reduction Act in the first iteration before we went to the 
smoke-free part this last January 1, we had been working all 
along the way with the retailers. And so in November when we 
knew the January 1 date was coming, we sent a package of 
information to all of the retailers in the province. 
 
This information had been prepared in the health promotion 

branch working together with the retailers. There’s a group of 
retailers that are sort of consultants. And so that had the 
information around how the new Act was going to come in to 
play, how the public health inspectors would be involved. We 
also have a regular update that’s . . . updates that go out to the 
retailers, and we have kits basically that we have prepared that 
retailers can use to work and train their employees. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That’s what I was looking at then, is 
knowing what was done for the retailers around the province, 
and I know it’s information that’s going out. So you’re saying 
that you have sent out information to all retailers in the province 
and in that kit would be obviously various resources to inform 
them of their responsibilities going forward. 
 
And it’s interesting because I have talked to a number of 
retailers and they’re concerned over this, and they feel that quite 
frankly the information that has been put out hasn’t been 
sufficient to train their employees. What again — and I guess I 
would like to know a dollar figure — how much has that cost? 
How much has it cost the Department of Health to put those kits 
together, to send them out to every retailer in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have the specific number roundup, 
but I would be happy to provide you with the kit as a retailer so 
you can actually see what’s there. And basically it has things 
like no smoking signs, the other things that you see in 
establishments. It has information about how the Act works and 
those kinds of things. So we’d be happy to share one of those so 
I’ll arrange to have it sent over to you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would be very 
interested in receiving one of those kits. You never know what 
three years down the road brings. Maybe perhaps I’ll be a 
retailer and needing that. 
 
But I would really be interested in knowing the dollar figure. 
The dollar figure as to how much that cost to put the kit 
together, the ongoing cost, and as well as . . . yes, the cost of 
sending it out. 
 
Because there is . . . other provinces are going through the same 
process of tobacco reduction. And other provinces use an 
organization called Operation ID. And I know you’re probably 
very familiar with it; I’m very familiar with it. And the cost in 
other provinces to put this information out is zero for their 
department of health because this is what the Operation ID 
does. 
 
Now I know you probably have some sort of a bias towards 
Operation ID. You think that it at times promotes unhealthy life 
styles with tobacco use but I would be very interested to know 
from your perspective as to why and I would be very interested 
to know the number . . . the dollar value that we’re putting in 
promoting the reduction of tobacco compared to what other 
provinces are putting in with Operation ID, which is not costing 
them really anything. And I believe it’s used in every other 
province but Saskatchewan. It’s being allowed to . . . They’re 
allowed to put their information into the retailers’ hands and 
then to the employees’ hands. And the package looks very, very 
useful. And there are a number of things that they Operation ID 
has that — you know, I’ve talked to retailers — that your 
promotional package doesn’t have. 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

And I’ve wondered if you’ve looked at even what the Operation 
ID has and copied it to some extent — some issues around, you 
know, who’s eligible, and dates, and those type of things, to 
have in front of the person that’s selling a tobacco product. To 
know what is the eligible date, when is the person . . . when can 
he and when can’t they, their age, and that type of thing that, 
from my understanding, Department of Health won’t allow the 
retailers to have now, and I’m questioning that. So if you could 
answer. There’s probably three or four questions in that vein, 
but I would be very interested in your answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. And I’ll 
provide you the information around providing the kit. It’s not in 
this year’s budget. It was done last year and partly the year 
before. But I am quite curious that you seem to be advocating 
the operation that’s involved. 
 
I met with the retailers and the organizer of Operation ID for 
Canada a few years ago. And it was very clear when talking to 
this woman that she was a marketer from the tobacco industry, 
and that this is funded by the tobacco industry. 
 
The World Health Organization has sent a warning out across 
the world to be very careful with the tobacco company funded 
promotion or Operation ID-like operations and are encouraging 
countries everywhere to be very, very careful. 
 
We in Saskatchewan, after looking at this, said we’re not going 
to use this operation because it is something that comes from 
the tobacco industry. And so we made that decision a number of 
years ago, and I think we’ll be sticking with that. Our kits and 
what we provide — I think you’ll see — are very equivalent to 
the kind of information there, plus some other things that are 
done. 
 
But we’re working with something that we want to denormalize 
the use of tobacco, and we don’t think having an organized 
tobacco company program assists in that at all. Thanks. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that’s interesting. And I don’t know if 
I’m necessarily promoting Operation ID over the program that 
you have until I see what you have available and the 
information that you have available. 
 
But what I can say is, talking to a number of the retailers that 
have compared both the products — the one that you’re 
offering and the one that Operation ID offers — and they have, 
to the person that I’ve talked to, said that the promotional 
material to train their people from Operation ID was more 
effective and much better done than what your department has 
done. Now I haven’t seen it, so I can’t say for sure from my 
own perspective, but I know that’s what retailers have said. 
 
But I find it interesting — and I hope this isn’t the case — that 
just because tobacco companies are funding this, that it’s no 
good. If that’s the reason . . . If you can prove to me that there is 
some sort of subliminal message in there that’s making people 
smoke, that’s one thing. But just to come out and say that 
because tobacco companies are funding this, then it is no good, 
I don’t think is good enough, because it operates in other 
provinces. And it’s effective in other provinces. 
 
You know, I can use the example . . . If that’s the example, I 

mean, what are we doing letting alcohol companies say, don’t 
drink and drive? Because that must mean we should be doing it. 
If we’re just saying that the person . . . Whether it’s a tobacco 
company saying, don’t smoke at a certain age and down or an 
alcohol company . . . 
 
And you can even take it one step further — the provincial 
government with gambling, talking about, you know, about 
addiction to gambling and things like that . . . I mean, we’re as a 
provincial government saying, you know, this is something to 
be careful of. But because we’re the ones getting the profit, 
does that mean we shouldn’t be able to say there’s problems 
here and there’s dangers here? 
 
And to use that same argument about tobacco companies — and 
major tobacco companies can’t say, under the age of 18 don’t 
smoke; it’s bad for you — because there’s some sort of hidden 
message there, I don’t think is good enough. 
 
Now I would be very interested in knowing why other 
provinces feel that it’s more than suitable, but we don’t. And 
we’ll be putting, and I’ll be interested in finding out the number 
— I see we’ve put a half a million dollars into tobacco 
reduction strategy going forward — how much we put in last 
year because I’m concerned that the fact that it’s just because 
it’s tobacco companies putting forward the information package 
that that eliminates it from any possibility of being effective 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We made this decision quite a number of 
years ago. We prefer to go with a Saskatchewan-made product, 
working with our local retailers. And the cost of developing that 
was a few years ago. We think that it makes sense to do this, 
working with Saskatchewan people. We accept the advice from 
the World Health Organization and from many other of the 
advocates around the world saying, this is not something you 
should use. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well we’ll be interested to see those 
numbers. I’m not going to spend any more time on this right 
now. But I would be interested in seeing the numbers. You had 
mentioned that the cost was a number of years ago. And if there 
has been no costs going forward, I’d say the package that you 
have is very ineffective because if you’re not changing it as you 
are going forward and addressing the issues going forward, 
there will be costs going forward. And, you know, that’s all part 
of a proper education package, is keeping up to date. Regardless 
of that, we’ll leave the Operation ID and the tobacco reduction 
strategy for a minute. 
 
[16:15] 
 
What I want to do is talk about recruitment and retention of 
nurses. And the last question that I asked you a couple weeks 
ago, and you went through the different numbers, and how 
many are full-time, how many we have as full-time nurses in 
our province compared to other provinces; you went through 
that. And one of the last statements you made here is you said 
. . . I guess about three-quarters of the way through your last 
answer you’re talking about, I believe, overtime, it says the 
number of overtime hours for SUN, Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses’ members, declined by about 11.4 per cent. 
 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

What do you have, what statistics do you have to back that up? 
How do we know that when we look at the cost of overtime in 
the health regions over the last number of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We took the information directly from the 
SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] 
payroll system. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Then I’d be interested to know . . . When 
we look at the budgets over the last couple of years and we look 
at overtime — the overtime for the Saskatoon and Regina 
health authorities over the last four years — in 2000-2001, in 
Regina the overtime was a little over three and a half million 
dollars, and in 2003-2004 it’s over $5 million. You know, it’s 
an increase of $2.6 million in four years for overtime in the 
Regina Health Authority. 
 
In the Saskatoon Health Authority, if you compare 2000-2001, 
the Saskatoon Health Authority paid about 400 . . . 4.2 million 
roughly in overtime, and in 2003-2004 it paid well over $6 
million. That’s an increase in four years of over $2 million, 
which if you take the 2000-2001, it’s an increase of 50 per cent 
in the last four years for overtime. 
 
I would be interested then as to what that overtime was spent on 
when we see that the overtime for nurses, according to the 
minister, has decreased by 11.4 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the information that I provided to 
you last time related specifically to nursing and it was for the 
year ’04 over the year ’02, and so that was 11.4 per cent. And 
correct me if I’m wrong, but I think you are taking all of the 
employees for the whole health region and using those 
numbers, and I was specifically referring to nursing last week. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, what the numbers that I’m taking are 
just out of the, you know, the total overtime for the Regina 
Health Authority and the Saskatoon Health Authority. So if it’s 
not registered nurses — because registered nurses, RNs or 
RPNs [registered practical nurse] have gone down 11 per cent, 
but our overtime has gone up 50 per cent in the last four years 
— who is getting paid the overtime? Where is this overtime 
being paid? Is it lab techs, is it x-ray techs, is it, you know . . . 
I’d be very interested to know a bit of a breakdown on the 
overtime costs then, when we’re seeing our registered nurses 
who again . . . 
 
And that was the basis of my last question a couple of weeks 
ago, is that nurses are certainly working more overtime. That’s 
what we’re hearing all the time. But you’re showing that it goes 
down eleven and a half per cent but overtime costs went up 50 
per cent in the last four years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s a little bit challenging to answer the 
questions when you’ve got the global amounts. But some 
examples of where we have increased overtime, we know that. 
It does relate to some of our CT [computerized tomography] 
scans, MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], some of those 
things where we’ve expanded the numbers of hours and we 
recruited more people, but we still end up having to use some of 
our existing employees a bit more. And we know across the 
board, and have been monitoring the overtime hours over the 
last number of years, and we’re starting to have this level off 

and go down because we have the senior management in the 
RHAs [regional health authority] working specifically to deal 
with some of those things. 
 
But it’s hard to answer all of those questions without sort of 
taking notice of what specific area and then going and looking 
to see if we have that data directly. But we have a much more 
comprehensive SAHO system where we have everybody on the 
same payroll system just now in the last year, or the last two 
years I guess it would be. And so some of those kinds of 
comparisons will be easier to make because we’re working with 
one system rather than a whole array of systems. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well I’d be very interested if the minister 
could, in the future, get some of those numbers, get some of that 
breakdown. Because if we’re paying, you know, 50 per cent 
more overtime in the last four years in the Saskatoon Health 
District, I would like to know where that money is going. I 
mean if it is, if it is because we’re running the MRIs [magnetic 
resonance imaging] more often, then we better look at full-time 
staff and attracting . . . That better be a targeted area to recruit 
more full-time staff. Because when we’re spending, in the two 
health districts, over $11 million this next year . . . in this past 
year I should say — ’03-04 — when we’re spending well over 
$11 million on overtime, and we had better start looking at 
some full-time positions. 
 
We certainly know, talking to Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
that the fact that overtime is an issue. And they’re concerned 
with the upcoming bargaining process, that some of the 
deterrents for health districts to use overtime to backfill the lack 
of full-time work, may be being eroded in this next contract. I 
realize you probably won’t talk about what the contract 
negotiations are into the future, but that’s certainly what we’re 
hearing. Because we’re relying so heavily on overtime, which is 
a symptom simply of not having enough full-time workers. 
 
And when you start looking at not having enough full-time 
workers, you can look at all the symptoms that that causes. One 
would be overtime and we’re certainly working on that. 
Another issue is WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] and the 
amount of claims that the health authorities are finding with 
WCB. You know, we can go through some of the numbers as 
far as WCB and what the premiums are that the health 
authorities have to pay to WCB. And they are increasing 
significantly. The health authority . . . the Regina Health 
Authority in the last year has gone up $1 million in premiums 
for WCB. Why is that is because the amount . . . their claims 
are going up. Why are their claims going up? Because of 
relying on nurses probably to work more hours than what they 
were scheduled, or whatever. I think it relates back to the first 
issue that we were talking about with overtime. 
 
So although the minister had said the last go-round with 
estimates that we are fitting in quite nicely in Western Canada 
with the number of full-time employees, full-time nursing 
positions, I would say that we should maybe revisit that and 
look at dealing with some of the problems that we see in our 
health care system — especially with registered nurses, the 
amount of overtime that they are spending, and the number of 
workers’ compensation claims, that we see our premiums going 
up in these two health districts. And when you talk to the Union 
of Nurses, that the fact that we just don’t have . . . They’re also 



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

saying that we need more full-time positions. 
 
So I would ask the minister to comment on those symptoms that 
. . . And if it is that we’ve got enough full-time employees, 
full-time nurses, then what are causing these symptoms with 
such an increase in overtime and an increase in WCB rates, 
those type of things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — First thing I’ll talk about is the safety in 
the workplace. And that’s a concern that I think I have and I 
think right across the system. So we in . . . What we did with 
the money that we got out of the first ministers’ accord last fall, 
we allocated quite a large chunk of that money directly to safety 
issues around buying equipment — lifts, those kinds of things 
— training. 
 
And we’re continuing to monitor very carefully the workers’ 
compensation claims and the safety issues that are there. So 
that’s . . . I appreciate you raising that point and that’s one that 
we are making a strong effort to have everybody work safely 
because it’s better for the patients, better for the workers, and 
better for the whole system. 
 
Now when it comes to overtime, and as it relates to nurses — 
because you’ve come back to that again — is that when we look 
at the whole system, the numbers of hours of overtime per 
nurse, if you calculate on the per nurse in the provincial system, 
is about one hour of overtime per nursing full-time equivalent 
per week, is about 52 hours per full-time equivalent for a year. 
So that’s how much it is. Now clearly what we know is some 
nurses would never work overtime and so some others are 
working more, but in the overall scheme of things. 
 
Now the other question that you raised is around the number of 
full-time nurses working. And in Saskatchewan we have the 
greater percentage of nurses — RNs, RPNs, and LPNs [licensed 
practical nurse] — working full-time than our neighbouring 
provinces of Alberta and Manitoba and the national average. 
And let me fill that out for you — 50 per cent of registered 
nurses, 74 per cent of registered psych nurses had full-time 
employment in the year 2003. This is higher than the Canadian 
average as well as being higher than all the other Western 
provinces. We also know that 50 per cent of the licensed 
practical nurses had full-time employment and this is higher 
than Alberta and Manitoba and the Canadian average. 
 
The Statistics Canada report 2004, in November 2004, on 
employment trends in nursing said that we know that 82 per 
cent of the RNs who work part-time voluntarily chose this 
arrangement, while the same is true of 60 per cent of the LPNs. 
 
So we have more full-time nursing positions in Saskatchewan. 
We continue to look at the new graduates and how do we get 
them into some of those positions when they first come out of 
school, and that becomes a challenge. But as our system goes, 
we have more full-time jobs than our neighbours. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, the last time we were in estimates you 
went through those numbers; pretty close to the same numbers 
as this time give or take a few per cent. So we have some 
consistency there. 
 
The time that I have . . . again, I’ll get back to the full-time 

equivalents and that type of thing. It’s interesting when you 
mention that there’s one hour per week per nurse, full-time 
nurse, and it would be great if that’s how you could work it out, 
so every nurse worked one extra hour. But that’s not how the 
system works, you know, and you said that there are certain 
nurses that work a pile of overtime, an awful lot of overtime. So 
it’s easy to say that it’s only one hour per nurse per week and 
you spread it over that it doesn’t sound like nearly as significant 
a number, but when you look at how many nurses are actually 
working overtime, and then you add that up per hour per week 
it’s much more significant, I think. 
 
Before I leave I do want to ask a couple of questions on 
questions that were asked today in question period regarding the 
contract in Yorkton with the ambulance, the EMS [emergency 
medical services] people. And I do want to just try and 
understand the difference on how the funding is determined. 
The difference between, for example P.A. [Prince Albert], 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Moose Jaw, they get a flat rate of $275 
and a mileage or kilometre rate of 2.75 per kilometre, whereas 
in Yorkton the rate is $200 flat rate for a call, $200 flat rate, and 
a per kilometre of $2 per kilometre. Why the discrepancy 
between those communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On a province-wide basis we have 
suggested guidelines which set the maximums of patient 
charges. This is what a patient is charged, is what you’re 
reading to us. And so the regional health authorities will choose 
various amounts in their region, as long as they don’t go higher 
than the provincial maximum which we set province wide. 
 
But those are the charges that are paid by the patient. They’re 
not the charges that are given to the operators. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So those are the charges that are charged to 
the patient. And the health authority determines that or is that 
set through the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Each of those charges is set by the 
regional health authority. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Then why would . . . And I guess you’re 
answering the question here for the regional health authorities, 
but that hasn’t stopped us before in some of these questions. 
Why would, for example, in Moose Jaw, it be 275 and in 
Yorkton 200? I realize it’s a different health region. Maybe I’ll 
leave it at that first of all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think what happens in each of the 
regional health authorities, they have different factors involved. 
So when the charges were set, for example, in Moose Jaw, 
Regina, Saskatoon, most of the calls come from within the city. 
So they set a flat fee and don’t worry about the mileage part. 
Whereas an area like Sunrise or probably Heartland would set a 
flat fee and then a mileage charge because the costs would be 
different on some of the longer calls. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So the difference then between Yorkton and 
Melville, the charge through the health district, is it the same — 
$200? 
 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2709 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If you’re in Yorkton or if you’re in 
Melville, the patient pays the same amount. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So just then comparing that health region 
with other health regions then around the province, you know, 
you’d mentioned Saskatoon and Regina most of the calls are . . . 
but Moose Jaw, for example, would do a number of rural calls. 
Moose Jaw not much unlike Yorkton or Swift Current or North 
Battleford. How do the rates compare in those other health 
regions compared to Yorkton? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay. The question that you asked is, are 
there variations across the province? And the answer is yes, but 
there is an ambulance fee guideline which was set out in 
October 2001. And basically the idea was to try to standardize 
the costs across the province. 
 
The effect of that guideline was that for — and this you have to 
remember: these are the previous health district names — but 
it’s Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Regina, and Saskatoon health 
districts. The basic call pickup rate was not to exceed $275, and 
the kilometre charge wasn’t to exceed $2 per kilometre. And 
there was supposed to be no change in the waiting time hourly 
rate. And then for all of the other health districts outside of 
there, the pickup rate was not to exceed $200 and the kilometre 
charge was not to exceed $2 per kilometre. 
 
So those are the guidelines that are still in effect now. And so, 
basically, that difference would be there. But this is the cost to 
the patient, that’s there. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think that’s all the questions I have right 
now. I mean, there’s lots more questions I have right now, but 
in the time . . . I’d like to turn it over to the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and she’ll ask some questions. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to ask some questions around the Pangman Health 
Centre. And this has been going on, this issue of a doctor, Dr. 
Oberholzer from Radville, being unable to come to Pangman 
and to provide services to the residents of Pangman and area. 
 
Presently we have numerous individuals travelling to Radville 
to have the services of Dr. Oberholzer and Dr. Helms. And Dr. 
Oberholzer has indicated for quite some time now that he would 
be willing to offer this practice for the convenience of the 
residents of Pangman and surrounding area within their own 
health centre. 
 
I spoke with you, Mr. Minister, on March 22 of last year — 
over a year ago — and at that time you indicated to me that you 
would look into it and that in the short term that privileges for 
Dr. Oberholzer would be granted in Pangman and in the long 
term that primary care would be implemented in Pangman 
Health Centre. To date that is over a year ago, Mr. Minister, and 
nothing has happened. 
 
In November of last year, the rural municipality of Norton 
wrote to yourself, and in their letter they state, and I quote: 
 

We were advised that the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and [the] Department of Health have yet to 
finalize [a] . . . Primary Health Care Contract for the 
doctors to sign. 
 

To my knowledge — I’ve contacted the RM of Norton — they 
have not received a reply from your letter. And on February 1, I 
spoke again after . . . This is one of numerous times that I have 
spoke to Lee Spencer, who is the CEO of the Sun Country 
Health Region. And he indicated to me that what was holding 
this up was a contract being signed between Saskatchewan 
Medical Association and Saskatchewan Department of Health 
and that ongoing negotiations were being held and that a 
contract would be finalized. 
 
He also indicated to me that the Department of Health was 
starting to plan to put primary care into Pangman and that 
Marga Cugnet from the Sun Country Health Region had been 
instructed to start the process of looking for a primary care 
nurse for Pangman. He also indicated to me that he would be 
meeting with Lawrence Krahn from the Department of Health 
within two days of February 1 when I spoke to him and that this 
issue was moving forward. To date I have heard nothing of this 
being resolved, and I would like the minister to indicate when 
this will be resolved, and how. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for the question about this 
ongoing discussion for the Pangman community and Pangman 
facility. What’s happening is, on a province-wide basis, is that 
Saskatchewan Health has been working together with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and others around 
developing a memorandum of understanding of a template for a 
primary health care contract between physicians and a regional 
health authority. And this is a major task to do this and there’s 
been many, many, many months — perhaps years — of 
discussion about this. We’re very close to having that 
completed and that will then provide a template for the 
relationship between the regional health authority and the 
doctors who are in the Pangman area. 
 
One of the things that then has to happen as that contract is 
developed is that the various doctors who may provide the 
service in a community, if it’s one or two or three, they end up 
having to make sure that their call arrangements and others 
mesh together, and that has been I think one of the challenges 
not only in this area but in many parts of the province. Our hope 
is that the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association], Sask 
Health, regional health authority memorandum of 
understanding will provide some very good guidelines for how 
this can be resolved right across the province. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 
hear what you’re saying but I guess I find it unacceptable. This 
has been going on for several years and, as this is transpiring, 
the people in Pangman and area are having to drive for services 
that Dr. Oberholzer and Dr. Helms are willing to provide within 
the Pangman Health Centre. They are willing to work with Dr. 
Wong and arrange for times that would suit both doctors so that 
they do not overlap and that they can provide the care. 
 
In the absence of this arrangement being made, people in the 
Pangman area are having to drive instead of Dr. Oberholzer 
being in their facility. It makes absolutely no sense. And I 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

would like to refer you to the Saskatchewan action plan for 
primary health care of June 2002 where it states, each person 
will continue to choose their own family doctor just as they 
have in the past. 
 
And what the people of Pangman and area are asking is to have 
a choice in which doctor that they have to provide their care. 
And Dr. Oberholzer and Dr. Helms are willing participants in 
making this available to them. It is the Department of Health 
that is the problem here. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you did indicate to me yourself, March of 
last year when I spoke to you behind the bar in this House, that 
you agreed that this should happen. You indicated to me that 
privileges would be granted to Dr. Oberholzer in the short term 
and then in the long term the primary care model would be put 
in place. 
 
Neither has happened, and I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, today 
to make it possible to grant these privileges to Dr. Oberholzer 
and Dr. Helms immediately so that they can start offering 
services in Pangman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for the comments. I will 
acknowledge that the discussion with the SMA has taken much 
longer than anybody anticipated. And part of the discussion was 
to make sure that there were clear rules and clear arrangements 
around setting up primary care, health care teams, in regions 
where a number of physicians will work together and make sure 
coverage is available in quite a number of the smaller 
communities where they may not have a physician resident. 
 
So this was anticipated that we would have this — almost a 
year ago — have this in place. But there have been long and 
hard discussions, and we’re very close to having it available, 
which will allow us then to go forward with the primary care 
facilities across the province. The specific issues that you’re 
asking around privileges relate to the regional health authority, 
and I think that they are most likely waiting on the 
province-wide memorandum of understanding because I know 
that’s happening in other parts of the province. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, there needs to be yourself to take action to see that 
this is put in place. Everyone wants to pass the buck. The local 
board who answers to the government, who receives their 
funding from the government, are saying that it’s the 
Department of Health and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association. You tell me that it is the local board. 
 
No one wants to make a decision, and at the same time what is 
happening is that the people that require the services are the 
ones that are paying the price. Either in economically they are 
paying the price because they have to travel. And secondly they 
do not have access to their choice of a doctor in their area when 
we have willing doctors. 
 
How long do you think that we are going to retain doctors in 
rural Saskatchewan if nothing is done by your department to 
encourage them to stay there and to enable them to provide the 
services that they want to provide? Dr. Oberholzer has had 
nothing but road blocks put in his way since he started 
practising in rural Saskatchewan. He could be offering many, 

many more services to the residents of Radville and area and to 
the residents of Pangman and area. He could be offering 
services that people are hard pressed to receive in Regina and 
Saskatoon because of wait lists and shortage of beds. And your 
government stands in the way of that happening. 
 
Now what he is asking here, and the people of Pangman are 
asking, is simply that he be able to provide the services that he 
is now providing in Radville to the people in Pangman in their 
own town, to provide a needed service for them instead of an 
inconvenience. Will you commit to working to make this 
happen and grant privileges for Dr. Oberholzer. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate the comments made by the 
member, and she’s identified a number of the kinds of issues 
that have been at the table as people discuss a template for 
setting up of these kinds of practices. It relates to compensation. 
It relates to how that should compare with compensation across 
the province. It relates to how the privileges can be granted in 
various places. These are all very challenging issues. And we 
will continue to work with the SMA to get a template that can 
provide solutions for this, and we had hoped that that’ll come 
out very, very shortly. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Well, Mr. Minister, I hear what you’re 
saying but it’s been three years almost since the action plan was 
put forth. And while that has been happening, people have been 
put on hold. And this is not about compensation because Dr. 
Oberholzer is presently being paid to provide the services in 
Radville. 
 
What it is about is allowing him to provide them in Pangman, to 
provide service, good quality service to the people of Pangman 
and area so that they don’t have to travel to Radville. It would 
not mean an increase in fees that the Department of Health 
would have to pay. So it’s simply a matter of no one — 
including yourself — willing to look at this issue and to come 
to a resolution of it, to provide adequate services. And that is 
what I’m asking you because you did commit a year ago to 
making this happen, and nothing has happened since. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister and to 
your officials, I would like to ask a number of direct questions 
from my constituency. 
 
And I’m going to start with the LPNs. I understand that you’ve 
had some discussions with the LPNs in the last while regarding 
discontinuing the licensing of LPNs who have not obtained 
their medication course as of 2006. 
 
I know at the annual general meeting in April, 2004 their 
members voted to discontinue licensing LPNs who had not 
attained their medication course, and as minister, you did not 
approve this motion. I know that after discussion it was 
determined that you felt that this should be grandfathered but 
since . . . It’s been 12 years since the medication course was 
first initiated and that most health districts actually had funding 
in place to attain this education. And they feel as an association 
that in order to be progressive and recognized, it would be more 



April 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

appropriate if everyone was on the same level. So I’m 
wondering what your intention is dealing with this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I spoke to the 
annual meeting of the licensed practical nurses last week in 
Moose Jaw. And I told them that I would not approve the bylaw 
that they had brought forward because it would have the effect 
of disenfranchising 400 workers in the system now who are 
licensed practical nurses. 
 
And so what I encouraged them to do was to continue to 
provide the conditional licences that they are now so that those 
people can continue in their jobs and provide good service like 
they have for many, many years and work with them to 
encourage them to take the medical course if they need it. 
Sometimes they don’t need that medical course for the kind of 
work that they’re doing, and that can be arranged so that these 
people can effectively continue and finish off their careers. 
They’re often people that have been working for a long time, 
and this would be an added burden to go back and work. 
 
So what the discussion then becomes, well how do you 
accommodate people who have served the province well, served 
their patients well, and also recognize the fact that the training 
has changed? And I think there is a system that they have been 
working out around how they can keep those people employed, 
but make sure that the standards for the new people who are 
coming in to work meet the kind of standards that they have set. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What percentage, or 
do you know what percentage of the people at the annual 
meeting actually approved this resolution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m not sure. Are you referring to the 
resolution from last year’s annual meeting? I’m not sure what 
the percentage was, but it appears that it was approved by the 
majority because it came in effect, but I don’t know that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a number of 
concerns addressed regarding this licensing issue as something 
that appears to . . . being that there is a great concern. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to ask you a question regarding a 
remark that you made in the House the other day about the 
crystal meth conference that was held in Saskatoon earlier this 
year, the chemical dependency workers conference. How much 
money did Sask Health put into that conference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that it was 
primarily organized by the care providers in Saskatoon and so 
that most of the funding . . . actually as a province-wide basis 
we don’t have very much conference funding anymore that we 
provide through the provincial government. But conference 
funding is sometimes provided through the regional health 
authority, and so I’m not sure if Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority contributed in some way. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, in the House on April 21, you 
indicated that you had brought in one of the world’s experts to 
Saskatchewan, Dr. Rossen, to talk about the sort of leading 
treatment program dealing with crystal meth. 
 
I had a call from the chemical workers executive council 

afterwards. They were very frustrated that you had indicated 
that we, meaning the government, had brought in somebody 
into this conference when the Government of Saskatchewan 
didn’t put one penny into this conference. 
 
It was put on by the chemical workers themselves, and they’d 
brought in the doctor themselves, and there were people from 
the Department of Health there, but this government did not put 
one penny directly into this conference. So to indicate to the 
people of this province that your government had some 
involvement with this conference is basically sending a 
message that perhaps is not altogether true, is not correct, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I think that the frustration that the workers are dealing with 
right now is the fact that they are trying to do the work that 
should be the work of this government and yet when they are 
doing something . . . [inaudible] . . . then I believe that the 
chemical workers actually have every right to be frustrated. 
 
There was a lot of work involved in the conference. The 
attendance was overwhelming. The number of people that 
needed this training was overwhelming. And then to have the 
government take credit for it, I think, was adding insult to 
injury. 
 
On top of this, Mr. Minister, I was also told that the funding 
was cut for the inter-agency conference this year. It wasn’t a 
large amount of money, but they needed it to fulfill their work 
and their duties as chemical workers that are doing a great job 
out there in the midst of a growing problem, not just with 
crystal meth but with other addictions as well. And they feel 
that they have been left in the cold by this government. 
 
So I’m wondering if there is some kind of comments you’d like 
to make to the people that have worked very diligently to put on 
this conference and someone else is trying to take credit for 
their work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well what we did around reducing the 
funding for conferences went right across the board, but I do 
acknowledge that this particular group had less funding than the 
previous year around their particular conference. But that’s true 
for quite a number of groups across the province, and that was 
part of a budget decision that we made. And what we will 
continue to do is work with all of the people. 
 
What we acknowledged in the information we provided is that 
this group has shown leadership and that they did organize this 
conference. I think it’s really important that this world expert 
did come to Saskatchewan, and I think we should celebrate the 
fact they’ve done that, that we’re all working at this together. 
And if we’re going to start taking credit, each of us for different 
parts of this, then I think it’s a problem. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I move we rise and report progress and ask for leave to 
sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2005 

moved that we rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall it . . . may sit again? I recognize 
the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2679 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2679 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2679 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2679 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2679 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2679 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2680 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2680 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2680 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2680 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2680 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2680 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2680 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2680 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2680 
  Taylor.............................................................................................................................................................................2681, 2689 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2681 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2681 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2681 
  Addley ............................................................................................................................................................................2681, 2698 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2682 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2682 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................2698 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Whitewood Community Drama Club Performance 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2682 
 Transit Service Employee Recognition Awards 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2682 
 Selnes Family Inducted into Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2682 
 Clearwater Aviation 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2683 
 Congratulations to Helen Grandy on 100th Year 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2683 
 Corrections Exemplary Service Awards 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2683 
 Biggar Writer Receives Saskatchewan Arts Board Award 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2684 
 Saskatoon Credit Union Anniversary 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2684 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Strike by Emergency Medical Technicians in Yorkton 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2684 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2684 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2685 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2685 
 Investment Saskatchewan Dividends 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2686 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2686 
 Minds Eye Pictures 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2687 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2687 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2688 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2689 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2689 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2689 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2692 
 Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2693 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2693 
 Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2694 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2695 
 Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2697 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2697 
 Bill No. 108 — The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2699 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2700 
 Bill No. 113 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2700 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2701 
 Bill No. 112 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2701 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2702 
 Bill No. 111 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créanles 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2702 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2703 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2703 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2703 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2709 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2710 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




