















































Hansard: March 16, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 74A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 16, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2039 
 March 16, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again on 
behalf of my constituents who are concerned about the issue of 
forced amalgamation for school districts. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions today and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Carievale and Carnduff. And one person’s so opposed she 
signed it twice, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
constituents of mine who are concerned with the deficiency in 
residential support offered to people who have long-term 
disabilities. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional spaces for Swift Current residents with lifelong 
disabilities. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, today’s petitioners are all from the great city 

of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 
deluged with petitions from west central Saskatchewan by 
people who are concerned that proposed changes to amalgamate 
59 school divisions by January 2006 will not prove to be cost 
effective. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the signatures on this petition come from 
the communities of Elrose, Rosetown, and Kindersley. And I’m 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
of school divisions in Saskatchewan and continue 
reorganization of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 
basis. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy and Stockholm. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of those constituents 
of mine who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Midale and 
Macoun. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents who are very concerned about the 
amalgamation of school boards. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Fillmore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens desiring to halt the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Wymark, 
Vanguard, and Neville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present another 
petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural 
gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 

an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Vanscoy and Delisle, I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of citizens who are concerned with the effect that the TransGas 
Asquith natural gas storage project will have on the quality and 
quantity of their water and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by residents of Delisle, Grandora, and 
Vanscoy, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens concerned with the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from a number of 
communities including Grayson, Fenwood, Melville, Killaly, 
and I’m particularly pleased to be able to present the petition 
that has been signed on behalf of citizens of Meadow Lake. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning the elementary school in Arbour 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

Creek, that’s sessional paper no. 716. 
 
And addendums to previously tabled sessional papers being 
sessional paper nos. 637, 640, and 715. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 79 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: what was the 
cost of the TransGas cavern projects located at Landis and 
near Melville, which were sold in 1997 to Canadian Crude 
Separators and Plains Environmental, respectively? Why 
were these caverns developed by TransGas prior to the 
sale? Why were these caverns sold by TransGas? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a delegation here today to mark Les 
Rendez-vous de la francophonie. 
 
We value the contribution that the francophone citizens make to 
social, cultural, and economic development of our province. 
They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask 
that they stand as I mention their names. Our guests are here 
representing a variety of Fransaskois community organizations. 
There’s also a mother and a friend or two with us today. 
 
From the Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise, François 
Dornez; ACF elected official, representing the region of Ponteix 
and the economic and rural sector. From le Guichet unique and 
the ACF, Geneviève Lapierre, communications officer. From 
the Institut français at the University of Regina, Peter 
Dorrington, director of the new research centre. From the 
Conseil culturel fransaskois, Marie-Ève Bussière-Bear, 
president. 
 
From the French weekly l’Eau vive, Maria Lepage, from the . . . 
who’s also responsible for book fairs. From the Éditions de la 
nouvelle plume, Françoise Sigur-Cloutier, president, also 
regional manager, French communications, for Radio-Canada. 
From the francophone school division no. 310, Marie Paterson, 
public relations coordinator; from the Conseil de la coopération 
de la Saskatchewan, Sylvain Lejeune, project analyst. And from 
the provincial government, the director of our own Office of 
French-language Co-ordination, Monsieur Florent Bilodeau. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I would like to offer our guests a 
bienvenue à Saskatchewan et à votre législature. 

[Translation: welcome to Saskatchewan and to your 
legislature.] 
 
It’s our pleasure to welcome you here today. And we have met 
a number of times, many of you, and we look forward to 
working with you in the future. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise today to introduce to this Assembly, a delegation of 
students and their teacher coming from Melfort, Saskatchewan. 
They’re here today to spend the day as part of their educational 
experience studying about the provincial and national 
governments. And they’ve been here today, had a tour of the 
legislature, grilled me profusely for 30 minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
This place is easy compared to the students when they get a 
hold of you. And then they’re going on to the Science Centre 
this afternoon to watch a show on NASCAR [National 
Association for Stock Car Auto Racing] race car driving. 
 
So we wish them a good experience in Regina at their 
legislature and thank them very much for coming. And I’d ask 
all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

La Semaine nationale de la francophonie 
 
Mr. McCall: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Les semaines du 
4 au 20 mars ont été proclamées officiellement Les 
Rendez-vous et la Semaine nationale de la francophonie en 
Saskatchewan. C’est un honneur pour moi de souligner cette 
occasion dans notre Assemblée législative provinciale. 
 
La Journée internationale de la francophonie, le 20 mars, est le 
point culminant de ces deux semaines de fêtes, qui ont pour but 
de célébrer la langue et la culture française. 
 
Cette année marque le centenaire de la Saskatchewan; c’est 
donc un moment propice de célébrer le rôle important que nos 
citoyens francophones ont joué pour aider à façonner la 
province. De plus, le thème des Rendez-vous cette année en 
Saskatchewan est <<100 ans de coeur . . . francophone.>> 
 
La langue et la culture françaises ou fransaskoises sont une 
valeur ajoutée à notre province, notre pays et notre monde. 
J’encourage tous mes collègues à soutenir activement les 
Francophones tout au long de l’année et à les fêter dans leurs 
circonscriptions. Merci et bon Rendez-vous à tout le monde. 
Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The weeks of March 4 to 
20 have officially been proclaimed Les Rendez-vous and 
National Francophone Week in Saskatchewan. I am honoured 
to observe this occasion today in our Legislative Assembly. 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

March 20, International Francophone Day, is the focal point for 
the two weeks of festivities, whose goal it is to celebrate French 
language and culture. 
 
This year marks Saskatchewan’s centennial; it is therefore a 
great time to celebrate the important role our francophone 
citizens have played to help shape the province. In addition, the 
theme for Les Rendez-vous this year is 100 years of heart . . . 
francophone. 
 
The francophone language and culture are an added value to our 
province, to our country, and to the world. I encourage all my 
colleagues to actively support francophones year-round, and 
celebrate them in their constituencies. Thank you, and happy 
Rendez-vous to everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Blaine Lake Citizen of the Year and Lifetime 
Achievement Awards 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
centennial spirit is alive and well in Blaine Lake. The town 
known as the Gateway to the Lakes presented its Citizen of the 
Year and Lifetime Achievement awards last Friday night. Some 
200 people came to the community hall to celebrate the 
achievements of two of Blaine Lake’s finest citizens. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Lifetime Achievement Award was presented to community 
volunteer extraordinaire Marlene Fiala. Marlene has served on 
virtually every volunteer board in the community, from the 
local housing authority to the figure skating club and a dozen 
other committees in between. Marlene and her late husband 
Ray, a Sask Wheat Pool agent, along with their four sons — 
Vaughn, Darryl, Calvin, and Wade — and daughter, Rhonda, 
moved from Hyas to Blaine Lake about 30 years ago. The Fiala 
family immediately induced vigour into this community, a trait 
that continues to this day. 
 
The Citizen of the Year in Blaine Lake is Doreen Kalmakoff. 
Doreen is a farmer, award-winning teacher, an artist, and a 
skating instructor. When it’s time to relax, Doreen enjoys 
kayaking and whitewater rafting. And she still has time for her 
husband John, two children — John Kalmakoff, a member of 
the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and Jeff 
Kalmakoff, a Crown prosecutor — and six grandchildren. 
Doreen’s immediate goal is to turn Blaine Lake into a 
Saskatchewan version of Chemainus, British Columbia. 
Anyone who has been to the community will attest to the 
beautiful murals that Doreen has painted on almost every 
community building and business in town. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in saluting Marlene 
Fiala and Doreen Kalmakoff — two Blaine Lake residents who 
have made an outstanding contribution to their community and 
their province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Cumberland. 
 

Montreal Lake Cree Nation in Mourning 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, on March 3, the people of 
Montreal Lake Cree Nation were shocked and saddened by the 
news that a tragic and senseless act of violence had taken the 
lives of three of their young people. All three had been very 
active in the community, involved in their local youth centre, 
and working with young people in the areas of sports and 
recreation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Monday I attended the funeral for 19-year-old 
Farro Bird, for 27-year-old Greg Naytowhow, and for his 
19-year-old brother, Kerry Naytowhow. It was heartbreaking, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the saddest days of my life. But I was just 
one of hundreds of people who came to pay their respects. And 
for those who attended — including members of the FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] executive, chiefs, 
and councillors from all over the province, representatives from 
the RCMP and the Regina Police Service, and so many of the 
youth and people of the Montreal Lake Cree Nation — what 
was so evident was the incredible unity of the community in the 
midst of the pain and sadness. 
 
I particularly want to commend Chief Richie Bird and his 
father, Senator Allan Bird, whose strength and leadership were 
so clearly visible as they comforted families and their 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one knows why these things happen. All we 
can do is take what lessons from these tragedies that we can, 
keep up our courage, gather our strength, and press on. I ask the 
members of the Assembly to join me in extending our 
sympathies to the families who lost their loved ones and to all 
the people of the Montreal Lake Cree Nation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Handel Catholic Women’s League Celebrates 60 Years 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year Handel 
Catholic Women’s League completed 60 years of service to 
God and Canada. What an accomplishment. 
 
They gathered with their community and friends to celebrate the 
Eucharist with their spiritual director, Father W. Reschney 
presiding. Past president, Tillie Zimmer handed over the gavel 
and the symbol of authority to President Nicole Perlinger, and 
Father continued with the installation of officers. An informal 
luncheon followed at the hall where over 100 people gathered 
to celebrate this momentous occasion. A 60-year pin was 
presented to Eva Perlinger, their only founding member; a 
25-year pin to Yvette Gruber; and a president’s pin to Nicole 
Perlinger. 
 
Their membership has dropped to 12, but the desire to serve 
remains strong. Several former members came to help make the 
occasion even more memorable. Some were Della Roesch, Sue 
Schommer, Catherine Graver, Katie Wandler, Joan Basler, 
Lorraine Beloin, Adelyne and Theresa Roth, Lucie and Rose 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

Rohs, and Marlene Schraeder. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the Handel CWL [Catholic 
Women’s League] completing 60 years of service to God and 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Rural Women’s Month in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March has been 
proclaimed as Rural Women’s Month in Saskatchewan. 
 
This proclamation comes at the request of the Saskatchewan 
Women’s Institutes, the women’s president of the National 
Farmers Union, the Whitewood Women’s Network of 
Whitewood, Saskatchewan, and the Partners for Rural Family 
Support of Humboldt, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this month is about recognizing and celebrating 
the contribution of rural women to the province and to raise 
awareness and appreciation of the significant role that rural 
women have played and continue to play in Saskatchewan. 
 
Over and above the fact that they are one-half of most of the 
farm operations in the province, rural women have also always 
served as volunteers and leaders in their communities. Rural 
women are major contributors to Saskatchewan’s economic and 
social fabric and have always been. It’s particularly appropriate 
in our centennial year, 100 years of heart, that we recognize the 
significant impacts rural women have made to the development 
of heath care, education, and social services in our wonderful 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
acknowledging the rural women of this province. Without their 
commitment and contribution, Saskatchewan would not be the 
great province that it is today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Wynyard Seniors Receive 2005 Saskatchewan 
Centenarian Medals 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Keeping with the 
theme of the centennial celebrations, I was once again honoured 
to preside over the awarding of the 2005 Saskatchewan 
centenarian medal to four residents in Wynyard. On March 11 
at the Golden Acres facility I presided medals to Mrs. Sigurveig 
Gudmundson, born on August 1, 1905; Mrs. Mary Chudyk, 
born on December 10, 1902; Mrs. Gertrude Madey, born on 
February 2, 1898; and Mr. Mike Wasyluk, born April 5, 1905. 
 
The awards ceremony was well attended by the families of 
these truly great Saskatchewan citizens, and we were also 
joined by the Wynyard mayor, Sharon Armstrong. It was a 
pleasure for me to bestow these medals on these fine people 

who have contributed to the life of Saskatchewan throughout 
the province’s first 100 years. It takes a special kind of courage 
and resolve to live to be 100 years old or more. In fact it is all 
the more remarkable when you consider that, at the age of 102, 
Mrs. Chudyk still lives independently in her own home. Just as 
remarkable is the fact that, at the age of 107, Mrs. Madey has 
now lived in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries — a very long 
and good life indeed. 
 
I would like to personally congratulate these four outstanding 
Saskatchewan people for their part in building this province 
over the last 100 years. I would ask that all members join me in 
saluting them this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Centennial Summit 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Centennial 
Summit was one of the most significant centennial events to 
take place this year. Participants heard from a wide variety of 
presenters, from business leaders to academics, youth, and First 
Nations. They then broke into groups to discuss such topics as 
labour market development, the opportunities and barriers 
facing First Nations and Métis people, youth attraction and 
retention, quality of life, and attitude. 
 
One of the final speakers at the summit was Todd Hirsch, an 
economist with the Canada West Foundation, who stressed two 
things in his presentation on Saskatchewan’s economy. One 
was that the unrelenting negativity that exists in some quarters 
of this province is hurting us. He used youth as an example. He 
said it was no wonder young people were leaving this province 
when they hear so much doom and gloom. The other thing Mr. 
Hirsch said was that, given our current economic performance 
and our future prospects, this province has no right to think 
small. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, given record high job numbers, 
Saskatchewan has been experiencing 11 consecutive months of 
monthly employment increases, and this February showing the 
highest figure ever recorded for Saskatchewan in February. Mr. 
Hirsch is clearly right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in showing their 
appreciation for the participants of the Centennial Summit for 
their hard work, plain talk, and commitment to the future of our 
province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

Food Allowance 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I received 
a letter today from a constituent. I’d like to share it with 
members of the Assembly, share the sentiments from Barbara 
Taylor, who lives in Swift Current. She’s having a difficult time 
making healthy choices using the money she gets from her 
basic food allowance. 
 
Idea no. 3 of the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas for 
Saskatchewan’s future calls on this government to increase the 
basic food allowance, something that hasn’t happened in more 
than two decades. 
 
Question for the minister responsible — she didn’t get a chance 
to answer yesterday in this House, maybe she’s got some good 
news today. Will she confirm that the government will make 
this change, will increase the food allowance in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that there has not been a year 
in which our government has not improved adequacy on some 
front for people who are either on social assistance or working 
poor. It started with the recognition of actual utility costs when 
we were first elected, which people previously were taking that 
out of their housing money. 
 
As well, as the Premier mentioned in his comments about the 
centennial yesterday, we were part of constructing a National 
Child Benefit for Canada, which for a family of four under 
$18,000 gets an additional $800 a month under the child 
benefit, $800 a month on top of the basic allowance. So that 
money is not reflected in the basic allowance, but it’s a result of 
a program constructed specifically to help children and families. 
 
Now I would say that we work closely with the advocacy 
groups and people on assistance and I’ll speak further on 
matters of where additional funding is going. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, I’m glad the 
minister has indicated she’ll speak further on this issue. She 
could simply answer the question. 
 
Barbara Taylor is a diabetic. She has a tough time making 
healthy food choices on $9.40 a day. When she goes to shop, 
Barbara Taylor is paying 2005 prices, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment gives her a 
basic food allowance that’s based on 1985 prices. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s just wrong. By any reasonable measure, that’s wrong. 
 
There’s a number of former Social Services ministers who sit 
on this front bench, including the Premier of the province. The 
question for the minister to answer is simple today: will she 

stand up and take her place in the legislature and confirm that 
this government is prepared to do the right thing, that it will 
increase the basic food allowance for low-income families in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, there has been many budgets in which we would 
have appreciated the member caring about any of these issues. 
But quite bluntly, he hasn’t. In the last election platform they 
had exactly one page, which their only solution was to put 
people into jobs with a 25 per cent reduction in the number of 
people on welfare. Well through our Building Independence, 
which improves an employment supplement, extended health 
benefits, child benefits, shelter supplement, child care money, 
in fact we have helped 41 per cent of families be off assistance 
and they’re all materially much better off today than they were 
before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now, Mr. Speaker, do we want to do 
more? Of course we want to do more. There are still people 
who do not have as much as they require to support the kind of 
standard of living we would want to see. But I can guarantee 
you that, working with the community, we continue to make 
improvements on all of those fronts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Barbara Taylor is being admitted to 
the hospital in Swift Current today. She’ll be put on insulin to 
get her blood sugar to an acceptable level. Apparently the 
government is prepared . . . would rather pay for that, for that 
health care treatment, than simply to increase the food 
allowance to the point where she can make the healthy choices 
that Barbara wants to make in terms of her diet. 
 
You know, it’s nice to hear the history lesson from the minister. 
What we want today is an answer. It’s a direct question that 
deserves a direct answer, not to the Saskatchewan Party but to 
those who are on assistance, to low-income families in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Will she take her place and confirm 
that this government is prepared to increase the food allowance 
for those families in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Without knowing all the specifics of 
the person or persons that the member is referring to, I can say 
that where a doctor has provided a particular reasoning related 
to health for someone to have an additional food supplement, 
certainly that is within the possibility of the program. 
 
There’s no question that during years of scarce resources, we 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

targeted a lot of our resources to families with children and to 
people with disabilities. There are still today some individuals 
who are single persons who do not receive as much benefit as 
those people, and that’s certainly a challenge that we accept as 
something we want to make more progress on, and I’m sure we 
will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the government 
does do a lot of targeting, it seems. It seems that they would 
rather target $600 to have a new hand-rubbed finish put on a 
desk in a corporate office. It seems that they would want to 
target millions for dot-coms in Atlanta, Georgia. They want to 
target millions for dot-coms in Tennessee and other NDP [New 
Democratic Party] boondoggles, 3 million for Pangaea; we 
talked about that not long ago. 
 
We’re asking them to target the people and the issues that 
should be targeted today. The minister can simply take her 
place in the legislature and confirm for Barbara Taylor, who is 
now in the hospital because she can’t afford to eat in the healthy 
way she would like, confirm for her and many others in the 
province of Saskatchewan that this government has heard them, 
has heard the opposition; they’ll do the right thing; they’ll 
increase the food allowance in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, there have been a number 
of ways in which we’ve looked at the total amount of money 
that an individual has to spend — things like the project in 
Regina that provides a $15 bus pass instead of $60. The shelter 
supplement which will come in on April 1 will provide 
substantial new revenues to people which will take pressure 
again off the amount of money that they have to spend for food. 
But I will say to the member opposite is I believe that we have 
always had a compassionate response to people with particular 
problems and if he would bring that situation forward, we 
would certainly look at applying that compassionate response. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Nursing Resources 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 200 
or more nurses leave this province every year for greener 
pastures and better working conditions. Once again, here we are 
in Saskatchewan training nurses for the benefit of other 
provinces. Our retention rate here in Saskatchewan is the worst 
in Canada. According to the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 
this province could lose about a quarter of its nurses within the 

next year due to early retirement. 
 
It’s so bad, Mr. Speaker, even SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses] has launched an ad campaign to try and retain nurses in 
this province. But what is interesting, Mr. Speaker, is the Health 
minister sees it differently. Last November this minister, this 
Health minister, this NDP Health minister, told The 
StarPhoenix that he believes that Saskatchewan has enough 
surgeons and medical professionals, which I would assume was 
registered nurses in that category. Facts show otherwise. Nurses 
are leaving this province in droves. With the high number of 
nurses leaving and the potential of a huge number retiring 
because of early retirement, does the minister really think that 
we have enough nurses practising in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite didn’t 
vote for the budget last year that provided further funding to 
provide more nursing training spaces in this province. We are 
working to provide more nursing training spaces. We are 
working within the employment situation to make sure that the 
workplaces are conducive and complementary to what the 
workers need to do. And we are continuing to work to make 
sure that the professionals in our health system are part of a 
very good health system that provides the services for 
everybody. 
 
The members opposite have raised this issue again and again. 
But when we put forward very clear plans about how to expand 
this, they vote against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is right in 
one part. The Saskatchewan Party through the great work of the 
member from Melfort has talked about this for years and years 
and years. 
 
We’ve talked about the need for a human resources plan. We’ve 
talked about the need to hire more full-time nurses. We’ve 
talked about the need to train more nurses. We’ve talked about 
many reasons why nurses need competitive salaries and 
forgiveness of loans, Mr. Speaker. In fact, idea no. 11, 12, and 
34 of the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas addresses these very 
issues. 
 
Even SUN is talking about the need for a human resources plan. 
Last November SUN’s president, Rosalee Longmoore, told the 
StarPhoenix: 
 

We’re not retaining new (nursing) graduates in this 
province . . . we need to retain every new graduate in this 
province . . . [by offering them a] full-time job . . . 
 

When will the minister get a human resources plan for 
registered nurses to retain them in this province? 
 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to work with 
the nursing profession. We’ll continue to work with SUN, and 
we’ll continue to make sure that we have a supply of nurses. 
 
Now the member opposite raised the issue about the age of 
nurses in Saskatchewan. Information for the year 2003, which is 
what we, the last year that we have, was that the average age of 
a nurse in Saskatchewan is 44.9. The average age across the 
country is 44.5. Mr. Speaker, this relates to a number of us in 
this Assembly and the fact that we’re all in that category of 
where we’re going to be retiring and needing replacement. 
 
I think that part of what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, as it relates 
to nursing, as it relates to all of the different professions, is to 
continue to work and make sure we get our young people living 
and working and providing good care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously he has no plan for 
retaining nurses, no human resources plan, because SUN has 
said so itself, that the government doesn’t know where it’s 
going on this file, Mr. Speaker. In fact they are even suggesting 
. . . a number of people in this province are suggesting an early 
retirement for the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Right now, the nursing shortage is being 
managed by overtime — overtime done by many of the nurses 
who are being overworked through this overtime. Nursing 
graduates are unable to find full-time work. So how does this 
square? We have nurses doing mega hours of overtime, and yet 
nursing graduates can’t find full-time work. 
 
Injuries in nurses are skyrocketing due to the overtime, the 
stress, and the burnout that this NDP government is putting 
them through. A human resources plan is needed to address the 
unsafe levels of nursing and the amount of overtime that they 
are having to put in. Why isn’t there a human resources plan? 
That’s not asking very much. Why isn’t there a human 
resources plan in this province to alleviate the overtime that 
nurses are forced to work in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite, 
when he’s quoting documents, might want to go back to our 
nursing strategy document which we released last August. And 
it sets out many of the questions and concerns that the member 
opposite has. 
 
Now we know that there are challenges around overtime in 
some parts of our province; in other parts, it’s not quite as much 

of an issue. But we are looking at addressing that, working 
together with the nursing managers, with the regional health 
authorities. We’re looking at it on a broad basis across the 
province. We’re looking at it together with the unions because 
many of the issues relate to the contracts and how they’re 
structured. And all of these kinds of issues will continue to be 
part of what we do to make sure that we provide good care for 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, we need to be working very 
diligently at this, and we are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has the worst nursing retention rate in all of the 
nation. And part of that is because our salaries for nurses are the 
lowest outside of Atlantic Canada. And Mr. Speaker, 
negotiations are going to be starting next week. Our question is, 
is the government going to go to those negotiations with the 
mandate of 0, 1, and 1? And can he please explain to me what 
that is going to do — 0,1, and 1 — is going to do to attract 
nurses to stay in this province or attract nurses from other 
provinces? What is 0, 1, and 1 going to do to attract nurses 
within this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this province we are like 
one big family. All of us . . . and what I would say is that all of 
us — members on this side, members opposite — have nurses 
in their families. And they end up also being taxpayers. And 
you end up having to work and try to make sure we get the right 
balance between the kinds of resources that we have available 
through our taxation system and the right resources to make 
sure that we retain all of the professionals that we need in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done a very good job on this side of the 
House for quite a number of years in making sure we get that 
balance, and it’s not a very easy task. We’ve had to deal with it 
in quite a number of areas. Mr. Speaker, we’ll find a solution to 
this one, and we’ll make sure that all of our very good nurses 
continue to provide care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Goodale’s 2005 federal budget wiped out the farm 
improvement loan program. Mr. Speaker, this program was 
used for years by producers to purchase equipment, buildings, 
land, and livestock. Saskatchewan represents about 80 per cent 
of the loans approved under this program, and a majority of 
Saskatchewan credit unions are involved in these loans. In fact, 
in the third quarter of 2004 alone, Saskatchewan credit unions 
made about 500 such loans to the tune of $15 million. 
 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party raised this issue at the end of 
February with the Ag minister, and he said he would lobby his 
federal counterparts in early March. Will the minister report to 
the Assembly today how he has made out on those 
negotiations? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this whole issue around the loans was raised with the federal 
minister. We have pushed on this, and we were extremely 
disappointed when the budget did not continue to provide for 
these loans, Mr. Speaker. We know that they have been very 
important for producers in this province, and we will continue 
to press to try and make sure that those needs are covered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, once again our NDP Ag minister has failed to come 
through for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue I’d like to ask questions to the Ag 
minister about. Last year the Premier, the NDP Premier, and the 
Ag minister dragged his feet on fully funding the CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program — in fact 
didn’t make the announcement until December. As a result, Mr. 
Speaker, producers across Saskatchewan are still waiting for the 
2003 CAIS payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. After a year of drought, 
devastating frost, BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy], 
poor quality crops, farmers are desperate for some additional 
income and they’re still waiting, Mr. Speaker. Spring seeding is 
just around the corner. Mr. Speaker, when can our 
Saskatchewan farmers expect these cheques? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m really appreciating the fact that the member raises this issue 
because when we were in the midst of a, engaged in a very, 
very difficult struggle to try and get a better deal for 
Saskatchewan, where were they? Nowhere to be seen, Mr. 
Speaker, nowhere to be seen. They would not stand up for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Instead doom and gloom, push on this 
particular minister, but they were nowhere there in terms of 
standing up for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have continued to press to get a better deal for 
the people and the farmers of Saskatchewan for the income 
stabilization program. And I can tell you that we are pressing 
the federal government to get these payments out in a timely 
manner as well. Mr. Speaker, as those forms come in and are 
completed, they are processed. And, Mr. Speaker, where there 
are questions — and they do come into our office — we press 

for them to get done in a timely manner. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we would be the first to 
support that government in saying that funding is not fair. But 
having said that, Mr. Speaker, who does that minister think he’s 
helping, and who does he think he’s hurting by not fully 
funding these programs? 
 
You know who he’s helping? He’s helping the federal 
government because they don’t have to divvy up as soon with 
their share of the money. 
 
Who is he hurting? He’s hurting Saskatchewan farm families 
who haven’t received any money from that program from 2003, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s who he’s hurting. And Saskatchewan farm 
families are going to hold him accountable come next election, 
Mr. Speaker. Once again they’re using Saskatchewan farm 
families as pawns when they’re trying to negotiate with the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no. 47 of the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas calls 
for full funding of Saskatchewan’s share of any 
federal-provincial ag program to which the province is a 
signatory. Will the minister commit to that today? Mr. Speaker, 
will that government, that Premier, and that minister commit for 
once, finally, to help farm families in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s 47th on their agenda. It’s been number one on my 
agenda for the whole last . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we did fully fund the 
2003 CAIS program, another $110 million dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
We made sure that that funding was in place. And I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, I was ashamed of their brethren, the federal PC 
[Progressive Conservative], who were nowhere to be seen on 
this fight at all. The budget, where were they? They abstained. 
They were nowhere there, your brethren on the PC Party. Mr. 
Speaker, they did not have the courage to stand up and help 
Saskatchewan farmers. We did and we brought this money 
forward and we fully funded for ’03. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
be with our farmers today and in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

Performance of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely incredible. 
That Minister of Agriculture just stood in his place and said 
CAIS funding was his number one priority, Mr. Speaker. Last 
year it didn’t take two months or three months or four months 
or five or six for this NDP government to say that it would fund 
the share of the program it signed on to. It took 12 months, Mr. 
Speaker. He didn’t sign on it until December. He still hasn’t 
signed on for 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that’s what constitutes a number one priority for 
the NDP government, then bring on the election in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this question is for the Premier of the province. 
Once again today we have found out the NDP have absolutely 
no ideas. They have no ideas with respect to agriculture. They 
have no ideas on health care. They still refuse to listen to the 
people of the province with respect to the food allowance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the Premier could stand up and highlight 
for this Assembly and the people of the province why he 
stopped listening to Saskatchewan people. Why won’t he listen 
to the people of the province? Why is this government devoid 
of any vision or any ideas for our future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition seems to take question period and want to turn it 
into speech period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m telling you that the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t look for rhetoric. They don’t look for little flyers and 
pamphlets with 100 ideas. They look for results, Mr. Speaker. 
And what they get from this government is results. It’s a 
government with a vision that brings that vision to reality, and 
the proof is, Mr. Speaker, the proof is you just take a look at the 
February job numbers in the province of Saskatchewan — 
11,400 new jobs in the province of Saskatchewan in the month 
of February alone. That’s a result. 
 
This is a government that stands with its producers, that stands 
with its farmers, that fully funds CAIS while their brothers and 
sisters in the federal Conservative Party hide under their desks 
in Ottawa and will not stand up for the Saskatchewan people 
and the Saskatchewan farmer. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
government that takes vision and makes of that vision reality, 
not rhetoric. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier started off with 
an attempt at a joke or a one-liner. We think he might be using 
the same writer that the Minister of Health was using yesterday. 
We’re more than willing to help him out more than just with 
ideas for the province; we’ll also help him out with his jokes or 

his one-liners if he wants to make that request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said the people of the province are 
interested in results and he is exactly correct; he is exactly 
correct. Because the results of this government are the worst job 
creation record in the last five years, the fastest growing rate of 
utilization of food banks in the province, the longest waits for 
surgical care in the country right here in the birthplace of 
medicare — those are the results of this Premier and this 
government’s lack of vision and lack of leadership in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Today we talked about ideas no. 11, 12, 34, and 47. The 
question to the Premier is, will he implement at least one of 
them, at least one of those ideas, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What was the question? What was the 
question? Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to talk about results. Well let’s take a look at 
the results of his first year of leadership; let’s take a look at the 
results. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Elrose was 
leading the Saskatchewan Party, he produced, he produced a 
plan, a vision; they called it Grow Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, while I fundamentally disagreed with his plan, what I 
could see in that plan was a philosophical basis for a future, a 
philosophical position. I could see a relatively consistent plan 
even though I disagreed with the philosophy and I disagreed 
with many of the recommendations, Mr. Speaker. And the 
people of Saskatchewan equally disagreed with the philosophy 
and the recommendations. 
 
In a whole year in office, what has the new Leader of the 
Opposition produced? Well a little pamphlet with a variety of 
ideas, most of which they’ve taken from activity of this 
government — some of which may be good and some of them 
the people of Saskatchewan and this government will not touch 
with a 10-foot pole. That’s the result. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order, please. 
Order, please. The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition . . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, pardon me. 
Pardon me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’d never see that as one of my 
visions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to deal with 
a motion with respect to the consideration of private Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

leave to proceed with private Bills. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Timetable for Consideration of Private Bills 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 75 this Assembly allows private 
Bills to be considered during the resumption of the first 
session of the twenty-fifth legislature on the following 
dates: 

 
All petitions shall be filed with the Clerk of the Assembly 
not later than Monday, April 4; no petition shall be 
received by the Assembly if presented after Wednesday, 
April 6; and no private Bill may be introduced in the 
Assembly after Wednesday, April 13. 

 
I would so move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Regina Douglas Park, and seconded by 
the member for Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 75 this Assembly allow private 
Bills to be considered during the resumption of the first 
session of the twenty-fifth legislature on the following 
dates: 

 
All petitions shall be filed with the Clerk of the Assembly 
not later than Monday, April 4; no petition shall be 
received by the Assembly if presented after Wednesday, 
April 6; and no Private Bill may be introduced in the 
Assembly after Wednesday, April 13. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again I am extremely pleased to stand up on behalf of the 
government and table a response to written question 896. 
 

The Speaker: — Response to question 896 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Centennial 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the centennial Chair, 
the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into this 
debate which I think could be, could be classified somewhat as 
an historical debate, but perhaps more appropriately this sitting 
of the legislature as an historical sitting of the legislature. 
 
I’m very, very pleased to join in the debate moved by the 
Premier and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. And 
we’ll of course at the end of the day be supporting the motion 
which in summary commends the people of Saskatchewan for 
helping to be . . . for contributing in many ways over the course 
of our first century to provide for us the Saskatchewan we’ve 
inherited today and the Saskatchewan which has such a 
promising future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is, as we come here together, this is the final 
sitting of the Legislative Assembly that Saskatchewan will have 
in the course of our first century as a province. Once we leave 
this sitting and we next return to this place, it will be in fact at 
that time the first sitting of the legislature of Saskatchewan in 
our second century. 
 
And so it is with a sense of humility that I must say that I feel 
very, very proud to be one of 58 to make up the centennial 
legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. And I consider it 
an extreme honour to serve my province, Mr. Speaker, as Chair 
of our centennial in the course of our celebrations for 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was not lucky enough to be born here in 
Saskatchewan. I grew up in Alberta, went off to the University 
of Manitoba, fell in love with a Saskatchewan girl, and — I 
would add — lived happily ever after, Mr. Speaker. But perhaps 
it’s not so surprising that it was a Saskatchewan girl that I was 
attracted to, as both my grandmother and my mother were 
Saskatchewan girls. 
 
I’d just like to reflect for a moment if I may on a couple of 
experiences that to me signify so much of what is true about 
basic Saskatchewan values, and in fact one of which I think was 
referred to in some kinds of ways in our question period here 
today. 
 
My grandfather came from Britain as one of the homes 
children, Mr. Speaker, who came from the Barnardo’s homes, 
came to Toronto — or to Ontario, I should say — and after 
having reached the age of maturity, decided to make his future 
and came out west. And as he was walking down the CPR 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

[Canadian Pacific Railway] main line, he came to meet the 
section foreman in Webb, Saskatchewan. He was walking with 
another man at the time, and asked the section foreman if he 
needed a man. He said yes and the other man continued to walk 
on, and my grandfather stayed. He ended up falling in love with 
the section foreman’s daughter who became eventually my 
grandmother. 
 
And I remember talking in our home, as I was a young lad, with 
my mother — who then was born in Webb, Saskatchewan, in 
the section house on the CPR main line — and listening to her 
talk about a time that was so captivating in Canadian and 
Saskatchewan history, the time of the dirty thirties. 
 
And in the dirty thirties many of us will recall was a time when 
the men rode the rails across this country looking for work. And 
when you lived in a section house on the CPR main line, you 
were frequently a place where men would stop to see if it would 
be possible to find something to eat. And I remember my 
mother telling me, how when she was a little girl, she can 
remember her mother sometimes baking three batches of bread 
in a single day because in that household, there was a rule that 
when a man came to the door looking for food, he was never, 
ever turned away hungry. But there was also something else 
that was an important rule, was that before he ate, there was just 
a little bit of wood that needed chopping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I reflect on that and I reflect on the great 
respect that my grandmother has for those who serve in public 
office and I reflect on the experience of my mother and my 
grandmother through that difficult part of Saskatchewan 
history, as I look back, it was a time when I learned one of the 
very, very important rules, a basic rule about Saskatchewan 
values. Because, Mr. Speaker, more than anything else, as we 
reflect on our first century as a province in this great nation, I 
think we see our province as a decent place with decent people 
who live by decent values. And, Mr. Speaker, I think in many 
ways that will be exemplified in our celebrations. 
 
When I look at the Saskatchewan roots, it is very, very 
important that we not assume that the history of Saskatchewan 
began back in 1905. Surely in 1905 we became a province in 
the nation. But it was long before that, not just 100 years ago, 
but literally hundreds of years ago that Saskatchewan history 
began with the settlement of this land by our First Nations 
people and then subsequently by our Métis people, who were 
very much a foundation of the population and the culture of 
Saskatchewan before the European settlers came west to build 
their futures. 
 
And to me it seems it’s very, very important as we come to the 
celebration of our centennial year that we should ought to 
acknowledge in ways that are important and that provide for 
living legacies to commend the great contribution to First 
Nations peoples, to Métis peoples who were very much a part 
of the settlement of the West, of Saskatchewan, by those first 
settlers. We are all . . . It is important I think as well that we 
recognize the importance of the treaties that were signed and 
that were the source of over a hundred years of peaceful 
coexistence and in fact much more than that. In many ways the 
settlers came to our land; they were supported in dealing with 
the harshness of the environment that they dealt with by those 
who were here as our First Nations and Métis citizens of the 

territories at that time. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very, very clear that as we 
celebrate our centennial we are celebrating, we are celebrating 
100 years of provincial membership in this great Confederation 
of Canada. And that it is also important that we acknowledge 
history as it went back prior to that. 
 
Like many other members around the House, we will often find 
ourselves driving across this great province late at night — 
oftentimes later than we should ought to be driving — and we 
find ourselves reflecting as we look around at the patchwork of 
the jewels of light that we find across the prairie land. 
 
And I’ve often found myself reflecting back to that time when 
the European settlers first started to come out west where there 
were no roads, there were no lights, there were no trees. But 
what there was, Mr. Speaker, were dreams, dreams of young 
men and women — some with their families, some without — 
coming west to build a future, to build a future because they 
believed that this was a land that had great promise, a promise 
to build a future with security and with opportunity for their 
families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is with a great sense of admiration about 
the courage of those men and women who came west that I 
want to simply commend some of the great pioneers who began 
to shape the Saskatchewan that we have inherited today. 
 
If I could just reflect back to the period of September 1905 . . . 
what happened back then, Mr. Speaker, in history was that there 
was a great debate going on prior to that over the course of the 
summer of 1905 in the House of Commons in Ottawa as to 
what should ought to happen to this vast expanse of land 
between the province of Manitoba and the province of British 
Columbia. And there were several versions, actually, of what 
should ought to happen with the prospects of provincehood 
being dedicated to this expanse of land. 
 
One notion was that it should ought to be one large province. 
Another was that there should ought to be a northern province 
and a southern province. And the third — the one that was 
finally decided on by the members of the House of Commons at 
that time — was that there should be two provinces divided as 
we know them today between the provinces of Saskatchewan 
and Alberta. And subsequently after debate in the July of 1905, 
The Saskatchewan Act and the Act for our sister province in 
Alberta were passed and came into force on September 1. 
 
But as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, as we celebrate our 
centennials, we will not celebrate them on the same day with 
our sister province in Alberta. And it is partially for the reasons 
that we are here. 
 
It is for reasons that spell out our exercise of democratic 
practice, our forms of democracy in which we live, within the 
constitutional monarchy where the head of state is the defender 
of the constitutional rights of all of our citizens. That spells out 
why it is that we celebrate our centennial anniversaries on two 
different dates. 
 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

The Saskatchewan Act, the Alberta Act both came into force on 
September 1 and gave both provinces the authority, the right to 
exist as provinces at that time. But we celebrate them on the 
first and the fourth because those were the dates of 
inauguration. And what happened in history, Mr. Speaker, is 
that on September 1, Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier, 
Governor General Earl Grey — Earl Grey, he’s the one who 
donated the Grey Cup that the Riders are going to win in our 
centennial year — the two of them got on to a train, went out to 
Edmonton, and Lieutenant Governor Bulyea took the oath of 
office. 
 
They then got on the train and came to Regina, Saskatchewan. 
And on the afternoon of September 4, Mr. Speaker, Lieutenant 
Governor Amédée Forget, who at that time was serving as the 
lieutenant governor of the North-West Territories, took the oath 
of office, thus becoming Saskatchewan’s first lieutenant 
governor and thus enabling Saskatchewan to function as a 
democracy. It is our inauguration date, and it is our anniversary 
date. It has always been thus, and it will be the day that we’ll 
celebrate our centennial. 
 
Just kind of interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, a quick aside. I 
think we learned a little bit about ourselves through an event 
that had nothing to do with planning that occurred on that 
September 4 because it was part of the plan as Saskatchewan 
was going to enter into active participation into the great 
Confederation of Canada that there would be a great parade that 
would occur on the streets here in Regina. And the plan was 
that there would be bands and floats and military men with all 
of their medals proudly worn, First Nations leaders with full 
dress on horseback, and proud politicians — city councillors 
from Regina, MLAs, former members of the North-West 
Territories — walking the streets in the parade. 
 
And as history would have it, a circus came to town just at that 
time . . . was called the Floto Circus and was known at that time 
as having the biggest elephant in North America. Mama Mary 
was her name. And the Floto Circus did what circuses will do in 
those days. They applied for a parade permit so that they could 
. . . because what happened in those days, the circus would have 
a parade. People would come to the parade; they’d follow it 
down to the circus grounds; and that’s the way the world 
worked. And they did what they would usually do. They 
applied to the city of Regina for a parade permit. The city of 
Regina in its wisdom said, no. 
 
As I read the accounts back in the reports then, nobody will 
quite explain just why it is that they wouldn’t grant the parade 
permit, but I think it was kind of obvious. They were having 
this distinguished parade. For heaven sakes, we were entering 
into the great Confederation of Canada, and we didn’t want to 
mess it up with some stinky animals. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what happened is the grand parade was held, 
with the bands and the floats and the military men and the First 
Nations and the proud politicians walking along behind. And 
the Floto Circus said, you know what, if they’re having a parade 
we’re coming anyhow. And when they got to the end of the 
parade they just tucked right in at the end of the parade with 
Mamma Mary and the elephants walking front to tail right out 
front, followed by the animals and the wagons and the clowns. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it said to me two things. When we look at 
what we do when we come to our celebration this year, it seems 
to me we could take the advice of those who I . . . If we were 
able to talk to those who were there that day and ask them, that 
day that Saskatchewan had its inauguration and entered into 
active participation in the Confederation, what do you 
remember best? And I have a sneaking suspicion that nobody 
would have said it was the proud politicians walking down the 
parade route. I think they would have said it was the elephants, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what that said to me is that when we come to this day on 
September 4, 2005, it should ought to be a day of celebration, a 
day of fun for our people. Surely we will want to recommit 
ourselves to the great Confederation of Canada and those things 
will happen. But it should ought to be a day of celebration 
across the province of Saskatchewan. And that is certainly part 
of the plan. 
 
The other part of reflection, Mr. Speaker, I know we are 
nothing in Saskatchewan if we’re not flexible and we’re not 
ingenious. Because I notice as well that when you read historic 
accounts about the time that Saskatchewan came into 
Confederation, they will often refer to a grand parade that was 
held, including elephants they’ll say, just as if we had planned it 
that way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have the ability to chuckle at ourselves and 
to claim responsibility when good things happen despite the fact 
that they may not have been planned, but we move on as a 
people prepared to celebrate in our centennial year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look back over the course of our first 
century, it was very characteristic here in Saskatchewan that we 
had an economy that was very much driven by the world value 
of wheat. We were . . . Wheat was king. We were the 
breadbasket of the world. In very many ways that spelled out 
what was the major driving force in our economy here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the course of our first century and particularly as we 
moved into the second half of our century, our economy has 
changed. And we come now, as we come to the cusp of our 
second century, with a different kind of economic makeup as 
we find ourselves looking back with a sense of pride and 
accomplishment, but also finding ourselves looking ahead with 
a sense of confidence and optimism, with a much more diverse 
economy that is not as victim to forces beyond our control that 
can have significant devastating effects at times on our 
economy. 
 
And so we come to a time today on the verge of our second 
century in which agriculture continues to be, and I think for our 
second century will long continue to be a very important part of 
the Saskatchewan economy. But added to that, a growing 
manufacturing industry, a tourism industry that is growing, that 
in fact will be celebrated with the Rendez-vous Canada 
gathering that will take place in Saskatoon in the month of May 
which will be an absolutely immense opportunity for 
Saskatchewan tourism operators. 
 
Also minerals are continuing to play an increasingly important 
role in our economy and the future for employment and 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

revenues in order to provide services. In many ways our first 
century has been dedicated to the production of food. As we 
become more diverse in the world of agriculture, and in many 
ways I think in our second century the role of potash as an 
important ingredient in fertilizer to help feed those in a hungry 
world where the populations are growing the greatest, will 
continue to be strong. 
 
Those who like to dream and to envisage what hasn’t happened 
to a large extent, I think with some substance can see in our 
second century that diamonds may very well be an important 
commodity out of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And surely it will be that in our second century this will be a 
province with energy. Not only the energy of our people — in 
many ways a province among the youngest of all the provinces 
in the nation as we come to our second century — but energy in 
terms of production of energy whether it’s enhanced oil 
recovery or whether it’s production of energy through wind 
energy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are well positioned in this province at this 
point in time to respect the demands and the pressures of a 
clean environment, at the same time to see the potential to move 
forward in economic terms. To many people the concept of 
taking carbon dioxide, injecting it underground, and increasing 
your ability to extract oil seems almost magic, that you can take 
something you’re trying to get rid of and use it to gain 
something that is extremely valuable to our people. And that 
happens because this is a province that is committed to doing 
the research that’s necessary in order to be a part of an 
emerging economy. 
 
And certainly in our second century, Mr. Speaker, it would 
seem that the knowledge economy would be very much a part 
of Saskatchewan’s future. When I’ve talked with young people 
about the potential in Saskatchewan’s future, they marvel at the 
fact that the greatest, the greatest science project in the nation is 
right here in our Saskatchewan, with the synchrotron, which 
will certainly be the source of a great deal of development 
related to the knowledge economy that will promise to be an 
important part of our second century. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as we come to celebrate and we reflect on 
our province, our history, and our future we find ourselves 
emerging with a theme and the theme that has been chosen and 
has resonated well with Saskatchewan people for the 
celebration of our centennial is this, 100 years of heart. 
 
This is a province, Mr. Speaker, in which people see ourselves 
as a decent people and which we’re often referred to as the heart 
of the nation. And so it is most appropriate that when we come 
together in celebration we find ourselves celebrating 100 years 
of heart. 
 
And over the course of the celebration we find ourselves 
looking back and ahead at the same time — back with a sense 
of pride and accomplishment; ahead with a sense of confidence 
and optimism. And the confidence and optimism about the 
future for our young people is based on the strength of what we 
have inherited from those who have come before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that is very true as we 

look back is we will be able to identify clearly those who have 
been pioneers in the shaping of our province. And they had 
three things in common, no matter what field of activity it was 
— the ability to dream big, to plan well, and to work hard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s how we got where we are today. And I 
suggest that those same characteristics, the ability to dream big 
and to plan well — we call them strategic planners these days 
— but to plan well and to work hard, are alive and well in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And as they were 100 years ago, 
those are characteristics of young people in this province, 
because the truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that it is the 
youth of our province today who will be the pioneers of our 
second century as we look back at our bicentennial celebration, 
which I suspect will involve people in this House, none of 
whom are here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to honour those who have been the 
contributors of our first century, our pioneers of our first 
century, and those who will be the builders of our second 
century, the centennial celebration includes several things. One 
of those is the granting . . . And we’ve heard in the Assembly 
here of presentations of medallions to centenarians, those who 
are 100 years or more. Mr. Speaker, many are surprised to 
know that we have 347 centenarians in the province of 
Saskatchewan, people who are 100 years or older. Some would 
say the air, must be something good about the air or the water. I 
would suggest maybe there’s something good about the quality 
of life in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will also commemorate those born, our 
New Year’s babies on January 1 and September 4, and those 
will be presentations made by members of the Assembly to 
people in their own constituencies. 
 
It has also been the desire of the centennial celebration to create 
a couple of legacies that would enable the honour that is 
deserving of our pioneers and our youth to be, to be recognized 
by their own. And so, Mr. Speaker, there is a seniors legacy 
fund and a youth legacy fund which have been created related 
to the sales of licence plates, commemorative licence plates or 
centennial merchandise, both of which will be overseen by the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism on the one hand, the 
Provincial Youth Advisory Committee on the other, in the 
interest of seniors or youth who are wanting to make their 
futures here in our Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the great strength — not surprisingly in this 
province in which we are the volunteer capital of Canada — it 
is the great strength of our centennial celebration that they will 
occur largely as dreamed and planned and carried out by people 
in communities all across the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I met last summer with the minister responsible for 
centennial celebrations in Alberta, and when we told them there 
that here in the province of Saskatchewan we have over 150 
centennial committees all around the province of Saskatchewan, 
their mouth fell open. It’s just something that they can dream 
about there; in Saskatchewan it’s the reality. Mr. Speaker, we 
will have many, many celebrations that will be locally initiated 
and supported in a number of ways by the centennial 
celebrations. 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

Mr. Speaker, it was kind of surprising to some when we kicked 
off the centennial celebrations on January 1 from the rotunda of 
this building. I announced at that time that there were 1,100 
centennial events that are registered on the centennial website. 
The large, large, large, large majority of those organized locally 
by community groups and organizations. Mr. Speaker, last 
week we entered on the website event number 2,005 for 2005, 
and the truth of the matter is that there will be way over 2,000 
centennial celebrations and events that will take place around 
the province over the course of our centennial year and as I say, 
the large, large majority of those coming through the volunteer 
efforts of people at the local level. 
 
The highways are going to be busy from people travelling both 
within the province and expatriates coming back to 
Saskatchewan over the course of our centennial celebration. 
There will be, there are already registered over 300 
homecomings and reunion events that will bring people 
together to celebrate their roots and to reacquaint themselves 
with friends and family, to visit and to share memories, and also 
to share dreams and aspirations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be a busy summer. Over 600 events 
already planned just for the month of July alone, and that 
continues to grow. There will also be, with the mixture of the 
many, many community-based local events around the province 
of Saskatchewan, there will be a small collection of signature 
events which are important to have in your centennial year as 
well. One of the most outstanding I think will be the Jeux du 
Canada summer games, as the eyes of the nation will turn to 
Saskatchewan as we bring together amateur athletes from across 
the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will be the first gathering of amateur athletes 
since we were all glued to the televisions last summer as we 
watched the Olympic Games in Athens. And of the young men 
and women across the nation who come to Saskatchewan, 
largely in Regina but Moose Jaw and Lumsden as well, joining 
us as hosts, this will be the first gathering of amateur athletes 
since. And among those young men and women will be many 
who will be the Canadian Olympians when they gather in 
Beijing in ’08. And the Jeux du Canada Summer Games, Mr. 
Speaker, which will also be a celebration of culture and a 
celebration of our centennial comes to Saskatchewan this year 
largely when it was won in the bid several years ago because 
it’s our centennial year. 
 
It is also a time to celebrate the arts and there will be many 
celebrations of the arts. I won’t go through the list. They’re too 
long to list in the time I have available. But one of the signature 
events in the celebration of the arts, Mr. Speaker, will be the 
Lieutenant Governor’s centennial gala which will bring together 
in the month of May many outstanding Saskatchewan 
performers who have made their careers or have their roots here 
in our Saskatchewan and for whose fame goes well beyond the 
provincial borders of Saskatchewan, in a grand celebration of 
the arts. 
 
This is a province, Mr. Speaker, which is often referred to as a 
province with spirit and with soul and I think it’s no surprise to 
many that it is a province which tends to produce beyond its 
numbers, beyond its proportion, those who are outstanding in 
the world of the arts. 

Mr. Speaker, the National Aboriginal Awards which will occur 
this month held here in our Saskatchewan. These are Aboriginal 
award winners for across the nation but held here in our 
centennial year because of the recognition of the absolute 
importance of the wellbeing of our First Nations people and our 
Métis people. Mr. Speaker, in many ways when you think about 
it, we are all connected by common future and the future 
wellbeing of our First Nations and Métis people is intimately 
connected to the future wellbeing of our province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RBC Royal Bank hockey championship will 
be held in Weyburn in the month of May. Little did they know 
when they bid and won that, that it would be a year in which 
there was no NHL [National Hockey League] hockey and so 
this will be a national championship for hockey that will 
probably attract more attention just because of the times that 
we’re in than was originally anticipated. 
 
On September 4, Mr. Speaker, our actual anniversary day, there 
will be regional celebrations that will take place in 15 centres 
around the province of Saskatchewan, who will act as hosts 
inviting those in the area to come together in grand celebration 
of our centennial and there will be more details on that in the 
not too distant future. 
 
The Queen will be visiting and to many in the tradition of our 
historical membership in the Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker, and 
still in our system of a constitutional monarchy, that will be an 
important event for many of our Saskatchewan citizens as they 
celebrate their centennial. 
 
July 1, and with the appreciation I have I want to express to the 
federal government for support it’s provided as we celebrate on 
Canada Day our anniversary year, our centennial year, as a 
province within the nation. We will find the communities in 
celebration across the piece. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, if I can just refer to the centennial 
song that was sung just next door, Mr. Speaker, yesterday by 
Brad Johner who was selected to be the, to sing the official 
version of the Saskatchewan centennial song. After 250 
Saskatchewan people put heart to pencil to paper, our 
distinguished judges, Saskatchewan judges, selected Stan 
Garchinski’s song, “Saskatchewan, We Love this Place!”. A 
title and the lyrics, Mr. Speaker, most befitting of a province 
that chooses that as its motto for our province, “from many 
peoples, strength.” 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as I take my place I just want to 
acknowledge that over the course of our first century we owe so 
much to so many. And there will be great strengths that we will 
have in our province that we will identify. Some will say it is 
our resources and our riches that we have been blessed with, 
others will say it’s our topography and our living skies and our 
beautiful sunsets, and they would all be right. 
 
But at the end of the day, the greatest strength of this province, 
Mr. Speaker, as we celebrate our centennial, is our people. We 
have a people who are respected. I believe there is a thing called 
a Saskatchewan culture that defines who we are, how we see 
ourselves, and how others see us beyond our borders. And it is a 
culture, Mr. Speaker, which I believe makes us strong. In many 
ways, Mr. Speaker, I think we see and we are, in the finest 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

sense of the word, we are a humble people in Saskatchewan. 
This is a place where people still work hard. The work ethic is 
alive and well in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a province in which people still care deeply. We are the 
volunteer capital of the nation. This is a province, Mr. Speaker, 
in which people are honest and in which people are trustworthy, 
trusting. This is a province, Mr. Speaker, in which we see 
ourselves as dedicated to our communities and we see ourselves 
as co-operative in reaching solutions that affect us all, and in 
which we see ourselves, in the broadest sense of the word, as 
members of the same Saskatchewan family. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that is the great strength. 
 
The Saskatchewan centennial. No matter which way you look, 
when you look back or you look ahead, the truth of the matter is 
there are a million reasons to celebrate in this province, because 
it’s all about the people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I take my place indicating that I will support 
this motion because I believe to the core of my being, as I think 
so many Saskatchewan people do, that when we stop and reflect 
in this very busy and often troubled world, that the world could 
use a little more Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it too is an honour to enter into the debate this 
afternoon following the member from Moose Jaw North who 
has taken us through a bit of a history lesson. I listened very 
closely to the points that he was making about where 
Saskatchewan has moved and how we have become the 
province that we are. And indeed all of the remarks were very 
well put, I might add. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, as I looked at the motion in the last couple of 
days there are absolutely no points within the motion that I or 
any members of our opposition caucus disagree with. But I 
believe that there can be an enhancement and a strengthening of 
that motion, and I’m going to be adding to this motion at the 
conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, before I do that I want to talk about the new 
constituency of Canora-Pelly. It is a constituency that was 
created for the election, for the general election of 2003, and it 
puts together a vast array of communities. I’m sure that many 
rural constituencies, Mr. Speaker, are very similar to the 
Canora-Pelly constituency. We have in the constituency of 
Canora-Pelly 16 urban communities with, I’ll say significant 
population, if in fact you can refer to 25 people as significant. 
But they are a registered urban community, Mr. Speaker, and 
there are 16 of those communities. 
 
Included in that constituency there are also 11 rural 
municipalities, all or parts of 11 rural municipalities. There are 
three First Nations communities, Cote, Key, and Keeseekoose, 
all very active First Nations communities. Also in the 
Canora-Pelly constituency there are two provincial parks, Good 

Spirit Lake and Duck Mountain. Now, Mr. Speaker, I mention 
these communities because as the province has grown, each one 
of these communities has contributed to the development of the 
province. 
 
We know that many communities in rural Saskatchewan have 
been adversely affected by a declining population, a movement 
of people from rural Saskatchewan to more urban 
Saskatchewan, whether that be the cities or in fact moving 
completely outside of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there are still very active and viable 
communities. And as I travel through the constituency, it’s 
interesting when you stop and talk to the people who have been 
in the community for a long time, they all have a story. They all 
have a story about a particular thing that happened in the dirty 
thirties or whether they occurred during, you know, the very 
prosperous times after World War II. Or they’ll talk about a 
particular year in fact, a very specific year when maybe the 
crops were left out under the snow for an entire year and 
harvesting took place in the spring. And that has been a very 
common thing in the area that I come from of east central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three of my communities, Canora, Kamsack, and 
Preeceville, are the largest communities and they are obviously 
the most active communities in my constituency. Every one of 
those communities has already put together a centennial 
committee and have planned numerous centennial events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Canora is celebrating on July 
29. That will be their first day of their celebrations. They refer 
to their celebrations as the Colors 100. Now Colors has been the 
term that’s used to describe that summer celebration for years, 
but now they’ve called it Colors 100. And it’s going to be a 
three-day celebration. It’s going to be a great time in the 
community of Canora. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the community of Canora is also referred to 
as the Heart of Good Spirit Country. You’ll see that phrase used 
often to describe the community of Canora because it is so close 
to Crystal Lake, to Good Spirit Lake, to Madge Lake, and Duck 
Mountain Provincial Park, and it is referred to as the Heart of 
Good Spirit Country. 
 
One of the other things that I must mention about the 
community of Canora is that in the last number of years they’ve 
taken an initiative that needed to address the quality of water 
that actually was being supplied to the residents of Canora. And 
now after a very successful water development plan through 
many individuals in the town of Canora — and I’m not going to 
mention those individuals — back in an international water 
tasting competition in Berkeley Springs, West Virginia in 2003, 
the community of Canora has been deemed to be the best 
tasting municipal water in Canada. So that’s a billboard . . . 
You’ll see that billboard as you come in from Yorkton on 
Highway 9 into the community of Canora. You’ll see that 
billboard that says that they have the best tasting water in all of 
Canada according to this competition in 2003. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, prior to that water development 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

they weren’t the best tasting. There was other adjectives that 
would have been used to describe the water in the town of 
Canora. But these are ideas that the people of Canora came 
forward with and developed it. Now the water supply is now 
being pumped to the community, the resort communities of 
Good Spirit Lake, to the communities of Rama, Mikado. They 
now have water pipelines that are supplying those residents as 
well. So a tremendous development there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Preeceville is a little bit north of 
Canora and serves a vast area. And I know I’ve had discussions 
with the Minister of Health regarding the development of a 
expanded hospital in the town of Preeceville. And if you talk to 
anyone in Preeceville and surrounding communities about 
health care, that is number one. That is the number one priority. 
And it has been in the discussion stage for years. And the town 
and I were very pleased, were very pleased to see that the first 
phase was announced last year and that the potential 
development of that will take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mushers’ Rendezvous, held every year I believe 
now for about seven or eight years, brings the Canadian dogsled 
champions to Preeceville and on that date they raise dollars for 
this health care project. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that they 
have ranged from 15 to $25,000 net profit per Mushers’ 
Rendezvous in Preeceville held every February. That has raised 
thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker, for this anticipated project. 
 
The community of Preeceville of course is also looking forward 
to its centennial celebrations and has initiated a history book 
that they . . . a second edition, the first edition having been 
completed in 1982. So it will be a great project for them. They 
have their homecoming scheduled for a July long weekend as 
well. 
 
One of the other developments that doesn’t just affect 
Preeceville, Mr. Speaker, but also most recently in fact the Cote 
First Nation, is that a oil and gas company out of Winnipeg, 
Nordic Oil and Gas Ltd., has been in the area for a couple of 
years and has been doing some drilling — to the point that the 
results from the first well have initiated the company to in fact 
proceed with the drilling on a second well. And the optimism is 
tremendous, Mr. Speaker, in that the development now may 
expand to drilling on the Cote First Nation. And that whole area 
around Rockford, Usherville, through across to Cote First 
Nation, may in fact be an oil and gas development area of the 
future, Mr. Speaker. So there’s tremendous optimism in that 
whole area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third community I mentioned, of course, is the 
community of Kamsack. Kamsack again is the key or the 
gateway to the Duck Mountain Provincial Park. And one of the 
interesting things when I was in the community of Kamsack on 
Sunday of this past week, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to visit with 
the board of directors of and the mayor of Kamsack about a 
concern of the Eaglestone personal care home. And I was 
intrigued to learn that Preeceville . . . sorry, that Kamsack and 
the town of Kamsack, along with all of the municipalities 
around Kamsack, are the shareholders, I guess is the best term, 
of the largest not-for-profit level 1 and level 2 personal care 
home in the province. And that is Eaglestone Lodge personal 
care home. 
 

It’s a facility that I think we would all want to have in our 
communities, because what it does is provide care; it provides 
to the needs for level 1 and level 2 patients. And what those 
residents . . . And I shouldn’t call them patients because what 
they are really is residents of a family home, but it is just a 
larger family home that includes 42 residents. And within their 
suites, which of course are more independent individuals, there 
are five people in there. It’s full. It operates with a waiting list. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a facility that the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of east central Saskatchewan are 
very proud of. And we want to make sure that in fact that that 
facility continues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the other communities in my 
constituency, I quickly want to mention all of them so that I 
don’t exclude some of them that have spent a lot of time when 
they look at the centennial projects and start to develop. So very 
quickly, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the communities of 
Springside and Norquay and Sturgis and Buchanan and Pelly, 
they sort of fall into the next stage. And I noted when the 
member from Moose Jaw North was talking about the 
development of Saskatchewan, I’m going to begin with the 
community of Pelly. 
 
And I had the opportunity to visit the annual celebrations of the 
museum guild heritage group last summer and they took me out 
to what used to be Fort Livingstone. Now when I say used to 
be, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the rocks and the grass and the 
trees, that’s all you’ll see. You’ll see depressions where 
buildings used to be, but I was very intrigued to find out that 
Fort Livingstone in fact was the centre of government of the 
North-West Territories for two years. And in fact it actually was 
where the government conducted its business there. Then it 
became a North-West Mounted Police headquarters, and then it 
was determined that that would be moved out. 
 
Now unfortunately a fire completely destroyed everything, but 
the Pelly and area museum guild is actively pursuing . . . not 
just recognizing that a cairn is there to show people, but in fact 
that it can become a tourism centre. And they’re looking at 
rebuilding, and they’re working with federal officials from 
museum Canada and others. 
 
And I was at a public meeting there where they met with 
officials from Alberta and other centres, and I’ll tell you if 
enthusiasm is going to be a critical component of whether or not 
they’re going to be successful, this group will be successful. 
They’re looking at doing that, and they’re very active in that 
community. 
 
So when we look at their celebrations . . . on May 28 they’re 
going to have their official museum opening for the year, and 
that’s going to be a centennial kickoff. On August 1 they’re 
going to have their official centennial days. And of course on 
September 9, as they did last year, they’re going to have their 
annual museum guild day, and I’m sure that that’s going to be 
out again at Fort Livingstone. So I wish Pelly and area well in 
what they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Springside has already 
identified July 17 as their centennial days, and they have a 
packed weekend planned for the whole weekend even though 
they’ve only identified the 17th as their day of celebration. 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

The community of Buchanan has identified August 8 as their 
reunion days, and I know that there are hundreds of people who 
have already replied to the committee in Buchanan and are 
going to be returning to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I grew up in the community of Invermay, 
which was quite near to Sturgis, as I was a youngster and in my 
teens, when July 1 came along each and every year you were 
hopeful that your parents were going to take you to the Sturgis 
Sports Day. I mean that was the component that was just 
missing if you didn’t have the opportunity to go. And I recall a 
couple of times when in fact the Sturgis Sports Day was rained 
out, and that was just the most, you know, bitter disappointment 
that I had. 
 
And as I became older of course and returned back to the 
community, our fastball team that played ball for many, many a 
year used to enjoy going to the Sturgis Sports Day and Rodeo 
on July 1. And, Mr. Speaker, that event is still going to take 
place in the year 2005. Only this year they’re referring to it as 
the Sturgis Rodeo and Centennial Celebrations, and I know that 
they have a packed day planned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the little community of Veregin, 
even the little community of Veregin who experienced some 
rather tragic difficulties here over the past number of years with 
a number of fires that destroyed very critical buildings within 
that community, they have recognized July 17 as their National 
Doukhobor Heritage Day. And on that day they’re going to be 
celebrating the centennial as well. 
 
Norquay kicked off their celebrations by identifying an annual 
event called their ladies bonspiel that they had as the Centennial 
Ladies Bonspiel back in February. And I understand that they 
had not just curling teams there, but they just had a great 
amount of people return, former curlers that probably don’t curl 
very much right now, but they returned to celebrate the 
centennial. And they have other events. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on with all of those 
communities, but you can see that there is tremendous interest 
in recognizing the efforts of people, recognizing the efforts of 
the many people that have come before us in building this 
province and in building those communities. The smaller 
communities, as I’ve indicated there are about eight other urban 
communities that are going to work with their rural municipal 
councils. 
 
I just for a moment want to talk about my home town, which 
isn’t in the Canora-Pelly constituency. The community of 
Invermay is now in Kelvington-Wadena. But I know from a 
member who is on that centennial committee, they have had 
numerous meetings. And what took place there is that the 
centennial committee, which is operating through the recreation 
board, needed some funds to get started. So they went to the 
village of Invermay. And the village of Invermay has granted a 
loan of $750 to them, and the rural municipality of Invermay 
also granted them a loan of $750. So they have $1,500 of what 
I’ll call seed money, the ability to plan their events. And they 
have designated August 5, 6, and 7 — three days of celebration 
in Invermay. 
 
So when I look at my calendar and the invitations to all of the 

communities that I have to go to on August 4, 5, and 6, I think 
I’m going to be a fairly busy individual for those days. And I 
hope to in fact get back into my own community of Invermay to 
at least celebrate a little bit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated at the outset of my remarks and after 
having discussed this with the member from Swift Current, the 
Leader of the Official Opposition, when I look at the motion . . . 
and it talks about future opportunity. It talks about the 
foundation, and it talks about the things that have happened in 
the past. We have had a number of ideas that have been put 
forward by Saskatchewan residents. We have many ideas that 
we believe that the province of Saskatchewan should look at as 
it determines its future, that it determines the foundation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated at the very beginning, the 
motion that has been put forward is completely supported. But 
I’d like to indicate that I would move an amendment to amend 
the centennial motion by adding the following after “future for 
Saskatchewan,” the last three words of the motion: 
 

And that in order to move the province into the next 
century, this Assembly urge the government to adopt the 
following measures: 

 
(1) reduce provincial income tax for low-income residents; 
(2) build a new integrated health sciences facility at the 
University of Saskatchewan; (3) increase the food 
allowance for social assistance recipients; 
 
(4) celebrate Saskatchewan’s centennial by eliminating 
entry fees at all provincial parks in 2005; (5) establish a 
single health care agency for the entire province to 
maximize the use of Saskatchewan’s health facilities and 
human resources; (6) negotiate with the federal 
government for an eight-year exemption on 
Saskatchewan’s oil and gas revenues and their return to 
the 10-province standard for equalization payments; 
 
(7) recognize the treaties as the foundation for a 
partnership between First Nations and non-First Nations 
people in the economic and social development of 
Saskatchewan; (8) support a sustainable livestock industry 
by instituting a provincial capital tax exemption and 
providing a PST rebate on all capital costs associated with 
new or expanded beef processing capacity in 
Saskatchewan; (9) establish a children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon utilizing an existing acute care facility; 
 
(10) create Enterprise Saskatchewan as the central 
economic development agency of government in 
partnership with industry, local government, First Nations, 
labour, and post-secondary institutions to deliver on the 
promise of Saskatchewan; (11) increase training seats for 
medical professionals at Saskatchewan’s post-secondary 
institutions; (12) forgive a portion of student loan debt for 
doctors, nurses, and other health science graduates who 
choose to stay and work in Saskatchewan; 
 
(13) create a provincial fetal alcohol syndrome disorder 
(FASD) advisory board to address FASD issues in 
Saskatchewan and establish dedicated provincial FASD 
diagnostic centres; (14) establish crystal meth addiction 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

treatment centres capable of providing long-term treatment 
options and safe house facilities for high-risk individuals 
waiting for treatment; 
 
(15) coordinate a province-wide system of 
community-based organizations to address addictions 
issues and the shortage of detox and in-patient treatment 
facilities in the province; (16) dedicate a percentage of 
liquor and gaming revenues to addictions programs and 
facilities including dedicated facilities and programs for 
youth addiction services; (17) implement an aggressive 
public awareness campaign in all Saskatchewan schools 
about the dangers of crystal meth; 
 
(18) partner with the Government of Canada to building 
three new all-weather roads in Northern Saskatchewan to 
facilitate sustainable northern communities and sustainable 
northern economic development; (19) increase the amount 
a social assistant recipient can earn from employment 
while on assistance; (20) consult with First Nations and 
Métis people in the development, and prior to the 
implementation, of provincial legislation that impacts on 
the jurisdiction of Saskatchewan’s First Nations . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — 
 

(21) establish new growth tax incentives to encourage 
private sector investment in new or existing Saskatchewan 
businesses; (22) create a community infrastructure 
investment fund that pays an income tax-free return to 
Saskatchewan residents who invest in community 
infrastructure projects; (23) establish a provincial youth 
justice board to address youth crime, rehabilitation, and 
restitution measures . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — 
 

(24) create a diabetes health centre of excellence to 
improve the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes; (25) 
establish designated provincial conservation areas and 
protected wild spaces within Saskatchewan provincial 
parks; (26) make instruction in the history and content of 
the treaties signed between First Nations and the 
Government of Canada a part of the provincial core 
curriculum; 
 
(27) increase funding for K to 12 education to provide 
short- and long-term property tax relief; (28) create 
innovation schools within our publicly funded K to 12 
education system to deliver enhanced educational 
programming; (29) implement the SchoolPLUS program in 
all school divisions in Saskatchewan . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — 
 

(30) implement a program to reduce surgical waiting lists 
to the national average within four years; (31) make the 
University of Saskatchewan a centre for health excellence 
in North America; (32) support the expansion of 
entrepreneurial training to include every high school in 
Saskatchewan; 
 
(33) commit all provincial fuel tax revenue as a minimum 
annual investment in provincial and municipal 
transportation construction and renewal; (34) restore 
fairness to provincial public sector contract settlements by 
negotiating fair compensation packages that are 
competitive with other provincial jurisdictions in Canada; 
(35) establish an effective one-stop agency to facilitate the 
delivery of services to children, families, and individuals 
in need; 
 
(36) establish annual performance and productivity targets 
for all government departments and agencies; (37) 
implement a province-wide business retention program 
through Enterprise Saskatchewan; (38) establish a seniors’ 
advocate office that will function as a single-window 
access for seniors seeking assistance in dealing with the 
provincial government; 
 
(39) increase funding to cultural agencies by reducing the 
fee charged by the provincial government to administer the 
lottery licensing agreement; (40) support healthy 
communities by providing an annual grant to address 
energy costs in community-owned recreational facilities; 
(41) encourage new private sector investment in 
Saskatchewan-based, value-added enterprises through 
tax-free returns on long-term investment growth and 
dividend payments; 
 
(42) create an environmental centre of excellence at the 
University of Regina, mandated to develop 
environmentally friendly technology for the energy, 
mining, forestry, transportation, agriculture, and utilities 
industries; (43) support a non-partisan, professional civil 
service where government policy is clearly communicated 
by cabinet and implemented by well-trained public 
servants; (44) expand development of Saskatchewan’s 
uranium industry; 
 
(45) establish a fully independent Crown utility rate 
review board; (46) create a single water management 
agency in Saskatchewan to develop, manage, and conserve 
Saskatchewan’s water resources; (47) fully fund 
Saskatchewan’s share of any federal-provincial agriculture 
program to which the province is a signatory; 
 
(48) create a centrally dispatched emergency medical 
response system, EMS, to coordinate the delivery of EMS 
air and ground services in Saskatchewan; (49) reorganize 
provincial EMS to include emergency fixed and rotary 
wing service in partnership with the STARS program in 
Alberta; (50) create a comprehensive and seamless patient 
referral service in the province; 
 
(51) provide Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions 
with stable, long-term, multi-year funding commitments; 
(52) make Saskatchewan the first small business tax-free 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

zone in Canada; (53) aggressively expand Saskatchewan’s 
irrigation capacity as a central component of 
Saskatchewan’s long-term agribusiness and economic 
development plan; 
 
(54) restore trust and confidence in Saskatchewan’s justice 
system by undertaking a comprehensive justice review; 
(55) mandate Saskatchewan’s major Crown corporations 
to provide high quality utility and insurance services at the 
lowest possible cost; (56) implement a Crown dividend 
policy that establishes net return levels adequate to meet 
Crown reinvestment requirements and directs excess 
Crown profits to a dedicated infrastructural renewal fund; 
 
(57) review the mandate and dividend policy of 
Saskatchewan’s major Crown corporations every five 
years; (58) review provincial government competition with 
existing private sector businesses; (59) expand home care 
services to encourage independent living for seniors; 
 
(60) create a health care Bill of Rights and 
Responsibilities; (61) establish a health care commissioner 
to measure, monitor, and report to the people of 
Saskatchewan on the quality of health care; (62) establish 
a one-stop service for businesses and investors interested 
in starting or expanding a business in Saskatchewan; 
 
(63) work with other provinces and the federal government 
to negotiate a long-term agriculture support and risk 
management program that creates greater financial 
stability for producers and financial institutions; (64) 
review the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program with a 
view to expanding coverage and reducing risk; 
 
(65) support partnerships between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and provincial post-secondary institutions 
to promote research, development, and commercialization 
of science and technology; (66) participate in 
public-private partnerships to assist in commercialization 
of Saskatchewan-based research and innovation including 
investments in the life sciences, health sciences, 
synchrotron science, and renewable energy; 
 
(67) give every K to 12 student in Saskatchewan a 
Saskatchewan centennial tree to plant; (68) establish set 
provincial election dates every four years; (69) establish an 
enhanced business nominee program for immigrants with 
skills and investment capital to increase immigration and 
attract new investment capital; 
 
(70) negotiate a new municipal revenue sharing agreement 
based in part on provincial owned sources, revenues, and 
the municipalities’ ability to raise local property in tax 
revenue; (71) establish fair and balanced labour legislation 
that respects the collective bargaining process and 
removes barriers to investment, job creation, and 
economic growth; (72) support voluntary municipal 
amalgamation; 
 
(73) complete a value-for-money audit for the provincial 
health care system; (74) build partnerships with other 
jurisdictions for patient referral; (75) complete the 
development of an integrated health information network 

in Saskatchewan; 
 
(76) implement a four-year plan to move to 100 per cent 
provincial funding of health care capital projects; (77) 
establish a provincial family care tax credit for renovation 
of existing homes or construction of new homes to 
accommodate care of elderly or disabled family members; 
(78) establish a provincial caregiver tax credit to assist in 
the care of elderly family members or family members 
with mental or physical disabilities; 
 
(79) establish a provincial tax credit to assist parents in the 
cost of child care; (80) investigate the establishment of a 
research Chair in occupational health and safety at one of 
Saskatchewan’s universities to improve the health and 
safety of all workers in Saskatchewan; (81) invest in 
improved online distance education programs to enhance 
local educational opportunities, especially in rural and 
remote areas; 
 
(82) establish a partnership with First Nations to increase 
participation rates and improve educational outcomes for 
First Nations students; (83) increase provincial tax credits 
for research, development, and commercialization 
performed in Saskatchewan; (84) strengthen support for 
local recycling programs to preserve our environment and 
reduce stress on community landfills; 
 
(85) establish a stand-alone department of forestry with the 
mandate to facilitate the environmentally sustainable, 
long-term growth of Saskatchewan’s forestry industry; 
(86) make Saskatchewan the energy heart of North 
America by assessing the potential for further 
development of power generation from wind, clean coal, 
natural gas, nuclear, biomass, coal bed methane, ethanol, 
solar, oil sands, cogeneration, and hydrogen fuel cell 
technology; 
 
(87) reduce capital gains on proceeds reinvested in 
Saskatchewan from the sale of a Saskatchewan business or 
property; (88) encourage the establishment of a Western 
Canadian transportation hub and a north-south 
transportation and trade corridor in Saskatchewan; (89) 
create a province-wide transportation policy to encourage 
population and economic growth and sustainability; 
 
(90) review Saskatchewan’s student loan program to 
ensure access to post-secondary education for all qualified 
Saskatchewan students regardless of economic 
circumstance; (91) review all government regulations 
every five years with a view to eliminating barriers to 
environmentally sustainable economic growth; (92) 
address the impending shortage of qualified public sector 
employees by directing the Public Service Commission to 
develop an aggressive strategy for recruiting and retraining 
qualified public servants; 
 
(93) support an open and transparent selection process for 
provincial justices; (94) strengthen the ability of the 
provincial maintenance enforcement office to ensure 
compliance with maintenance orders; (95) strengthen 
police authority and discretion in advising the public of the 
presence of potentially dangerous violent or sex offenders 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

in communities and/or neighbourhoods; 
 
(96) partner with other provincial governments in Western 
Canada to deliver services where costs can be reduced and 
services improved; (97) work in partnership with First 
Nations and Métis people to implement existing 
agreements and develop new agreements to build our 
province; 
 
(98) streamline Saskatchewan’s interprovincial trucking 
and transportation regulations; and (99) eliminate any 
government fee that costs more to collect than it raises in 
revenue. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move this amendment to the 
motion, seconded by the member for Moosomin. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — With respect, I have received a motion which 
is an amendment to the main motion moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current. The amendment to the motion is moved by the member 
for Canora-Pelly, seconded by the member for Moosomin. Will 
the members take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The debate then will continue on the 
substance of the amendment only. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure today to stand in this Assembly and speak to the 
motion as it’s been amended and added to as my colleague, the 
member from Canora-Pelly, had indicated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a time of celebration in the 
province of Saskatchewan as this province reflects back on its 
past, the past 100 years. 
 
And when the motion was brought forward by the Premier 
yesterday, the Premier mentioned a fair bit about the rich 
history of this province. The Leader of the Opposition, the 
member from Swift Current, talked about the history of this 
province. And they both mentioned the fact that each and every 
one of us as members, Mr. Speaker, can think back to many 
discussions we’ve heard as young, as we were growing . . . as 
young individuals in our communities and in our homes and 
listening to the debate and the discussion surrounding how our 
grandparents or great-grandparents arrived in this country, 
arrived in this province. 
 
And they came, Mr. Speaker, because they had a vision. They 
had a desire to strike out something new and with a vision to 
build a life for themselves, for their family. And indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, to indeed look at how they could build a province as 
this province, as Saskatchewan became a province in the year of 
1905. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all stand here today and we have different 
thoughts and different views as to how we perceive 

Saskatchewan and how we look at how well the province has 
done over the past 100 years. Our accomplishments, Mr. 
Speaker, we think back and we look at the accomplishments. 
 
And as we arrive at this milestone, we not only think back to 
the past but we begin to look to the future, Mr. Speaker. We 
begin to look at what this province will be down the road. 
 
And I think about the communities in the constituency of 
Moosomin. Mr. Speaker, I think about the different 
communities and I look at a number of the communities in the 
constituency of Moosomin. Many of the communities along the 
Trans-Canada, along the CP Rail, which was the main rail line 
at the time, that was the railway that was used by many of 
pioneers when they came to this country. Mr. Speaker, people 
left areas in Europe and they came across the Atlantic. They 
arrived in Halifax, Mr. Speaker, they got on the rail and they 
travelled west. Some stopped in Ontario, some stopped in 
Manitoba. At the time, Mr. Speaker, they were stopping in an 
area called the North-West Territories. And many arrived in the 
area of Saskatchewan at that time which is part of the 
North-West Territories, Mr. Speaker, got off the rail in 
Moosomin and then found a mode of transportation which was 
either purchasing an ox or a horse and travelled to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I just want to bring the member 
to order on a matter which is rather unique to this legislature at 
this time, because the nature of the amendment is unique and 
has not been . . . this type of amendment has not been heard in 
the legislature for some time — the nature of this amendment 
being that it only adds to the motion, it does not present a 
different proposition to the original question. Therefore, that the 
debate that should occur until the disposal of the amendment 
should be restricted to the desirability of the additions that are 
mentioned in the amendment rather than having the debate 
concurrently on the amendment and on the main motion. 
 
The authority for this is given to us in Erskine May, 20th 
edition, page 395, and I will quote from a sentence about in the 
middle of 395: 
 

If it is intended only to modify the question [referring to 
the amendment] by leaving out or adding words, debate 
should be restricted to the desirability of the omission or 
the addition of those words. 

 
So I would just ask the member from Moosomin to bear that in 
mind. And I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
when we talk about the motion before us, we talk about the 
amendment which adds to the motion, Mr. Speaker — I might 
add that — adds to the motion, and, Mr. Speaker, that 
amendment adds to the motion in the fact that it talks about a 
further vision for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I think about the vision that we look at moving forward 
into the new century, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but think back to 
the early parts of the 1900s when Saskatchewan became a 
province and the vision and the hopes and the dreams that our 
forefathers had when they came to this province. They came to 
this province, Mr. Speaker, with a hope, with a dream to build a 
province, to build a place where they would be able to pass on 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

to the younger generation, Mr. Speaker, opportunities too as 
we’ve seen in the amendment and as we look to the future of 
enhanced education for the young people back in the early days; 
as they looked at how they could provide better health care and 
opportunities for their children and the generations to follow 
them, Mr. Speaker, to indeed have access to the health care 
opportunities that would meet the needs of themselves and their 
children and the generations that would be following them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look at the amendment before us and with a 
vision for the future, Mr. Speaker, we look at the fact that the 
amendment which adds to this motion calls on this province to 
look forward, to look forward with a vision as to how we build 
the future of the province. And we can’t help but think that 
when you look at the number of provisions in the amendment 
and when it calls for additional changes needed in our health 
care system, we look back at where we’ve been; we look at 
where we are today, Mr. Speaker; and we can’t help but think 
that we need to have a greater vision for the delivery of health 
care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no matter how you cut it, why do we call for a 
greater vision? Why do we look forward at how we can enhance 
health care delivery? Because there are many concerns that the 
people of this province have today in regards to how health care 
is delivered. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the community of Moosomin has 
been struggling for the past number of years for a new health 
care facility because they want to meet the needs of, not only 
the residents of today, but they’re looking, Mr. Speaker, to 
build for the future. Because they’re looking at how, how can 
they enhance the lifestyle of the men and women and young 
adults and the children that would call that area, that community 
and that area home, if they don’t have quality health care to 
deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think back to our forefathers and the visions they 
had. I think back to the many people who left Europe, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think back to one of the dreams they had was 
coming to this country. And I think it doesn’t matter where you 
go in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you see that 
men and women’s . . . the dreams of our forefathers were 
centred around two things, being able to build businesses for 
themselves and enterprises. 
 
But as well, Mr. Speaker, we have across this province, we have 
centres where people gather to worship over the years. And one 
of the things that I know as I think back to the Hungarian 
community that I’m a part of, Mr. Speaker, in the Bekevar area, 
whether it’s the Hungarian community, whether it was the 
German community, or whichever community, the French 
community, Mr. Speaker. We’re reminded of time and time and 
we will be reminded into the future, Mr. Speaker, that the early 
pioneers, one of the first things they did as they first of all 
established a place for them to call home, a place to live, that 
they immediately built themselves a place to worship. Because 
they came to this country, Mr. Speaker, with a vision of not 
only building a business and a home environment, Mr. Speaker, 
but also building places of worship where they could establish a 
community gathering place. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the future in that vein. 
Even as we celebrate the many centennial celebrations that will 
be, that we all will be participating in this upcoming year, Mr. 
Speaker. Most communities will be thinking back to their 
forefathers, why they came, why the community was 
established, and how they celebrated. And we’re going to look 
forward. Now that we’re celebrating our centennial celebration 
we look forward to the new ideas and where do we go in the 
future, Mr. Speaker? What are we hoping to accomplish as we 
move into the next centennial? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the issues I think we need to look at 
very closely and is certainly brought forward in the amendment, 
Mr. Speaker, is recognizing the treaties with our First Nations 
people, building partnerships with our First Nations 
communities. And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the First 
Nations communities and building partnerships in the 
constituency of Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, we have, I believe 
there is six different reserves now a part of the constituency of 
Moosomin, that I’ve had the privilege of getting to meet 
leadership in those constituencies. And I’ve had the privilege of 
getting to meet young people in those constituencies, in those 
communities that have a vision for the future. They have a 
desire to build something better for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether it be the community of the Chacachas 
First Nation or Kahkewistahaw First Nation or Ochapowace, 
Sakimay, Cowessess, or Carry the Kettle, each and every one of 
these First Nations communities, Mr. Speaker, have a desire to 
build something new and forward-looking for the young people. 
Because they want to see their young people move forward in 
this community, in their community, in this province, to help 
build this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but think that we are beginning 
to see many First Nations young people and leadership looking 
forward to the future with new ideas. What do they do to 
address the issue of drugs or alcohol on the reserve? How do 
they challenge their children to look beyond what may have 
been parts of the past and begin to build for the future? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even in this city, we see many First Nations 
individuals who have moved forward and have entered into 
post-secondary education, who have become lawyers, who have 
become spokespersons, are involved in the delivery of our 
health care programs in the province of Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to look at how we work with First 
Nations people, to help them enhance and build and move 
forward as they look forward to the future, as they look forward 
to becoming an integral part of continuing to build the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need to really be careful, as we look 
forward with a vision, that we include all peoples. And, Mr. 
Speaker, back in the past we may have been, we may have 
settled upon working with the communities and the many 
immigrants who came to this province. But I know the many 
immigrants who came to this province also learned how to work 
and to live with the First Nations community of that day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the very important issues we need to look 
at, as we look at building our future in the province, as we look 
at a new vision for this province, is a sustainable livestock 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

industry. Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us, in fact most of 
the members in this Assembly, have an understanding of what 
we’re talking about when we talk about a sustainable livestock 
industry. Because, Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of the 
implications of the problems that have been created as a result 
of the BSE situation we are currently facing and the border that 
has been closed, or access to the American border for the 
livestock, for the cattle in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We look at building, we look at building a sustainable industry 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I talked to many of 
my constituents. I talked to individuals at SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] this past 
week, Mr. Speaker. And I’m beginning to come across more 
and more individuals who are not just talking of the fact that, 
yes, it’s imperative that we work to get the border open so cattle 
can move back and forth in a free trade environment, Mr. 
Speaker. But Mr. Speaker, we’re also talking about individuals 
who are now beginning to look beyond the fact that, if this 
border doesn’t open, what do we do to address the current crisis 
in the livestock sector? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we talk about a sustainable livestock 
industry. What is part of developing a sustainable livestock 
industry? I believe, Mr. Speaker, part of developing a 
sustainable livestock industry in this province is looking ahead 
and saying to ourselves, maybe we shouldn’t be marketing all 
of our livestock. We shouldn’t just be sending our calves out of 
the province and specifically to the United States. Maybe we 
shouldn’t be necessarily sending our slaughter animals across 
the border to be processed. Maybe it’s time, Mr. Speaker, we 
established new slaughter and packaging facilities in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, years ago we had a number of packing facilities in 
this province. And had they still been . . . continued to work and 
be up and functioning today, we may not be facing the crisis 
we’re having today. So we look at building a sustainable 
livestock program in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have in my constituency, the 
constituency of Moosomin for example, a number of producers 
who have already rallied together and they’re currently 
remodelling a plant in Wolseley to turn it into a processing 
facility, Mr. Speaker, because they have already began to look 
beyond where we were yesterday and saying, you know, we 
have to do more than just marketing the live cattle. 
 
They’re in the process of building their slaughter facility so that 
they can begin to slaughter and process animals in the area, in 
the Moosomin constituency and the Wolseley area, Mr. 
Speaker, and indeed begin to add value to those . . . to that 
livestock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s imperative and I want to compliment the 
producers and the many producers who have got onboard by 
taking out shares in this Natural Valley Farms, Mr. Speaker, or 
who have committed animals to the facility. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of the day that’s what’s going to help . . . 
part of what’s going to help us overcome the crisis we are 
facing as a result of the BSE problem in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
And what does this mean, Mr. Speaker? It means to 
communities like Wolseley and the rich heritage that they have, 
or the area around Wolseley — Grenfell, Montmartre, Candiac 
— Mr. Speaker, it means that we not only add a processing 
facility but we’re going to add jobs in the area. We’re going to 
bring jobs, we’re going to bring economic activity into that 
area, Mr. Speaker, economic activity which is going to enhance 
the well-being of individuals, of farm families. 
 
And certainly we are quite well aware of the difficulty farm 
families are facing today and the crunch they are facing as a 
result of — not only the livestock sector, but also the grains 
industry — as a result of the frost damage that many farmers 
experienced across the eastern side of the province last year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we talk about adding value to our agricultural community, 
and value comes by getting into processing plants. And rather 
than always exporting the raw community, Mr. Speaker, we 
need to look at ways in which we can enhance, because as we 
begin to process, we add value to the carcass of that animal that 
we move into the food chain. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We have the individuals who are as good at feeding livestock 
and feeding quality animals, that we can, Mr. Speaker, market a 
quality product not only in this country but indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, to other parts of the world. 
 
And so it’s imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we look at it — and 
we’ve talked about this for quite a while — that we build a 
vision for tomorrow by looking at ways in which we can add 
real value to the many commodities that are produced on the 
farms in the province of Saskatchewan, whether it be the grain 
sector, whether it be pulse crops, Mr. Speaker, or the livestock 
industry, as I’ve been talking about today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we talk about industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We ask ourselves: how do we add value to the 
many natural resources that are part of Saskatchewan? For a 
good period of time, we basically have hung our hats on the 
potash industry. We’ve hung our hats on the oil sector. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s time to look beyond just the potash and the oil and 
the natural gas in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of adding value and . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
part of adding value and a vision for the future in agriculture is 
even at getting into the . . . adding value in the area of ethanol 
production. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a fair bit of research has 
been done in the past, and we know that more research is going 
to be done into the future as to the viability of an ethanol 
industry. And I would suggest to you that there . . . we have 
reached a point where there is certainly the opportunity to add 
to and expand the ethanol industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan, adding value not only to agriculture products, 
but indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, creating job opportunities. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard for the longest time of the 
number of young people leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 
And what that’s telling us is that we need to create real job 
opportunities for our young people so that gives them a reason 
to remain in this province, to become contributors to the 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

province of Saskatchewan as not only citizens contributing to 
their community, but also contributing to the province through 
their tax dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about building our resources and building 
on our resources, and the province of Saskatchewan has 
numerous resources, whether it be in forestry, whether it be in 
mining, or as I’ve already mentioned, in the oil and gas sector 
or coal. 
 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking about 
coal, I was chatting with a couple of people at SARM last week 
who had recently come back from meetings in the States and 
they were talking about ways in which we can do more to 
enhance the economic activity around our coal supplies; not just 
using coal to fire generators to produce electricity, but indeed 
using coal to produce other means of economic activity through 
further gasification and addressing other areas where we just 
expand the use of coal. And indeed at the end of the day, as 
well, address the issues surrounding the Kyoto accord that our 
province has signed on to, or our country has signed on to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about a vision for this province. We talk 
about enhanced development in the uranium industry. We have 
talked about enhanced development in mining in northern 
Saskatchewan. We’re talking about and we’re all aware of the 
activity and the potential for diamond mining in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have resources beyond measure in this 
province and we need to find ways of how we can begin to use 
those resources to build a future for the province of 
Saskatchewan, for the young men and women who are currently 
in our public school system today who will be in our 
post-secondary school system tomorrow, whether it’s university 
or whether it’s SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology], Mr. Speaker, who are going to be 
moving from those areas of education and looking for job 
opportunities. Looking to build upon the province of 
Saskatchewan to build a better future for the younger 
generations of tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do have a rich heritage and we, as I’ve 
indicated, will be over the next year taking the time . . . over 
this year, through this year, taking the time in many 
communities. We’ll be celebrating with great pride, taking great 
pride as they celebrate our centennial year. 
 
But they will not only be celebrating what’s happened in the 
past, they will be looking forward to the future and how do we 
build upon that future. How do we work to enhance health care 
delivery, how do we work to enhance job opportunities, how do 
we work to develop the resource sector. How do we build our 
communities so that young people will want to remain, and not 
just in the larger centres like Regina or Saskatoon, if you will, 
Moose Jaw or the Yorktons, but certainly communities like 
Moosomin or Kipling or Glenavon. People still have a rich 
pride in the communities that they’ve grown up in. And I can 
see, as the Premier has mentioned, as the Leader of the 
Opposition has mentioned, as members have already talked 
about today, communities will be looking to how they can build 
for the future while they celebrate the past. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly . . . I want to take this time to 
say this to Saskatchewan residents — yes, we can take pride in 
our past. Yes, we can take pride as we celebrate to enhance . . . 
as we celebrate this year of centennial. And I know that as I 
think of the many communities in my constituency, I think of 
communities like Wolseley and Grenfell and Moosomin and 
even Whitewood in particular. Because of the fact that they 
were some of the first communities, there’s a rich heritage in 
those communities. And for a period of time we kind of forgot 
about that heritage. 
 
But I want to compliment the communities because they took 
the time. They started looking at some of the buildings in their 
communities and said, you know, we shouldn’t be pushing 
these buildings down. There’s history here. There’s a heritage 
here. Let’s refurbish some of these buildings so that people can 
look back at the past, but let’s look beyond as we build to the 
future and look at the heritage that we can pass on to our young 
people. Mr. Speaker, I take great pride in seconding the 
amendment as brought forward by my colleague, the member 
from Canora. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to speak specifically to the amendment that is 
before the Assembly and offer a few comments. This 
amendment, the substance of it is derived from a pamphlet 
which has been put forward by the members opposite. It’s their 
latest attempt to generate public interest in their party. I suppose 
their fortunes must be flagging. They see the need to stimulate 
public interest in their party and so is their latest vision — and 
they have new visions every three months or so. As their latest 
vision, they’ve come forward with a number of points here that 
they hope will stimulate interest in them. This is, if you like, 
Mr. Speaker, this is their vision du jour. This is their vision of 
the moment. I expect that we will see lots more visions from the 
members opposite. 
 
But at the end of the day, to incorporate their pamphlet, if you 
will, into this motion where we seek to celebrate the 
contributions of the people of Saskatchewan, is — no less than, 
no more than — a gimmick. This amendment is a gimmick by 
them and they’re well-known, Mr. Speaker, for their 
gimmickry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as to the substance of the amendment, when you 
go through the lists, there are many ideas, so-called, that the 
government is in the process of implementing and is working 
on. But there are other ideas, Mr. Speaker, that we would have 
grave reservations about and that the people of Saskatchewan 
may have reservations about. And so there are many ideas on 
topical matters that may have people in 100 years wondering 
what that was all about. 
 
There are also on this list, Mr. Speaker, some omissions. And I 
note one glaring omission, and that glaring omission is to 
address the question of fiscal management, that how it is that 
you can put forward, how it is that you can put forward a list of 
what you think are ideas that will improve society, improve the 
ability of the provincial government to reach out to the people 
of Saskatchewan and to improve their economy or to improve 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

education, to improve health, to improve any number of things 
to do that, and to have in this list of ideas no end of ideas about 
how to increase spending, ideas about how to cut taxes. 
 
And that not one of them, not one of them would have in their 
coffee row session when they sat down to talk about these 
things, not one of them would’ve said, you know, I think we 
should put something in there about the budget; we should put 
something in there to make sure that we have balanced budgets 
— we should make sure that we include that. 
 
I would’ve thought that the seconder of the amendment, the 
member for Moosomin, who is, I think if I’m correct, the last 
serving member, now serving member of that previous 
administration — the Grant Devine administration which also 
had ideas but never concerned themselves about the 
affordability of ideas, also had proposals for tax cuts, never 
concerned themselves with the affordability of these tax cuts — 
that member, surely that member might have raised some 
consideration about this point or these other points, or 
cumulatively, all these points raises some issues about 
affordability. You thought you might have heard that from that 
member. But no, that member didn’t raise that concern. You 
think you might have heard that from some of the other 
members opposite who pride themselves in being fiscal 
conservatives. You think that one of them might have said, you 
know, there’s a little issue here of affordability and we should 
put something in this about balancing our budgets, doing this in 
some affordable way. But there’s nothing like that. 
 
[16:00] 
 
So now the members opposite are saying, we recognize this is a 
glaring omission, a glaring omission by them. And they’re now 
appealing to us, they’re appealing to us, Mr. Speaker, to 
improve this pamphlet of theirs by adding this notion of fiscal 
management, this notion of balanced budgets because they’d 
forgotten about it. Well what kind of a message would that be 
for their supporters, that the government at the end of the day 
had to bail them out because of this glaring omission on their 
part, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just again point out that the ideas they put 
forward have a huge price tag, a huge price tag. The ideas they 
put forward are not accompanied by any kind of framework in 
terms of affordability. And, Mr. Speaker, so when we look at 
this amendment again, we recognize these amendments come 
from their latest pamphlet, their latest vision. I guess this is a 
new one over the one they had three months ago. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, every three months . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Every three months, my colleague 
says, they have a new vision. Well, Mr. Speaker, this 
amendment, this amendment is no more, no less than a gimmick 
and we on this side of the House will not be supporting the 
amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to get up and speak to this amendment on behalf of my 

constituents in Arm River-Watrous. My constituency, like many 
of my colleagues’ constituencies, has a rich rural legacy. Our 
century in Saskatchewan is a colourful tapestry of pioneering, 
rapid development, community building, and working together. 
And this centennial celebration should be about ideas, about the 
ideas I have presented here because when I go around from 
community to community, constituency to other constituencies, 
what they want is this province to grow. They want ideas from 
their government, they want ways that they can make this 
province grow and thrive with that. 
 
When I go to communities that will be celebrating their 
celebrations, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . in Imperial, June 11. I’ve 
been asked . . . Many commitments I have to attend this coming 
up summer. June 11, 2005, in Imperial; June 12, Loreburn; July 
1 . . . June 25, Bladworth; July 1, Jansen and Watrous. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, July 9, I’ll be attending a celebration in 
Dundurn; July 15, Govan is having a celebration; July 30 is 
Davidson’s celebration; and also Wynyard is planning a 
celebration in September. Plus many other communities in my 
constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are in the planning stages of 
picking dates, of getting back to me, wanting me to come. 
 
And what they will want at their events is ideas of how this 
province is going to grow, what it’s going to grow, what it’s 
going to look like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the next 100 years. 
They also want to celebrate about the past too, because I mean 
that’s part of this, of the province, of your heritage, of your 
past, and the future. The two, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they go 
hand in hand when it comes to talking about ideas and dealing 
with the amendment. 
 
You know, I had a constituent that called me recently to suggest 
an important way that we could indeed honour those who 
helped build Saskatchewan. This gentleman suggested the 
government supply each community with a centennial flag that 
could be flown over the cemeteries in that community. He went 
on to say that this is the least we could do to thank them for the 
commitment and dedication through many hard times that 
helped build this province. 
 
And that’s an idea. And that’s what this amendment is dealing 
with that we’re talking about today, is ideas, Mr. Speaker, ideas 
how to grow this province. 
 
My grandfathers had an idea. They had an idea when they were 
in the old country, in Croatia, to come to a new country, to 
build something, to come here and build something, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And when they came there from . . . And I also want 
to make just one note. In Brkich the “r” is a vowel, so to my 
colleagues here and on the other side and my constituents that 
have bugged me for many years that I’m missing a vowel, I just 
want you to know in the Croatian language, the “r” is a vowel. 
But my grandfathers, they came here to build something new. 
They came here in the early 1900s and to settle, to settle here 
and to build a future and to build families, Mr. Speaker, and to 
bring ideas and to get away maybe from some of the old ideas 
that were from the old country that held people back that were 
in the class system of monarchies that were . . . either in 
dictatorships. They came here and with that, Mr. Speaker, came 
many, many people that came here to grow this province with 
it, and with them they brought many ideas. And that’s what 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

they’re going to be looking forward in the future is for ideas 
from their government, Mr. Speaker, how to grow this province. 
 
I mean, it’s just not . . . The celebrations just won’t be talking 
about the past, honouring them, which is good. We need to 
honour the people that built this great province, but we also 
have to look towards the future and that takes a lot of courage 
and some changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can remember the premier, the first premier of this province, 
he had a vision, Mr. Speaker, that within the next 100 years that 
this province would host anywhere between 3 to 5 million 
dollars. That’s why this legislature was built this size, this big, 
that when he knew he would be gone, but he was thinking that 
when we would be celebrating 100 years that there would be 
between 3 to 5 million people at least in this province. 
 
Well this province hasn’t lived up to that and that, Mr. Speaker, 
is a shame on that end of it, and something that needs to be 
rectified in the next 100 years. Making statements, when people 
read this, I would like to be able to say that in the next 100 
years there is 3 to 5 million people here, or 7 or 8 million 
people here to grow this province and to keep it growing, Mr. 
Speaker, at that end of it. 
 
You talk about one of the ideas we mentioned in here is 
immigration. I think we’re the worst of all the provinces for 
immigration. I think there was only 200 that applied last year 
compared to I think Manitoba, which had over 1,000, I believe. 
That’s something we can use because that’s what grew this 
province was immigration. That’s where everybody came from. 
You know that’s what started this province. Your First Nations 
were here. But they . . . It was immigration with them people 
that grew this province and I think that’s something that we 
have to look forward to. 
 
Agriculture is another way that I think this government has 
ignored the potential to grow this province. This present 
government has kind of forgot about its roots in agriculture. The 
minister today talked about the CAIS commitments. It took him 
12 months to fully, to fully fund CAIS. Now I have constituents 
that got their share of money for the 2003 crop year, got it in 
last year of July, and they’re still waiting, Mr. Speaker, for the 
2003 crop payments from the province of Saskatchewan. It still 
hasn’t come. So that’s like a year and a half they haven’t 
received their money, their share, their portion of the money of 
the government. And now the present Agriculture minister says 
he doesn’t know if he’s going to fund the 2004 CAIS, so he’s 
leaving them people hanging by a thread. When they go to the 
bank, the bank says, well I don’t know if you’re going to get all 
your money or not; we can’t lend you all the money. 
 
Right now they’re facing many difficulties out there in rural 
Saskatchewan when it comes to planting the crops coming in 
this year. As everybody knows, the commodity prices are very, 
very low. Banks are tightening up. Without that commitment 
from the provincial government, you know, a lot of farm 
families may look at packing it in. 
 
I was looking at the auction sale bills which I think a lot of the 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] have in their 
area. And there’s a lot of auction sales again coming up and a 
lot of the people that are retiring are 50 years old. They’re just 

saying, we’re not going to fight it any more; we’re tired of it, 
we’re going to maybe sell out while we can, Mr. Speaker, at 
that end of it. 
 
You know, and agriculture was a very, very bright spot in this 
province, and it still should be, Mr. Speaker, dealing with 
agriculture and dealing with it with the amendment. There is 
several amendments dealing with agriculture on it. One of them 
is to fully fund in this . . . in the amendment is to, if you sign, if 
you sign an agreement with the federal government, if you 
signed it, if you put your signature on it, that you will fully fund 
that program. 
 
Now out in rural Saskatchewan where I come from, when you 
sign your hand to something, it means your word is worth 
something. That means that you’re going to fully do what you 
said you were going to do. Well so far this province hasn’t did 
that, Mr. Speaker, and talking . . . This amendment on 
agriculture, on that particular issue right there, that is one of 
them, that if you’re going to sign an agreement — because 
that’s an agreement that the farmers took when the province 
says that they were going to . . . they signed on to CAIS — that 
they assumed that they would be getting their fair share of the 
money. And then the province, after they signed it, decided at 
first, no we weren’t going to, which they didn’t in 2002. I’ve 
still got calls from constituents that were shortchanged money. 
 
I had one that didn’t get his share from the province, his $5,000. 
Like, you know, the people over here, if part of their paycheque 
was docked by $5,000 . . . He said he had bills due and that 
$5,000 was slated to pay the fuel bill in the fall. That $5,000 in 
2002 didn’t come from the province, Mr. Speaker. Yet he had 
to go off the farm and get a job to pay that bill, to pay to cover 
the cost of that fuel so he could farm another year because the 
province didn’t fully fund CAIS in 2002. 
 
Now the farm families in 2004 are facing the same issue, Mr. 
Speaker. They are facing the same issues out there again. Is this 
province going to fully fund CAIS? Is it going to? Right now 
they don’t know. So when they go to the bank, the bank says, 
hey, you know, we can only lend you maybe 75 or 60 per cent 
of the money you need, the operating loans that you need to 
actually start your farming operation, while this government 
plays games with the feds again and we don’t know whether 
they’re going to sign on that again, on that end of it. 
 
Another dealing with the ideas in this amendment, is when I go 
from constituency to constituency I’ve got — and community to 
community — I’ve got many interest groups, groups that are 
interested in starting meat-packing plants. And they have asked 
me what the government is doing to help them at that end of it, 
Mr. Speaker. And so I phoned the minister’s office and asked 
him. And then he told me I had to submit it in writing, so I 
submitted the thing in writing. And I thought he would submit it 
back but I got a phone call from one of the aides there and says, 
well basically that they had commissioned a study for $55,000 
on the packing industry that probably says it isn’t very viable in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s about the only thing that he told me. 
He says that’s the only thing we’re doing out there right now, 
he said. 
 
Well one of the issues that deals in this amendment is maybe of 
reinvesting if you have a sale of Saskatchewan . . . in 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

Saskatchewan, of reinvesting that. If you reinvest that locally in 
Saskatchewan you get a tax incentive, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
some tax issues dealing in this document that maybe will help 
investment in rural Saskatchewan. It needs to be looked at, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government I hope will look at. 
 
And talking about this amendment, 100 ideas, today on the 
radio there was a fellow from Alberta who is going to celebrate 
his 100th anniversary in Alberta by . . . he wants to climb 100 
different mountains. Well in Saskatchewan that’s going to be 
obviously a little hard. But you know, there’s different ways 
that you can celebrate our 100th year. I’ve had one person say 
that she plans to walk 100 miles throughout the year — you 
know, take a mile a day or half a mile a day or whatever. 
Another one that says, you know, he’s going to write to 100 
friends. 
 
And something that this government can look at doing is 
implementing 100 ideas, Mr. Speaker, and following some of 
the examples of the residents of this province of doing stuff, of 
actually doing something. Because what I get from my 
constituency, what I get is we’re in a stalemate. I mean, this 
province hasn’t grown. The job growth hasn’t grown. People 
are leaving. Towns are shrinking. Your major cities aren’t 
growing. We’re going to have to start doing something to grow 
this province. And if we don’t, in the next 100 years I don’t 
know what this province is going to look like if we don’t start 
thinking outside the box and doing some ideas out there, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’re going to have to do something to grow 
this province. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And right now what I get from the government and what I get 
from my people when I come around, when I go out there town 
to town, that there is no direction from this government. And 
that you know, they can talk about political rhetoric or 
whatever, but that . . . you come out there. That’s what they’re 
telling me, Mr. Speaker, that they’re not getting that from this 
government. They don’t know exactly what this government 
has in the vision to grow this province. 
 
How is it going to do it? What’s it going to focus on, Mr. 
Speaker? You know, they’ll tell me about all the agriculture, 
tell me about the ag, the oil and gas sector, the uranium sector, 
the tourism sector that we have in this province — the potential. 
And they can’t understand why this province isn’t growing and 
why the government doesn’t seem to have a direction in how to 
grow this, grow this. 
 
So with this amendment, Mr. Speaker, we need, we need to get 
some of these ideas out there. We need to get people talking. 
We need to implement some of these things. We need to get this 
province growing, Mr. Speaker, because if we don’t, I don’t 
know what this province is going to look like in the next 100 
years. Because just like everybody here on both sides of the 
House, they want this province to grow. I would imagine that 
they do, that they want that province to grow. 
 
You know, I’ve never maybe heard them that they really like, 
you know, the population to grow, but I can imagine that they 
want this province to thrive. They talk about it in their speeches. 
The member for Moose Jaw, you know, talked about the rich 

heritage, the future, the potential of this province. And he’s 
right. There is a huge, huge potential in this province. And 
when you see, when you look at that, it’s not growing. It’s all 
. . . it is very, very shameful at that end of it for this province 
not to grow with the potential here. 
 
I’ll use the member from Moose Jaw. He made a very good 
speech. He listed the potential, the growth, the potential of this 
province. I think now we have to implement that, and that is 
one of the way is with this amendment, with these 100 ideas. 
This government needs, I think needs a vision, needs ideas, Mr. 
Speaker. So with that, I support the amendment put forth by the 
member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to start my remarks that I’m going to make on 
this debate on our amendment by reading a quote. And the 
quote goes as follows, “Nothing that really comes to mind.” 
 
Those words, Mr. Speaker, were said by the Minister of Finance 
on February 25 in answer to a question from a reporter at a 
scrum, when the reporter asked him, does anything stand out 
legislatively in this spring session that we’re currently in. Mr. 
Speaker, my point being, my point being is that, that’s why we 
felt, and I feel, that 100 new ideas that we could offer to the 
province of Saskatchewan on this, our 100th anniversary, could 
be, should be, will be perhaps the best birthday present that we 
could offer this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, I believe, and the 
government in general says that I think with some degree of 
sour grapes, because frankly they don’t have any ideas. Frankly 
they’re devoid of new ideas, and that’s very evident by the 
Finance minister’s very own remarks that he made mere weeks 
ago, when he said that there was nothing legislative of real 
significance in this session. Well now there is; now there is, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s 100 new, innovative, outside the box ideas 
that this government and this province could implement to give 
this province what I think is the ultimate birthday present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance called this gimmickry. It’s 
a gimmick, he says, when we talk about 100 ideas that the 
Saskatchewan Party has for the province. He calls it gimmickry. 
Well let’s, let’s look at just a few of these ideas at this . . . what 
he calls gimmickry. Let’s look at idea number nine, when we 
talk about establishing a children’s hospital in Saskatoon 
utilizing an existing acute care facility. Mr. Speaker, how can 
anybody in this province be opposed to that? How could 
someone stand in his place and call that a gimmick, or 
something that we would use for political gain? Or that we, we 
need some new interest injected into our party, so we came up 
with a gimmick that would call for a children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fail, I fail to understand how someone could use 
that kind of mean-spirited approach to our most innocent people 
of our society, our children. How could, how could people, how 
could anybody make a mean-spirited comment like that, Mr. 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

Speaker? I fail, I fail to understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at another gimmick, in number eight . . . 
let’s go to number 18, Mr. Speaker. Let me read that. Number 
18, Mr. Speaker, says, partner with the Government of Canada 
to build three new all-weather roads in northern Saskatchewan 
to facilitate sustainable northern communities, and sustainable 
northern economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those of us who venture outside the government 
centre of Regina and go into the forest fringe area of the 
province and go into the northern part of the province realize 
the huge potential that exists in that part of that province, Mr. 
Speaker. And I fail to see how putting money into infrastructure 
in these northern kinds of areas can be a gimmick. 
 
What it is in reality is the beginning of a new century for 
development in the northern part of the province. And all one 
has to do, Mr. Speaker, is talk to those people who live in the 
northern part of the province. They know. And members are 
here, the member for Cumberland, in this House know exactly 
what that potential is. I fail to see how that can be perceived as 
a gimmick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at gimmick number 47. Fully fund 
Saskatchewan’s share of any federal-provincial agriculture 
program to which the province is a signatory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one in this House, on either side of the House, 
would argue, would disagree that agriculture has come under 
some very difficult times these past number of years. I don’t 
think you would get that argument from any member in this 
legislature. And to ask the government to live up to its 
commitment on a federal-provincial program, in my mind, is 
not a gimmick, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What it is, is a good, sound, positive message that we’re going 
to send to the agriculture industry in Saskatchewan and all 
across Canada that we are prepared to support farmers in 
Saskatchewan. That’s what that is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at idea number 53. Talks about aggressively 
expanding Saskatchewan’s irrigation capacity as a central 
component of Saskatchewan’s long-term agribusiness and 
economic development plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Official Opposition, the member 
from Swift Current, yesterday talked about when John Palliser 
came to this part of the country and had a look around and gave 
a report that said that agriculture was not sustainable in 
Saskatchewan, that it would be a waste of time for people to 
come here and try to engage in the business of agriculture. 
Well, of course we know what happened, Mr. Speaker. We 
know in fact that Mr. Palliser was wrong. 
 
But idea number 53, when we talk about expanding the 
potential that we have for the irrigation industry . . . Truly 
amazed. My colleague from Arm River tells me — and he’s 
right, of course — that only 3 per cent of the water that is used, 
that comes out of Lake Diefenbaker, only 3 per cent for 
irrigation. 
 
Now there have been plans over the years — for many, many 

years — about an irrigation project that would be on the west 
side of the Saskatchewan River, in the 
Delisle-Vanscoy-Conquest area; nothing’s ever happened. 
There’s an old plan that comes from many years back about a 
dam to be built in North Battleford on the Saskatchewan River, 
and a channel built to create irrigation all the way down from 
the North Saskatchewan down to the South Saskatchewan River 
south of Kindersley in the Eston area, would be a huge, huge 
economic impact not alone just for agriculture, but for tourism 
and many other areas of development. Nothing’s ever been 
done about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With idea no. 53 we’re saying, let’s aggressively look at this. 
For the beginning of our next century let’s develop these ideas; 
let’s put this province on the map with regards to irrigation. 
Again my colleague tells me that, you know, that was one of the 
ideas that ACRE [Action Committee on the Rural Economy] 
came up with. It was the government’s own committee that are 
telling them that this is a good idea and yet the Finance minister 
says that number 53 is a gimmick, it’s gimmickry. I don’t 
understand — Mr. Speaker, I just fail to understand that kind of 
thinking. 
 
One other of the ideas that I would like to speak about is idea 
number 97, Mr. Speaker, and that says that we would work in 
partnership with First Nations and Métis people to implement 
existing agreements and develop new agreements to build our 
province. Mr. Speaker, I have in my almost two years of being 
an MLA for Carrot River Valley, I have had the opportunity, 
the very good opportunity to meet with some Aboriginal 
groups. I’ve met with the Prince Albert Tribal Council. Of 
course we have the two bands in Carrot River Valley, Shoal 
Lake and Red Earth. I met with the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council and others from Saskatchewan. 
 
And the underlying theme, Mr. Speaker, that I hear from all of 
those groups is their interest and their desire to become a full 
partner in Saskatchewan and in the future of Saskatchewan. 
You know what they tell me, Mr. Speaker? They tell me . . . 
And they say this, they’ll say this straight out and they would 
say it if they were here today. They tell me that they are very 
frustrated with this socialist government and the fact that every 
commitment that they have made to First Nations and Métis 
people has not been lived up to. And they will tell you that, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would invite any of you, yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
or any other of the members, to come to those meetings and to 
hear these people say that. 
 
These folks in these councils are on the biting edge of 
something new and something great, Mr. Speaker. And we have 
a government in this province that calls an idea to do that 
gimmickry. I just fail, fail to understand. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about just one more of the 
ideas, and that is idea no. 4. And it goes as follows, it says, 
“celebrate Saskatchewan’s centennial, by eliminating entry fees 
to all provincial parks in 2005.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why we would not want to 
invite and encourage every person in our province to spend 
some time in a provincial park this summer. 
 
There are those, Mr. Speaker, who can’t afford to go to 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

provincial parks. Maybe they can’t afford to pay the camping 
fees. Now that we have got ridden of the idea of the wiener 
roast tax, of course it’s a little easier. But having said that, 
having said that, it is difficult for a lot of people to maybe take 
their family and maybe pack them up and maybe pay their 
camping fees and — if they golf — the golf green fees and the 
entrance fees to the park. So I don’t know understand why we 
would not invite and ask people from right across the province 
to come and celebrate their 100th birthday at our provincial 
parks. I don’t understand how that could be perceived as 
gimmickry. 
 
My grandfather came to this country very close to a hundred 
years ago, in about 1905 or 1906. And I would think that he 
would say to us, all of us, if he were here today — and he isn’t, 
Mr. Speaker; he lived to the great age of 98 — he would say, I 
think today to us that, that this would be a great opportunity to 
come out and to live and be happy and be proud of the fact that 
we have now fulfilled many of those dreams and ideas from our 
forefathers that came to this country. And I probably believe 
yours did too, Mr. Speaker, as did most of ours, who are in this 
Chamber today. 
 
So the park fee idea is truly a present that we can offer every 
resident of this province without a great cost to anybody and 
would do far more good things than bad things. But yet, the 
Finance minister says it’s gimmickry. Well I guess, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to let the public decide if that’s gimmickry or 
not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister in his words on this 
amendment talked about budgets, and he talked about why is 
there nothing in here about balanced budgets. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there is in fact lots of things in this document about 
fiscal responsibility. Mr. Speaker, I would say to you that I’m 
not an economist. Mr. Speaker, I don’t pretend to be. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t pretend to be an economist, and that certainly 
goes without saying. But I would tell you that I could balance 
this province’s budget if I did it the way the socialist 
government does. They borrow the money to balance the 
budget. Mr. Speaker, I could do that all day. I could do that all 
day. Now that is gimmickry. It’s easy to be a Finance minister 
in that kind of a situation. Where it’s hard to be a Finance 
minister is one where you are going to implement 100 ideas or 
20 or 10 or 50 that are good for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about ideas . . . and I want to spend 
just a couple of minutes talking about the idea of ideas, about 
100 — whether it be 1 idea or 10 or 1000, regardless. Let’s go 
back 100 years to do that. Let’s go back 100 years, and let’s 
look at the two provinces that joined Confederation at almost 
exactly the same time — Alberta and Saskatchewan. We both 
started with very, very close to the same amount of assets: very 
little. We both started with about the same number of people: 
very few. And we both started on . . . let’s call it an equal 
playing field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want somebody from that side of the House to tell me, to stand 
up . . . and I mean this sincerely. I’m not asking this question in 
an antagonistic way. I’m asking it in . . . I want somebody from 
that side of the House to tell me why 100 years later we look at 

the two provinces and the differences in those two provinces, I 
want somebody to honestly tell me why that happened. 
 
We’re looking at this year. Let’s talk about budgets. Let’s talk 
about ideas. We talked about Alberta who’s going to have 
roughly a multi-billion dollar surplus. And we’re talking about 
Saskatchewan who is devoid of any kind of ideas who are going 
to have to borrow money to balance the budget again. 
 
Those are the ideas that I think we have to talk about. And you 
can’t say . . . the government may say, well it was Leduc in 
1947 that created the difference. That’s not right, Mr. Speaker. 
That is absolutely not right. It can’t be natural resources 
because we know we’ve got them. And I could go and list them 
all, but I don’t think you’re going to want me to do that under 
the rules of speaking on amendment. But we all know they’ve 
been talked about before, so I won’t go into that. 
 
You can’t say the difference is human resources because we 
know the Premier yesterday talked about it. The Leader of the 
Opposition talked about it. The member from Moose Jaw North 
said it very well today. We have exported. We have produced 
some of the world’s best minds right out of Saskatchewan. And 
they’re all right. No one would argue with that. So what has 
been the difference? The difference is in Saskatchewan we’ve 
had almost 60 years of socialist government who is devoid of 
future thinking. They are devoid of ideas, as opposed to some 
other government next door who has had ideas. And that is why 
100 ideas is the very best present we could offer the people and 
the future of this province, without question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, contained in the 100 Ideas, the 
booklet that we do have, is talk about infrastructure, talk about 
rebuilding roads. The member for Moose Jaw North, in his 
words again — we’ll talk about infrastructure for a second — 
mentioned that this summer the highways of Saskatchewan are 
going to be full of people coming back. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker, he’s right. He’s right and I hope 
they are. But do you know what, Mr. Speaker? The member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy talked about it yesterday or one day just 
this week in her member’s statement about Highway No. 35. If 
those folks come back on Highway No. 35 from the United 
States, they’re going to think they went through a time warp 
and they’re back in 1905 . . . or No. 15 Highway east of 
Kenaston, one I’m familiar with, the member from Arm 
River-Watrous is certainly familiar with. We can go on and on, 
on infrastructure. But in this ideas, in our 100 ideas we have 
some valid, outside the box, innovative, new ideas that can 
make a huge difference to the future of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say also that when you talk about the 
ideas or lack thereof, a lot of the good things that have 
happened in Saskatchewan over the last 100 years have 
happened in spite of the government. And I’m being really . . . 
honestly and fairly, in spite of all governments. They’ve 
happened because the people themselves have had ideas. 
They’ve had the innovation. They’ve had the courage, and 
they’ve had the desire to make this province go. They’ve done 
that in spite of all governments. 
 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, the longer I’m in this political business, the more I 
truly believe that governments take far too much credit when 
things go well, and they probably get too much blame when 
things go badly. The fact of the matter is, is that governments 
really don’t control the economy. The economic factors control 
the economy. What governments can do is they can be the 
catalyst for a good economy or they could be the wet blanket 
for a bad economy. And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that that’s exactly what we’re seeing from this socialist 
government and ones before it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how, I don’t know how we could 
possibly not look at these ideas and say that they’re good, that 
they’re supportable. I don’t know. You look at what’s in the 
document, you look at what’s not in the document and 
obviously there are some things that are not. They are not . . . 
unfortunately, they just weren’t in here. 
 
And one of those things is the idea of additional hours of work. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not in the document. And you know why it’s 
not in that document, Mr. Speaker? Because almost 80 per cent 
of the people of the province, including the old supporters of 
the NDP, have said it was a bad idea. Now that’s the difference 
between a good idea — 100 of them — and a bad idea. 
 
It’s not in there. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? As long 
we’re the government . . . Whenever we become the 
government, as long as we’re the government, it’s never going 
to be in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to finish my comments today because I 
know others have lots to say. But I want to say that if this NDP 
government, if this socialist government right there has a desire 
for the future, if they have a wish to give Saskatchewan a 
birthday present that will live well past all of us in this Chamber 
— that will live forever, it could in fact be a legacy for this 
government — if they want that, if they have that desire to do 
something that will be with this province for the next 100 years, 
then they should look seriously at supporting this motion. I 
don’t know how they could possibly turn their backs on it. I 
truly don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud. I’m proud of the 100 ideas that we’ve 
developed. I know that some of our members are going to speak 
more about them; I’m very sure. And I would ask this 
government to think strongly before they vote against it 
because, in this year of our 100th anniversary — of our 100th 
birthday — the people of this province are going to be 
watching, and they’re going to be remembering, Mr. Speaker, 
who has the ideas and who doesn’t have the ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the time and the opportunity to be 
part of this debate, and I look forward to listening to members 
as this debate continues. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
remarks, I’d like to move an amendment to the amendment to 
the centennial motion: 

by adding after “raises in revenue” in the last line of the 
amendment: 
 
(100) recognize the contributions of the voluntary sector. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in moving an amendment to the amendment, I’m 
looking at the opportunity to mention that it’s only a few days 
when these 100 ideas came from the opposition members, and I 
wonder where some of them came from because it looks like 
many of the policy documents that we have in place. But I also 
note that over the course of a day, they’ve already lost one of 
their 100 ideas, and are down to number 99. And I thought I 
could quite easily in handling backfill to make sure it’s 100 and 
speak to the 100th addition to this amendment as a good idea to 
add to our discussion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason I’m adding the . . . recognizing 
the contributions of the voluntary sectors, of course, because as 
Legislative Secretary for the Premier’s Voluntary Sector 
Initiative, I’m proud and honoured to be able to enter into a 
debate on the amendment to the amendment that’s before the 
Assembly. It would be moved by myself and seconded by the 
Minister for the Environment and the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Earlier a colleague of mine, the member from Moose Jaw 
North, who’s been working so hard in this province to help us 
celebrate the centennial, stated that our centennial year ought to 
provide for a living legacy, and the member opposite talked 
about leaving a legacy. Well I know a very important legacy to 
leave behind. And the member from Moose Jaw North then also 
talked about the need to provide for a living legacy as we 
celebrate 100 years of membership in our great country of 
Canada. 
 
The member’s job I’ve quite envied actually over the number of 
months because I’ve seen it to be very immediately rewarding, 
not to mention the times I think people mentioned to him what 
could, should, or must happen for us to celebrate our centennial, 
but also because I know the people and our province are ready 
for this celebration. 
 
Perhaps not as glamorous — maybe more a steadfast shadow, 
but equally important to the celebrating of the centennial and 
just as lasting I might add — is the human legacy we would be 
able to leave behind from the Premier’s Voluntary Sector 
Initiative that will recognize and join in partnership with the 
voluntary sector. 
 
In his address a few short years ago, the Premier of the province 
asked of us, asked of the voluntary sector to join together to 
help us in doing the work as set out in the document that states: 
 

The Saskatchewan Voluntary Sector . . . will help our 
community of volunteers to sustain their achievements. It 
will establish a Framework to support the further building 
of relationships with government. 

 
It will also help us to better understand how this 
partnership is already working, both in action and in role, 
and to support the voluntary sector in the development of 
policies and programs. 
 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

The committee’s first priority is to develop a framework to 
guide provincial government interaction and participation with 
the voluntary sector, and I might add the job has been done. 
 
The Voluntary Sector Initiative will build capacity in our 
voluntary sector and it will help build a stronger volunteer 
community. This initiative will help equip our impressive army 
of volunteers and their organizations to fulfill their missions. By 
working together with the voluntary sector, our government will 
help raise the profile of Saskatchewan’s volunteers. We will 
increase the awareness of the value of the voluntary sector 
activities to all of our well-being and to all of our citizens. 
 
To this date the work has been accomplished by means of 
getting together people from organizations across the province 
and representatives from each government department who 
have been working in partnership with the voluntary sector. 
And I want to take a moment to thank those men and women 
who have been working really hard on the initiative to make 
sure that the job gets done and a job well done to leave a human 
legacy for the centennial of our province. 
 
Now because of the work of the voluntary sector, I think we’re 
adding to . . . and I know the Premier and others on this side of 
the House believe that we will be adding a legacy to 
community, but also we will be enhancing further the quality of 
life of our province. In the months after the Premier announced 
the Voluntary Sector Initiative, we got together and established 
a framework and in the framework it outlines the values and the 
principles of the initiative and also the vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the sets of principles in the document 
include — and have been mentioned when we talk about 
celebrating with people in community — shared leadership, 
open communication, consensus, advocacy, community, and 
accountability. 
 
Now we’re working together in partnership on our objectives, 
which is to build a formal relationship between the public sector 
and the voluntary sector, to build capacity within 
Saskatchewan’s voluntary sector, and to build awareness of the 
value of the voluntary sector and volunteers to our society of 
the ways in which voluntary sector organizations structure 
themselves and of the structured relationship between the public 
and the voluntary sectors. 
 
Saskatchewan has a history of helping. Saskatchewan people 
are the thread weaving through all Saskatchewan stories of 
achievement and accomplishment. The First Nations set 
foundations of caring, thriving society . . . on the caring, 
thriving society on the Canadian prairies centuries ago. Métis 
and early settlers built on that foundation of generosity. They 
volunteered to help one another build homes and barns as well 
as first schools and community centres. 
 
For many decades, volunteer organizations have provided 
essential health and social services to Saskatchewan citizens. 
Volunteers in this period provided or raised most of the funding 
and were usually active in both the governance and operation of 
the organizations. 
 
Well times have changed, and in some ways they’ve changed 
dramatically. In some of those areas, they remain the same. But 

over the past 100 years, building on those foundations of the 
human condition upon which our society is based, they have 
remained our values. They have remained true. 
 
Saskatchewan people share a recognition of the broader sense 
of community — an understanding that helping one’s neighbour 
helps us all. This is reflected in the province’s . . . the 
Saskatchewan motto of Multis E Gentibus Vires or Latin for 
“from many peoples, strength.” 
 
The Saskatchewan initiative in recognition of the voluntary 
sector speaks directly to the needs and the strengths of our 
province. The framework document is a blueprint that paves the 
way to the initiative’s future development and clearly outlines 
the initiative’s areas of priority. The Saskatchewan initiative 
also involves the public sector, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, directly as a full partner. 
 
Another critically important feature of the Saskatchewan 
initiative is the application of the values and the principles that I 
mentioned. They are becoming an integral part of the working 
culture for the Government of Saskatchewan. And it’s hoped 
the values and principles also become an integral part of the 
working culture for voluntary sector organizations as well. 
 
The initiative will help define the philosophical approach to all 
work related to the provincial voluntary sector, helping to create 
an environment within which the province’s voluntary sector 
organizations can successfully manage their work without 
barriers and with the respect that they have earned. 
 
I noted a quote in the original document from Arla Gustafson, 
who’s the executive director of the United Way of Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker. And I wanted to read her quote into the record 
because it does typify what Saskatchewan is known for. So in 
quoting Arla, in quote I say: 
 

Saskatchewan is well known for business, labour, 
government and the voluntary sector working together. 
True democracy is about involving people in the decision 
making and the voluntary sector is democracy at its finest. 
People helping people is what Saskatchewan is known for. 
That is what true community and true citizenship are all 
about. 

 
In undertaking the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative, 
Saskatchewan is doing many things. The province is 
formalizing a long-standing relationship with the thousands of 
organizations that comprise the voluntary sector. By formally 
recognizing the relationship, the province is acknowledging the 
contribution of the voluntary sector and the individual 
volunteers throughout this province. 
 
I know it has also been mentioned that . . . how important it is 
for all of the celebrations of centennial in every community 
across this province, bar none, where you hear from a society 
that’s recognizing the past of our province, to celebrating the 
future of our province, holding events, holding the sporting 
events. 
 
The 2005 Summer Games could not be done without the 
legions of volunteers that come together to help us celebrate in 
our centennial year. And we’re all very thankful that when we 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2005 

ask them to come forward and do that work, they want to do it. 
They want to join together in partnership and get the job done. 
That’s the way Saskatchewan folk celebrate — come together, 
recognize their community, and become part of the democracy 
that we cherish in our province and have cherished for the last 
100 years. 
 
In that way the voluntary sector is talking about having a 
practical and a sustainable process that will serve as a 
foundation for joint initiatives, not only in the centennial year, 
but for many, many years to come, indeed a true human legacy. 
Our province is opening the door and establishing a formal 
two-way means of communication to the voluntary sector to 
identify, develop, and implement mutually advantageous 
initiatives and processes. 
 
As I mentioned, the joint steering committee envisions the 
Premier’s Voluntary Sector as a living legacy that can be 
realized by Saskatchewan’s centennial in 2005 and that will 
benefit all residents of our province for decades to come. 
 
The philosophical and practical scope of the Voluntary Sector 
Initiative will reflect the breadth of vision and energy of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and it will encompass a range of needs 
of the voluntary sector and the government in working with the 
voluntary sector to sustain and enhance the quality of life 
enjoyed by all people in Saskatchewan. It will continue to 
develop in anticipation of a growing and evolving set of needs 
from both partners. 
 
The work of the Premier's Voluntary Sector Initiative is not 
intended as a legal framework, rather it brings government and 
the voluntary sector together in a defined moral imperative that 
will guide the initiatives and the ongoing work of two distinct 
partners as their working relationship evolves to meet new and 
challenging initiatives. In doing that, we respect each partner’s 
differences and the distinct ways of working, while identifying 
the common ways that we can work together to benefit both. 
The strength of the initiative lies in the collaborative efforts of 
both sectors and exists to serve the needs of both sectors. 
 
The Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative respects choice. 
Organizations within the voluntary sector are not required to 
participate within the framework of the initiative or on any 
specific projects developed by the initiative because we believe 
in dependence on each other for a job well done, as I 
mentioned, in recreation, in culture, in health, and in protection 
of the environment. But we also recognize the independence of 
many, many groups in Saskatchewan who don’t want to be in 
partnership with government. They stand alone to be able to 
advocate on behalf of people they represent or to be able to 
work in their own community to be independent of anything 
that that municipality or the province might do. 
 
As I’ve been doing the work of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector 
Initiative, I’ve found out many, many things about the work that 
happens across this province. And so one of the things the 
voluntary sector asked us to do was to develop an inventory of 
the ways we are already in relationships. And that updated 
inventory will be ready for all members in this Assembly very 
soon. 
 
The Canadian volunteer initiative actually praises 

Saskatchewan for doing such an inventory because the sector 
themselves don’t even know the many, many ways that we 
interrelate with each other on a daily basis. And the first 
document has pages and pages and pages of ways that 
government departments interact with the voluntary sector and 
the volunteers out in community. 
 
And I wanted to read just a few of those into the record today. 
An example might be in Culture, Youth and Recreation, there’s 
a Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, where volunteers indicate 
at the beginning of this fiscal year that they’ve been working 
with the department to make sure that our heritage stays strong 
into the future. 
 
Industry and Resources has a business and co-operative services 
area that they work with in the volunteer sector as well. There’s 
a Small Business Loans Association. 
 
In Learning, the apprentice and trades certificate commission, 
volunteers are sitting on those boards bringing forward issues 
on their own individual trades. There’s planning and evaluation 
of children’s services in the Department of Learning, early 
childhood developments. There’s the expansion of the 
SchoolPLUS program that relies on helping organizations with 
communities that come together in an integrated way to work 
with the government on issues that are important to them. There 
are just thousands and thousands of ways. On a daily basis 
people don’t even begin to understand the work of the voluntary 
sector in relationship with government to provide these services 
that we all value and cherish so much. 
 
In one organization when we talked to them, the Air Cadet 
League of Canada, which is composed of national, provincial, 
and local committees who are all volunteers, these people give 
of themselves in the true spirit of volunteerism to make our 
communities a better place to live. 
 
These volunteers in the provincial and local committees donate 
approximately, and this is just one organization, donates 
approximately 84,000 hours to that program each year. That’s 
the equivalent of over 40 full-time jobs in every corner of our 
province. 
 

You, the volunteers . . . should feel great pride in the job 
you are doing to help the youth in our province become 
the creative, confident leaders of tomorrow. 
 

And that’s a quote from Rick Fesciuc, past chairperson of the 
Air Cadet League of Canada. 
 
The people of this province, the volunteers, the voluntary sector 
of this province, are ready to answer the challenges of the 21st 
century because we have a Premier who took the vision of 
having a Voluntary Sector Initiative, put someone responsible 
for the initiative in charge of that and directing it and doing the 
ongoing work with the volunteers in the communities. And I 
know members opposite, if they talk to their communities, will 
know of the work of the sector in so many different corners of 
our province. We’re ready to draw on the lessons of the past to 
embrace the promise of the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



March 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

Ms. Hamilton: — We all know we share generosity of spirit, 
tenacity, pride of accomplishment, and the pioneering spirit that 
led to the creation of our province almost 100 years ago. 
 
Saskatchewan’s rate of volunteerism has been admirably strong 
for many years. Imagine this: our voluntary sector organizations 
depend on the combined efforts of 400,000 volunteers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — 400,000 volunteers in our province; 
equivalent of more than 25,000 full-time equivalent positions. 
And that represents an investment in our economy of 
approximately $800 million each and every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no government could begin to organize or hire or 
replace or try and do the work of $800 million — yes — per 
year of contribution to this province. 
 
As a leader in the number of volunteers that we have per capita 
anywhere in this country, we need to make certain that we work 
in partnership with them to keep our volunteer component 
strong. And you find that in many, many communities. When 
someone volunteers for one position, you’ll find them working 
in five or more. You’ll find them doing work on their church 
boards, at their local rink, organizing local sporting events, 
keeping their history strong. 
 
Our volunteers are everywhere and doing everything to keep 
our quality of life so strong in the province. And that’s the kind 
of human legacy that we talk about when we’re talking about 
the centennial celebrations in this province. 
 
By working together, the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative 
gives its two sector partners an opportunity to give the people of 
Saskatchewan a legacy of substance, a legacy that reflects the 
rich social traditions of our province. 
 
We will work together, the voluntary sector and the public 
sector, with this ambitious and worthy end in mind: that the end 
of the celebrating year — when the balloons are taken home by 
the children, when the parties have finished, when people have 
enjoyed and celebrated this, our centennial year — we will have 
a living human legacy that we can leave behind that will 
maintain the quality of life that we all appreciate from the 
foundations that have been set by the volunteers and the 
pioneers of the voluntary sector in all of our communities. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would move the amendment 
to the amendment to the centennial motion: 
 

by adding after “raises in revenue” in the last lines of the 
amendment, no. 100, a new 100 to replace the old 100 . . . 
 

Not saying, Mr. Speaker, in doing so, that we want to support 
all of the 99, but we want to add another one to: 

 
recognize the contributions of the voluntary sector to our 
great province. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by the Minister of the 
Environment, the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the . . . The 
subamendment has been moved by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Centre, 
which reads: 
 

I move to amend the amendment to the centennial motion 
by adding after “raises in revenue” in the last line in this 
amendment, quote: 
 
(100) recognize the contributions of the voluntary sector. 

 
I shall refer to this as the subamendment to the main 
amendment and I would also advise members that the same 
rules of debate apply to the subamendment. That is that the 
discussion is restricted to the content of the subamendment. For 
reference people can also look to Erskine May 22nd Edition, 
page 344. 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
delighted to second the amendment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It now being just slightly 
past the hour of 5 o’clock, this House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:01.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2039 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2039 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2039 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2039 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2039 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2039 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2040 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2040 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2040 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2040 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2040 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2040 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2040 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2041 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2041 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2041 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2041 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 La Semaine nationale de la francophonie 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2041 
 Blaine Lake Citizen of the Year and Lifetime Achievement Awards 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2042 
 Montreal Lake Cree Nation in Mourning 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2042 
 Handel Catholic Women’s League Celebrates 60 Years 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2042 
 Rural Women’s Month in Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2043 
 Wynyard Seniors Receive 2005 Saskatchewan Centenarian Medals 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2043 
 Saskatchewan Centennial Summit 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2043 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Food Allowance 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2044 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2044 
 Nursing Resources 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2045 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2045 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2046 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2047 
 Performance of Government and Opposition 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2048 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2048 
MOTIONS 
 Timetable for Consideration of Private Bills 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2049 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2049 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2049 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Centennial 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2049 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2054 



 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2059 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2062 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2063 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2065 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2068 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


