
















































Hansard: November 14, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 5A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 105 
 November 14, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Highway 321 is a short section of road that runs from the 
Alberta border into the community of Liebenthal on the west 
side of the province, and it’s in need of repair. The prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to the 
Highway 321 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Burstall, Saskatoon, Fox 
Valley, Richmound; Medicine Hat, Alberta; and several other 
communities in the immediate vicinity. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 310. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Yorkton, 
Wynyard, Jansen, and Foam Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned with safety of Highway No. 5. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt and Lake 
Lenore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with the oil revenues: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that a portion of the 
provincial windfall of oil revenue be used to reduce the 
provincial gas tax. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson and Kenaston. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from citizens opposed to possible reduction of 
health care services in the town of Biggar and district. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 4, 5, 7, and 8. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: has the Department of 
Agriculture requested an extension of the deadline for the 
own use import program with the federal Pest 
Management Regulatory Agency? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: for the 
fiscal year 2000-2001, how much did the government 
spend on Highway No. 1 from the Manitoba border to 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

Alberta border on construction and maintenance? 
 

And I have also similar questions right up to the present. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 10 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
many kilometres of road were paved and/or reconstructed, 
and a breakdown for each, in the fiscal year 2002-2003? 
 

And similar questions up to the present. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to give notice that I shall on 
day no. 10 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Immigration: for the fiscal year 
1999-2000, what was the average processing time in days 
for each application category of the immigration program 
— skilled workers, business persons, farmers, and students 
— for a nominee from the point he or she applied to the 
program to the point he or she was considered nominated? 
 

And similar questions up to the present. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 10 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
many projects, for what value and project location did the 
provincial government apply for under the Prairie Grain 
Roads Program in the fiscal year 2001 and 2002? 
 

And similar questions to the present. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 10 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what was the 
total revenue the Government of Saskatchewan received 
from tourism in 2000? 
 

And also similar questions up to the present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 10 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Property 
Management: when was the final approval given for a new 
airport terminal in Regina? When was the tender posted? 
What is the expected completion date for the project? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I have another 
question. 
 

For the Minister Responsible for SPM: on what date was 
the last occupational health and safety inspection done on 
the government airport hangar and what were the findings 
of this inspection? 

Also, Mr. Speaker, another question for the Minister 
Responsible for SPM [Saskatchewan Property Management]: 
 

Are there currently occupational health and safety 
problems in the temporary trailers used at the government 
airport terminal? And if so, what are they and are 
corrective measures being taken? 
 

Another question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister for SPM: 
 

On what date was the mould problem corrected in the 
government airport hangar? And was this problem 
corrected in the office space in the hangar as well? 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got numerous 
questions. I’ll just read the first one. I give notice I shall on day 
no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many airplane trips on 
government aircraft did the minister take during the period 
of April 4 to March 31? 
 

And I have numerous questions, Mr. Speaker, that relate to trips 
on government aircraft by the ministers during two different 
time periods. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 10 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation: when will the new web-based program for 
the personal property registry be completed and 
operational? Who is the software contractor? How much is 
the total cost of development and implementation? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Premier: what is the total budget for the Raise a 
Flag for Fairness advertising campaign on equalization, 
including print, radio, online, and television? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 10 I shall ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: when was the budget approved for Raise a 
Flag for Fairness advertising campaign? 
 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 10 I 
shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: from which department, Crown 
corporation, government agency, or other source is the 
funding for Raise a Flag for Fairness advertising campaign 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

on equalization coming from? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 10 I will ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: what company or companies have been 
contracted to produce the advertising for Raise a Flag for 
Fairness advertising campaign on equalization? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 10 I want 
to ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: how much is the contract or contracts for 
the Raise a Flag for Fairness advertising campaign on 
equalization worth? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to members of the House 21 members of the 
grade 12 class from Riverview Collegiate in Moose Jaw. Now a 
couple of us on this side of the House attended Riverview. It 
was a great school then, and from all I hear, it’s still a great 
school. These students are accompanied by their teacher, Delise 
Fathers, and a teaching intern, Katie Lowe. 
 
So very pleased you could make it, especially with the 
highways today being a little on the icy and snow-packed side, 
and I look forward to meeting you at about 2:30. And I hope all 
members of the House will welcome these students from 
Riverview. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader, the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature a visiting MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from the province of British Columbia. Sitting in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is MLA Michael Sather, a British 
Columbia New Democratic Party MLA from Maple Ridge-Pitt 
Meadows. Mr. Sather serves as the opposition critic for 
intergovernmental relations in the provincial legislature. 
 
He is visiting Saskatchewan today on a day that’s fit for skiing 
in any province whether it’s British Columbia, Alberta, or 
Saskatchewan — it’s fitting. He started his life and career in the 
province of Alberta but moved to British Columbia in 1974 
where he pursued a career studying wildlife until 1984. He has 
attained a master’s degree in psychology and has served as a 
mental health therapist for the Fraser Health Authority for three 
and a half years before he was elected to the British Columbia 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to have Mr. Sather visiting with us 

today. We wish him well throughout his time with us and 
encourage all members to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Bullying Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today marks the start of Bullying Awareness Week in 
Saskatchewan. Bullying and harassment are a growing problem 
for young people in our province. Whether the abuse is physical 
or emotional, bullying has a negative effect on young people. 
Twenty to 30 per cent of children report being subjected to 
bullying, and we know that the results of this abuse can lead to 
low self-esteem, depression, and even suicide. 
 
[13:45] 
 
In the community of Canora we know only too well the 
destructive impact that bullying can have on a family and a 
community. On December 6, 2004, Travis Sleeva, a 16-year-old 
from Canora, took his own life. For months Travis had suffered 
from harassment at both the school and community level. In his 
suicide letter he stated that he just could not take the fighting 
any more. According to Gary Sleeva, Travis’s father, and I 
quote: 
 

Travis’s suicide was not the first link to bullying in this 
school. But with proper intervention and strong leadership, 
hopefully it’ll be the last. 

 
The Saskatchewan Party and I share the hope of Travis’s 
parents that strong leadership and a partnership between 
students, parents, teachers, and our communities can reduce 
bullying in our schools and ensure that no other parent has to 
endure the pain and suffering that comes from having their 
child bullied. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

World Diabetes Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each November, 
Diabetes Awareness Month — and today November 14, which 
is World Diabetes Day — serve as an opportunity to remind 
people of the seriousness of diabetes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, diabetes, whether juvenile or type 2, is an 
epidemic. Almost 2 million Canadians and well over 50,000 
people in Saskatchewan live with this incurable disease. 
One-third of those with diabetes are unaware that they even 
have the condition. And perhaps most alarming, the incidence 
of diabetes is four to six times higher among First Nations 
living on-reserve than among Canadians as a whole. 
 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, those living with diabetes face a daily struggle 
with diet restrictions, and many need insulin injections to stay 
alive. It also means living with an increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease, kidney failure, nerve damage, 
amputation, and blindness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout Saskatchewan there are 19 branches of 
the Canadian Diabetes Association whose employees and 
volunteers are working diligently at the grassroots level to 
promote the health of people in Saskatchewan through diabetes 
research, education, service, and advocacy. I ask all members of 
the Assembly to join me in recognizing the volunteers and 
employees of the Canadian Diabetes Association here in the 
province for their valuable contributions to the health and 
well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. World Diabetes Day 
is celebrated each November 14, marking the birthday of 
Frederick Banting, the Canadian who discovered insulin in 
1922 and was awarded the Nobel Prize. 
 
Since that remarkable discovery, many other scientific leaps 
have taken place that make managing diabetes easier. The 
market will soon see sophisticated glucose monitoring systems 
that are designed to be worn like a wristwatch, pager, or hearing 
aid. Glucose sensors based on sound waves and infrared light 
technology virtually do away with the need for pricking the 
fingertip. 
 
Insulin has been a godsend for many type 1 diabetics but the 
need for injections make it less welcome. Consequently 
researchers have been working on devising less invasive 
delivery methods. Just this September the first inhaled form of 
insulin, like an asthmatic puffer, was recommended by the US 
[United States] Food and Drug Administration. Another project 
still in the lab is an insulin pill, one that has just been endorsed 
for type 2 diabetics. 
 
The most important aspect of medical advances in diabetes 
management is at the lead for better patient compliance and 
thereby better control of the disease. Basically the less pain and 
hassle involved, the better control diabetics have over their 
diabetes — and that is definitely something worth celebrating. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

SaskEnergy Share the Warmth Project in Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
keeping our homes well sealed against the Saskatchewan cold is 
a challenge that each and every one of us faces. So with winter 
here it was a great deal of pleasure that I got to work alongside 
about 160 volunteers helping some low-income Moose Jaw 
residents get their homes ready for the cold weather. This was 
part of SaskEnergy’s Share the Warmth energy efficiency 

project, an initiative that coincided with our centennial and has 
the theme, 100 years, 100 homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Salvation Army selected 100 Moose Jaw 
homes for an energy upgrade and the volunteers went to work. 
Both the Minister of the Environment and I were privileged to 
work with representatives from a variety of organizations — the 
Salvation Army; SaskEnergy; the SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology] architectural 
program students turned out in force, Mr. Speaker; the Moose 
Jaw Fire Department and the firefighters’ union; the Office of 
Energy Conservation; and Moose Jaw Canadian Tire and many 
community volunteers to assist with the energy efficiency 
improvements to the homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, windows and doors were prepared for winter, 
working smoke detectors were installed, low-flow shower heads 
and faucets were installed, and also an Energy Star 
programmable thermostat was put into each home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of those programs where everyone wins 
and I would like to thank all of the community organizations 
and volunteers from the fine city of Moose Jaw for making this 
possible. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Huskies Win Hardy Cup 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in the last two years the sporting world has witnessed the end of 
a couple of long-running curses — the curse of the Bambino 
which haunted Boston Red Sox fans for 86 years before coming 
to an end last fall, and this year we witnessed the end of the 
88-year championship drought for the Chicago White Sox, this 
year’s major league champs. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one streak continues after yesterday 
afternoon and that’s the 46-year Saskatchewan 
Roughrider-NDP [New Democratic Party] curse. As most of 
Saskatchewan knows, our beloved Riders have never won the 
Grey Cup under an NDP administration. For the sake of Rider 
Priders across the province and across the country, the 
Saskatchewan Party, team green, asked the NDP to step aside 
from government, at least for the duration of the playoffs. They 
refused and now they will face the wrath of the Rider nation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is one green team still left to cheer for 
in this province. They are the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] football Huskies. They are now Saskatchewan’s 
team. This coming Saturday at Griffiths Stadium in potash 
corporation park, our Huskies face the Laval Rouge et Or in the 
Mitchell Bowl for the right to play in the Vanier Cup in 
Hamilton. 
 
In true Saskatchewan fashion I am confident team green, the 
Huskies, will defeat the reds, in this case, the Rouge et Or. I 
encourage everyone to make plans to attend the game at 1 p.m. 
this Saturday in Saskatoon. Congratulations to the Huskies 
players, coaching staff, and fans, and best of luck this weekend. 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while it may be true 
that there is no joy in Riderville today, the Roughriders’ 
unfortunate season-ending loss to the Alouettes in Montreal 
yesterday definitely does not mean that the football season is 
over here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Far from it, Mr. Speaker, because on 
Saturday, the University of Saskatchewan Huskies defeated the 
Alberta Golden Bears 30-17 to win the Hardy Cup, symbol of 
university football supremacy in Canada west. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saturday’s win extends the Huskies’ season 
record to 10 wins and no losses and means that the U of S green 
team advances to the national semi-final. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Huskies had a total offence of over 600 yards. 
And while the win was obviously an overall team effort, I think 
running back David Stevens deserves special mention for his 
very impressive contribution of almost 200 yards, including two 
touchdowns. 
 
As a personal note, Ryan Barnstable is interning as a student 
teacher with my spouse, Karen, and the proud Lord Asquith 
grade 4 class. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the second year in a row that the Huskies 
have won the Hardy Cup and the second year in a row that 
they’ll face the Laval Rouge et Or. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating all of the players and coaches of the Huskies for 
Saturday’s win, and of course wishing them all the best in next 
weekend’s game against Laval. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Music Therapy Program in Wynyard Area 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to talk about a new community program up and 
running in Wynyard. Laureen Magnusson of Wynyard has 
begun a very successful music therapy program through the 
community access — respite, rehab, education service, better 
known as CARRES [community access — respite, 
rehabilitation, education services]. Musical therapy is a skilful 
use of music as a therapeutic tool to improve mental, physical, 
and emotional health. The non-verbal creative and affective 
nature of music helps for contact, self-expression, 
communication, and personal growth. 
 
This therapy is not restricted to the patients presently in the 
CARRES program. In order to expand the music therapy to 
many other community groups, a workshop was held last month 
to introduce this new therapy to health care volunteers, teachers, 
and activity directors, church groups, youth, parents, caregivers 

at home or in a helping agency. 
 
Magnusson loves sharing music so much with the CARRES 
program that she decided to cover a larger area with music. She 
has decided that she will also share her love of music with the 
folks at the Mallard Industries of Wadena. Along with other 
Wynyard community leaders, Laureen is giving a gift of music 
as a way of meeting the needs of people who need a helping 
hand. 
 
I would like all members to join me in congratulating Ms. 
Magnusson and all the good folks at CARRES for going 
forward with this new musical program. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Federal-Provincial Energy Accord Negotiations 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’ve already 
established, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier is hopping mad about 
the fact that the federal Liberal government is not going to give 
Saskatchewan the energy accord that it deserves. And to 
demonstrate how angry he is, Mr. Speaker, he’s confirmed this 
morning at an announcement that part of the Premier’s plan, 
part of the NDP government’s plan to really ramp things up, to 
really make a much stronger case for Saskatchewan on behalf of 
a better energy accord, part of his strategy will be to start a 
website. 
 
They’re going to launch a website, Mr. Speaker, and also 
window stickers. People can go to the website and print out 
window stickers and put those stickers in their living room 
windows, I guess, across the province. And so therefore the 
federal Finance minister and the Prime Minister will come to 
their senses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the plan. That’s it. The question to the 
Premier is this: is that, is that what he has to offer the people of 
the province in order that our province should get a better 
equalization deal from Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the intention of what we 
announced this morning, what we began on the weekend, is to 
engage the people of Saskatchewan, to engage the people of 
Saskatchewan in this discussion, both through information and 
through opportunity to voice their opinion directly to the federal 
government. 
 
The website announced this morning in combination with other 
media efforts, in combination with activity that will follow, Mr. 
Speaker, gives that opportunity to the people of Saskatchewan. 
The Leader of the Opposition may want to make light of the 
power of the people of Saskatchewan when engaged. We do 
not. We know that the voice that will be heard loud and clear 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

from this province will be the voice of this province’s 
population — its people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not making light of the power 
of Saskatchewan people. We are making light though of what is 
a pathetic and weak plan to make Saskatchewan’s case to 
Ottawa. That’s what it is. 
 
The Premier of all people should know, Mr. Speaker, that 
preaching to the choir doesn’t save a lot of souls, especially, 
Mr. Speaker, if you are spending the choir’s money to do it — 
some $300,000 for ads and the website. But is this the sum and 
total of the Premier’s plan, a website and window stickers that 
you can download and put up in your house, Mr. Speaker? Is 
that the sum and total of the Premier’s plan? 
 
I can’t believe the federal government haven’t rushed to 
announce a deal even this day after such an announcement from 
the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: what premiers 
of this country has he contacted? What provincial capitals has 
he contacted to get their support, and has he yet now talked to 
the Prime Minister? This is a week old. Has he talked to the 
Prime Minister of the country and what premiers has he talked 
to, to build support for Saskatchewan’s case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the last time I 
checked, the premiers of Canada do not make this decision. It is 
made by the national government, its Prime Minister, and its 
ministry of Finance. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition may be confused about how 
equalization works in this country, but the fact of the matter is, 
this is a federal project, Mr. Speaker. We are negotiating. We 
are debating the national Government of Canada and not other 
premiers or other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I tell you this, Mr. Speaker. The Prime Minister of Canada, 
the Minister of Finance, the Department of Finance in Ottawa, 
and the federal Liberal government will listen to one thing, and 
they will listen to the people of Saskatchewan. We are engaging 
the people in this campaign. And I’m sorry to hear the Leader 
of the Opposition sounding like he’s not with the people of 
Saskatchewan. I wish he’d get back on the train and help us 
instead of hindering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I can’t believe what I’m hearing from this Premier. 

Every other premier in the . . . every member of the council of 
the federation is a potential ally. Or, Mr. Speaker, they are a 
potential detriment to our getting our case if we don’t get them 
onside. Wouldn’t you build that kind of support? Don’t the 
premiers of the province have as much influence as the 
Premier’s window sticker campaign that he launched this 
morning? 
 
And more to the point, if it rests on the desk of the Prime 
Minister, I’d like to know from this Premier, when has he talked 
to the Prime Minister? This announcement was made last 
Monday. He said that’s when he found out about the fact the 
feds were not going to come through. Has he talked to the 
Prime Minister of Canada, or is he too busy launching websites 
and designing window stickers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to persist as a 
people and a province in building a fair Saskatchewan energy 
accord for this province and its future, Mr. Speaker. When you 
have a circumstance in a nation where some regions and some 
provinces have achieved energy accords and their people are 
benefiting from it, that is only right and fair that it should be 
extended to all Canadians. It should be extended to the people 
of Saskatchewan. That’s the case we’re making. And it will be 
made loud and clear by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, in many venues, in many venues beginning now with 
the website, raise the flag — www.raiseaflag.ca. I invite the 
people of Saskatchewan to access to learn and to express their 
opinion directly to the national government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Agroforestry Development 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that this Premier 
has failed to get a better equalization deal for the province of 
Saskatchewan? As we have learned over the weekend, it’s been 
confirmed in the media and by the federal Finance Minister, 
Ralph Goodale, that they blew the opportunity to get a 2 to $3 
billion agroforestry agreement and arrangement from the 
federal government. That’s what was confirmed on the 
weekend. 
 
Well the minister of SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] chirped from his seat and he says that 
it’s not true. Maybe he wants to advise the Premier with respect 
to the answer to this question. According to the federal Finance 
Minister, Ralph Goodale, the Premier and his NDP government 
turned its back on a multi-billion dollar project in 2002 for 
agroforestry and an agroforestry centre of excellence at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the question to the 
Premier is very, very direct: why in the world did he blow a 
multi-billion dollar agroforestry deal with the federal 
government in 2002? 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform the House 
and inform the Leader of the Opposition there has never been 
an offer made by the federal government to this province or any 
other province, Mr. Speaker, to establish such a centre as the 
member just referred to. 
 
And if there was, Mr. Speaker, you can rest assured, Mr. 
Speaker, that that opportunity would be aggressively pursued 
with the federal government because — to set the record 
straight, Mr. Speaker — this government, through the forestry 
centre in Prince Albert, has been aggressively pursuing with the 
federal government the concept of agroforestry. There has never 
been funds made available, Mr. Speaker, for the agroforestry 
project as the member refers to. If Mr. Goodale who is the 
federal Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, has funds available 
for agroforestry, we will be there like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well here’s what the 
Minister of Finance, here’s what Mr. Goodale has to say with 
respect to the minister’s response: 
 

“We wanted to focus on cost of research and 
development,” [This is a quote, Mr. Speaker.] Goodale 
said, adding that the province’s focus was more on 
“building a building” and whether it should be “a lab or an 
office building.” 

 
And then he goes on to say: 
 

“The location of the building seemed to be more important 
(to the NDP government) than the content of the building 
and what it did.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: is this true? 
Has he yet again let down the people of the province with 
respect to the relations of Regina and the Government of 
Canada in Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that whether 
on the question of equalization or agroforestry, if the people of 
Saskatchewan are let down by our national government, what 
side is it that our opposition takes? Invariably, Mr. Speaker, 
they take the side of Ottawa against the people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that under 
the leadership of the Saskatchewan forestry centre, we have, as 

the opposition was advised by the Minister of the Environment 
in June, Mr. Speaker, ceded about 1,000 acres to agroforestry. 
We will continue to promote that, Mr. Speaker, but we have 
never had approval at the federal level for funds to support 
agroforestry. And when we do, Mr. Speaker — the Premier 
wrote the federal government in 2002 offering Saskatchewan to 
take the lead in this — and when the money is there from the 
federal government, we’ll be there like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding those very 
snappy answers, Mr. Speaker, let me just say that the minister 
was wondering, well whose side would we take. When it comes 
down to believing the federal Finance minister or the minister 
responsible for SPUDCO, we’re probably going to side with the 
federal Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: when he was responsible for 
this file, the minister responsible for SPUDCO, when he was 
responsible for this file, did he come to the cabinet and indicate 
there was an opportunity for a multi-billion-dollar agroforestry 
deal? Did he come and brief the cabinet on that? And well, Mr. 
Speaker, maybe he did, and you just didn’t believe him. I’m not 
sure. That could have been it. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: why has he let people, the 
people of the province down with respect to this opportunity in 
agroforestry? Will he explain that? And why in the world then 
should they trust him on the equalization file, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the 
Leader of the Opposition and this House that the Canadian 
Forestry Service has never been able to gain federal Treasury 
Board approval for an agroforestry program, Mr. Speaker. We 
have offered, Mr. Speaker, to take the lead in agroforestry on 
behalf of Canada. That offer still stands, Mr. Speaker. And 
when the federal government wishes to step up to the plate and 
actually come up with funds and not just words in support of 
agroforestry, we will be there, Mr. Speaker, because we have 
been there. 
 
We have been there through the forestry centre, Mr. Speaker, 
putting hundreds of acres into agroforestry. And I want to 
advise the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that over half of the wood 
used in the oriented strand board plant at Meadow Lake, Mr. 
Speaker, comes from agroforestry in Saskatchewan, Alberta, 
lead by this government. And we’ll continue to lead that kind of 
development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

Wait Time for Surgery 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. According to the Saskatchewan Surgical 
Care Network website, urgent cases — that are cases that have 
been rated as urgent — have an approximate wait time of three 
to six weeks. The average wait time for orthopedic surgeries is 
listed on the website as about seven and a half weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. Can the minister tell me today whether those estimates 
on his Surgical Care Network website are accurate? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, we are 
getting better and better information about how the surgical 
cases are being handled in this province. And what we have is a 
surgical registry which the managers use and the doctors and 
the GPs [general practitioner] and others who have access to 
that to make, to do their planning. 
 
What we also have is the website that the member opposite has 
referred to which looks, retrospectively, looks at information 
that’s provided over what’s happened over the last year. And 
information is put up there as quickly as possible, but it’s 
retrospective information. The information that is there reflects 
what has happened over the last year and, Mr. Speaker, that 
information is as accurate as we can prepare it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the minister 
has said over the last year, the time frames of three to six 
weeks, or seven and a half weeks for orthopaedic surgery are 
accurate. 
 
So then could he explain to me the case of Jean Reynolds of 
Foam Lake? Her daughters and her husband are here in the 
gallery today. Jean is 73 years old. She can’t be here today 
because of excruciating pain. She’s left at home at Foam Lake. 
 
Jean needs a hip replacement. On September 19 her case was 
graded as urgent. According to the website, that means that 
should be done within three to six weeks. Jean Reynolds was 
told by the surgeon or the Surgical Care Network she could be 
waiting up to six months for this surgery, Mr. Speaker. As of 
today no date for that surgery has been set. She was diagnosed 
and designated as urgent two months ago. How could this 
happen under his watch? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, the 
surgeons and the general practitioners who have access to the 
surgical registry look and see the information that’s available. 
They work together with the senior administration in the health 
regions to make sure that people get access to surgery as 
quickly as possible. If there are questions or concerns 
Saskatchewan residents now have the opportunity to talk with 
their surgeon. But they also have the ability to contact people at 
the surgical registry for information or work together with the 

quality assurance people who are in each health region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate when the members opposite provide 
questions like this around particular individuals because they 
are of a concern. And I would be happy to look at this 
information should the member opposite provide it to me at this 
point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many times we’ve 
stood in the House and we’ve heard this minister talk about the 
challenges he has. Well let me tell you about some of the 
challenges the people of Saskatchewan have. Like Jean 
Reynolds, who’s had her pain medication tripled since August 
— that’s a challenge the people of Saskatchewan are facing, 
Mr. Speaker. What type of quality of life does that give Mrs. 
Reynolds? 
 
This is what her daughters have had to say when they wrote a 
letter regarding the case: 
 

Mom is the human face behind the headlines about 
government bragging about how they’ve reduced hospital 
wait times. In her time of greatest need, her home province 
is letting her down big time. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Reynolds family have been in that Foam Lake 
area for over 100 years contributing to that community as well 
as the betterment of this province. In the time of need, she’s 
having to wait six months or longer for hip surgery. 
 
My question to the minister is, is this case an anomaly, or is the 
minister and the Surgical Care Network misleading the people 
of Saskatchewan? 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, people who work within the 
health care system — whether it’s the surgeons, the general 
practitioners, the nurses, the other people who are involved 
there — are all concerned about providing care for individuals. 
And I think that it’s very important that patients know that they 
can work with their doctors and with the staff within the system 
and that they also now have some other mechanisms to get 
information about how the surgical wait-lists operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes patients are not able to get all of the 
information to their doctor as quickly as possible. I encourage 
people to do that. I also know that situations change and that 
there’s an ongoing monitoring of what happens. Mr. Speaker, I 
encourage the member to make sure that that kind of 
information is brought forward so that this individual matter can 
be resolved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The treatment of 
the Reynolds family in this case is absolutely unacceptable — a 
family that has contributed so much to the area around Foam 
Lake as well as this province. 
 
The family has called the quality care coordinator. And what 
the family describes after that conversation . . . that 
conversation as being futile. No one seems to be able to move 
ahead the date of surgery. The family has made repeated calls to 
the surgeon’s office, and again and again they’re told six 
months or longer for the surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family has followed the protocol that the 
minister just has outlined. Whether it’s the quality care 
coordinator or whoever else in the system, they followed that 
procedure. But nothing has been done. It has not been moved 
ahead at all. It seems only when families come public — which 
is not an easy thing to do, Mr. Speaker — it’s only when 
families come public and come in front of this Assembly and 
tell their story, do they get any results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can that family expect some timely results from 
your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we 
have done when we’ve designed our system around dealing 
with the surgical wait-lists is to make sure that we include the 
professional advice from the orthopedic surgeons and from the 
family physicians and others who are involved in the system. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we rely on that kind 
of professional advice to make sure people get into the 
appropriate procedures that are needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular case is one that needs to be raised 
with the professionals involved, the doctors. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I will look at the circumstances surrounding this particular case, 
But, Mr. Speaker, we do have some very clear procedures to 
follow, and we encourage people to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

New Facility at Regina Airport 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, once again we have an NDP minister not telling the 
truth. Last Thursday we questioned, we questioned . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just ask the member to 
measure his words and not to get personal in any remarks. The 
member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday we 

questioned the minister responsible for NDP airports about the 
government’s new, million-dollar airport for NDP cabinet 
ministers. The minister tried to blame the Saskatchewan Party 
for this decision. In fact she said we were party to this decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is incorrect. The decision to build a new, 
million-dollar airport for NDP cabinet ministers was a decision 
made by that minister and that cabinet. Mr. Speaker, if the NDP 
want to build themselves a million-dollar airport, that’s their 
decision, but don’t blame it on somebody else. Mr. Speaker, 
why did the minister say the Saskatchewan Party was involved 
in this decision when that clearly was not the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Property Management. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, just to point out to the member opposite, it’s not an 
airport we’re building. It’s a terminal building. It is offices for 
staff. It is also a waiting area for people using that terminal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has a 
responsibility to its employees, the same as any other employer 
across the province of Saskatchewan, to provide 
accommodation that is good working conditions that meet 
occupational health and safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I never once said that the members made the 
decision on the new building. What I said was, the members 
opposite through their representation on the Board of Internal 
Economy have input into who can fly, who can’t fly, and what 
our expenses are used for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I look forward to the minister briefing 
me about airports, Mr. Speaker. But here’s something else. 
Here’s something else that was not correct. She said they have 
to build a new airport because the old one has mould. But in the 
September 7 Leader-Post a spokesman for SPM said the mould 
problems had been fixed. So here we go again, Mr. Speaker; the 
NDP is caught building themselves a million-dollar facility at 
the airport, and they try and blame it on mould. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only mould we need to get rid of is that 
mouldy, old NDP government. Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP 
blaming their new million-dollar airport on mould when their 
own officials say the mould problem has been fixed? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Property 
Management. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the terminal building at the 
Regina airport was built in 1920. Now the member opposite is 
pretending like he’s never been in the facility; he’s never seen 
it. And maybe he’s accurate; maybe he never has. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it is a hip-roof building. The offices are along the 
angle at the side. It is an old facility. There has been problems 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

with mould. There’s also problems with water in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the staff have been working out of portable 
trailers, and that’s inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. So the decision 
was made, when the money was available in SPM’s budget we 
would proceed with this project, and that’s what we’ve done, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
government has a culture of entitlement, but also, also, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re finding out they have a culture of 
mendaciousness. The member from P.A. [Prince Albert] for an 
example, talked about SPUDCO. He didn’t tell the correctness 
to the public of Saskatchewan for how many years, and he had 
to apologize to the people of Saskatchewan and to this 
legislature for not being forthright. 
 
The Premier in the last election, it was the same thing. He 
talked about not raising taxes. He said he’d cut taxes. And did 
he? So I’m not too sure what you can call that, Mr. Speaker, 
other than limited information estimation, I suppose. But he 
said that they’d cut property taxes, and they actually did 
nothing. 
 
So there is a problem with not telling the correctness about 
SPUDCO, not telling the correctness about taxes, and now we 
can’t . . . we find out they can’t even be upfront and forthright 
on mould. Mr. Speaker, why does this NDP government have 
such a culture of mendaciousness? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Property Management. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, throughout estimates, 
throughout question period over the past number of years, the 
member has stood on his feet, and other members have asked 
questions about air services and a terminal here in Regina. They 
have complained about the building. They have complained 
about the service. They have complained about the cost. And, 
Mr. Speaker, if it is so abrasive to those members over there — 
they dislike the service — my only question is: why do they use 
it so often then? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The House will come to order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I move that Bill No. 7, The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 7, The Farm Financial 
Stability Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Western Development Museum 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth, and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, The 
Western Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask all members to come to order so 
that we can proceed with the business of House. 
 
It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation that Bill No. 8, The Western Development Museum 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The University of Regina 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 9, The University of Regina Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. Would 
the members who insist on carrying on a dialogue perhaps do it 
on that . . . behind the bar somewhere or someplace else so we 
can conduct the business of the House. Please members. Please. 
 
It has been moved by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 9, 
The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The University of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 10, 
The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 10, The University of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Page 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to inform 
the Assembly that Brock Egeto will be returning for the Page at 
the fall session, and Brock is here today. Welcome, Brock. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — At this time I wish to table the audited 

financial statements for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2005 
for the New Democratic caucus and the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus; and also at this time I wish to table the members’ 
accountability and disclosure statements for the fiscal year 
ending March 31, 2005. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone, the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — I’m very pleased to enter into what is a 
historic Throne Speech debate, Mr. Speaker. But just before I 
do, I would like to express my gratitude to the constituents of 
Saskatoon Greystone who have re-elected me to this legislature 
on four occasions. And I’m very honoured to serve them, Mr. 
Speaker, and honoured to sit in this Assembly on their behalf. 
 
And I also, Mr. Speaker, want to express appreciation to my 
family who have supported me throughout my years in politics. 
To my mother, Trudy, who has been a constant supporter 
throughout my years in political life, I want to express my deep 
appreciation. And to my wife, Louise, and my sons, Mark and 
James and Michael, and my stepdaughter, Monté, I want to 
express my gratitude for the very strong support that they have 
given me, Mr. Speaker. Without the support of family, it’s 
impossible to do this work effectively. So I am very grateful for 
their support. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, that this is a historic Throne Speech debate. 
And I say that because this is the first Throne Speech in our 
second century as a province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a Throne 
Speech that will help set direction for the next 20 years — at 
least — ahead, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very excited about many 
of the announcements that are contained in the Throne Speech. 
 
We’ve had a wonderful centennial year in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve had more than 3,800 local celebrations around 
the province. And I think that people have really expressed their 
love for this province, their love for this land, their respect for 
this land, their enthusiasm for the diversity of our people, Mr. 
Speaker, who come from every walk of life and every part of 
the globe, as well as our First Nations and Métis people. So we 
are a rich diversity of people, Mr. Speaker — in fact the only 
province in Canada where the majority of the population is 
neither of English or French origin. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have celebrated our innovations in this 
province, our social contribution to Canada, whether it be the 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

first minimum wage in Canada, the first 40-hour week in 
Canada, the first universal medicare program in Canada, and 
many, many other social firsts, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
celebrated our contribution to the scientific community in this 
province of which we can be very proud. And of course one of 
our latest and most important contributions is having the first 
synchrotron in the country, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll have more to 
say about that later. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve celebrated our artists. We’ve celebrated the 
contribution of our volunteers in Saskatchewan. And I and 
many other members of this Assembly have had the privilege of 
awarding Centennial Medals to outstanding volunteers in our 
own constituencies and in many, many sectors of our province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in addition to our centennial celebrations, this year our 
government has also been pursuing a very ambitious set of new 
public policies, Mr. Speaker, and I want to reflect on those for a 
moment. And in many ways, Mr. Speaker, these can be 
summed up with a single reference in the Throne Speech which 
is that this is a have province with heart, Mr. Speaker — a have 
province with heart. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say that because first of all Saskatchewan, 
starting in 2004, became one of three have provinces in Canada. 
And I know that people across this province are very proud of 
that status, Mr. Speaker. But we are also proud of the social 
legacy that allows us to claim that we are a have province with 
heart. 
 
But I want to talk about the economic prosperity for a moment, 
Mr. Speaker, because if you look at the amendment that the 
members opposite have put forward, the claim is being made 
that we are not growing economically. In fact that’s what the 
amendment says, Mr. Speaker. And yet, Mr. Speaker, members 
opposite ignore the fact that from the spring of 2004 to 
September 2005 we had 17 consecutive months of job 
increases, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, this summer we set a record high in terms of 
the number of people working in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that we can be very proud 
of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also saw the highest per capita increase in 
income in Saskatchewan anywhere in Canada. And members 
opposite of course ignore this fact as well. But the reality is, and 
Statistics Canada bears this out again and again, that 
Saskatchewan leads the way in Canada — not just in terms of 
GDP growth, gross domestic product growth, but also in terms 
of improvement in per capita income for residents of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. We have been able to, Mr. Speaker, 
stimulate the small-business community in its growth through 
reducing small-business tax down from 8 per cent a few years 
ago down to 5 per cent now, Mr. Speaker — another measure 
that I’m proud of. 
 
In my home city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, the economy is 
booming and there is growth in all sectors of the Saskatoon 
economy. 
 

So the claim, Mr. Speaker, that’s being made by members 
opposite in their amendment, that somehow the economy is 
stagnating, couldn’t be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. And 
members opposite know it, Mr. Speaker. And they should come 
clean, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that they’re not giving the 
people of Saskatchewan accurate information about the state of 
our economy in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this kind of prosperity that I’m referring to now hasn’t 
been seen, Mr. Speaker, for at least 22 or 23 years. The last time 
we saw this kind of economic growth in Saskatchewan was 
during the Allan Blakeney era, Mr. Speaker, when an NDP 
government again, Mr. Speaker, was in office. And, Mr. 
Speaker, after Allan Blakeney was defeated in 1982, Mr. 
Speaker, we watched the economy steadily go down through 
nine years of Progressive Conservative government led by 
Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. And it’s now taken 14 years of hard 
work to rebuild this economy, Mr. Speaker. But it’s being done, 
Mr. Speaker, and those of us on this side of the House are proud 
of that accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said that this is a have province with a 
heart, which is the way our government has described our 
initiatives over the last few years and into the future, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that one of the things that Saskatchewan 
people are proud about is that they value strong social programs 
and they value the improvement in these social programs that 
we have delivered in the last year. 
 
And one of the things that I’m very pleased about, Mr. Speaker, 
is that in this past year we’ve provided help to our university 
students. And many of those students are in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. We froze tuition rates, Mr. Speaker, at the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, and 
that was a measure that was appreciated by my constituents, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are accelerating the expansion of all of our daycare spaces 
in the province of Saskatchewan and that’s something else that 
my constituents appreciate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the very important measures that we took in the last few 
months was that we provided assistance to approximately 
10,000 families — families on social assistance; low-income, 
working families — in terms of a housing supplement, Mr. 
Speaker, which was worth up to $131 a month depending on 
family size. And this has improved the living circumstances of 
many families in my constituency and right across the province, 
Mr. Speaker — up to an extra $131 a month for a family 
through the housing supplement. 
 
And for families, Mr. Speaker, who are renting and have a 
member of the family with a disability, up to another $151 a 
month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we increased the minimum wage. That’s another 
measure that I’m very proud of. And we have now increased it 
to just over $7 an hour, $7.05 an hour, Mr. Speaker, 
consistently higher than the minimum wage in neighbouring 
Alberta where the Conservative Party is the government, Mr. 
Speaker. Once again here in Saskatchewan we’re demonstrating 
that we’re not prepared to see people work, Mr. Speaker, 
without a wage that is adequate for sustaining their livelihood. 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

And I’m proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is much that needs to be done in terms 
of building on this economic and social legacy that I’ve talked 
about now, and that’s what this Throne Speech speaks to. 
Building a province with a heart, that’s a have province with a 
heart, will be a centrepiece of our planning in the first years of 
this new century. And the other centrepiece, Mr. Speaker, will 
be building an economy that is a green economy, Mr. Speaker. 
Those are going to be the two highest priorities of our 
government as laid out in this Throne Speech. 
 
And I want to touch on some of the key areas of economic and 
social development that will be pursued. And I want to touch on 
several areas here, Mr. Speaker, starting with our plans for the 
manufacturing sector and the research and development sector, 
Mr. Speaker, which are both very important to residents of my 
constituency. 
 
Let me say first, Mr. Speaker, that one of the things I’m very 
pleased to see is the commitment that we’ve made in the Throne 
Speech around continuing to strengthen our manufacturing 
sector. Last year Saskatchewan manufacturing shipments grew 
by twice the national average. And over the next decade it is 
your government’s plan to double manufacturing exports from 
our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve seen the manufacturing sector now grow to some 7 
per cent of the economy, and it’s a much bigger percentage than 
that in the city of Saskatoon. And I’m very pleased to see this 
kind of growth in this very important sector. 
 
Also a priority for us, Mr. Speaker, is our innovation agenda 
and research and development, and what has been accomplished 
by this government in terms of working with the city of 
Saskatoon and the federal government to bring the synchrotron 
to our city and, Mr. Speaker, what has been accomplished in 
terms of growing the research park at the University of 
Saskatchewan at Innovation Place with the hundreds of new 
jobs that have emerged from that over the last decade, Mr. 
Speaker, and many, many new products, many, many new 
spinoff industries. Those jobs have been key to people in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. And it’s this innovation agenda and 
the use of our research parks in terms of growing the economy 
that’s going to be an important part of our economic 
development strategy in the second century of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased that our government is 
prioritizing that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another key element of our economic 
development strategy will be strengthening our transportation 
sector, which is key to all other elements of our economy. And 
I’m pleased to see a commitment in this Throne Speech that the 
highway from Saskatoon to Prince Albert will be twinned. And 
I’m particularly pleased to see a commitment in this Throne 
Speech that there will be a major investment in road 
development in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which 
will integrate northern people into our economy more fully and 
ensure that they have full access to services in the North, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s a very important commitment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the commitments that I am the most 
pleased about is the promise in the Throne Speech that we will 

move towards green, renewable energy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, talks about 
one-third of all our energy needs being met through safe, 
renewable energy sources within 20 years, Mr. Speaker. And 
what that means, Mr. Speaker, is a much bigger role for wind 
power and solar energy development and geothermal energy 
and hydrogen, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those are going to be 
key parts of the foundation of Saskatchewan’s economy in the 
future, is small-scale green renewables, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
very, very pleased to see the Throne Speech address this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this builds on our record that has been 
established since our Premier took over his position in the year 
2001, Mr. Speaker, that we have since that time established 
enough wind power in this province that by Christmas, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll be able to provide enough wind power for more 
than 70,000 homes in the province of Saskatchewan. And we’re 
just getting started, Mr. Speaker. We’re just getting started. 
 
I am pleased to see a commitment in this Throne Speech in 
terms of economic development, a commitment that 
Saskatchewan will be the leader in energy conservation in all of 
Canada within 20 years, Mr. Speaker. And I am very pleased to 
see that promise being made, because energy conservation, in 
terms of all the investments that might be made in energy, 
energy conservation is the best way of creating employment in 
this province. And it’s the best way of creating energy in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, because for every million dollars 
invested, you can save, Mr. Speaker, more units of energy 
through a conservation program than you can through any 
source of energy supply, Mr. Speaker. So this just makes good 
economic sense and I’m pleased to see it being prioritized in the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Speaker, that I’m also pleased about in 
terms of our economic development strategy is the emphasis 
that our government is giving towards establishing a new 
energy accord with Ottawa. And one of the things that I want to 
see come out of that energy accord, Mr. Speaker, is that some of 
those funds be set aside to help develop a renewable energy 
economy, Mr. Speaker. And that should be one of the priorities 
in terms of how monies from a new energy accord are utilized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to see an emphasis on ecotourism 
in this Throne Speech, and excited, Mr. Speaker, by the 
commitment in the Throne Speech that through a consultative 
process with northerners, the Churchill River will be recognized 
as one of our natural historic legacies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Churchill needs special protection, Mr. Speaker. The 
process for establishing that protection needs to be a partnership 
between the people of the North and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we are embarking on that 
journey, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very excited about it, because I 
think it holds significant potential both for the development of 
the North and the protection of a historic legacy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we talk about a green economy, those are some of the 
elements of that economy that are part of the vision of this 
Throne Speech and I think this will be welcomed by many, 
many people across our province. 
 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

[14:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also talks about social 
innovation. And earlier in my comments I talked about some of 
the social policy accomplishments of the last year. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to talk about some of the social vision that is 
contained in this Throne Speech because I think this is going to 
be an important part of development in this province over the 
next decade. 
 
The Throne Speech talks about this government’s commitment 
to develop a centre of excellence for pediatric care, Mr. Speaker 
— a children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, in the city of Saskatoon 
— and that is something that I think all people of Saskatchewan 
will be excited to see. 
 
This Throne Speech talks about support for the College of 
Medicine and expanding that support to train future doctors in 
our province and future health professionals in our province. 
And that’s exactly the kind of social investment that is required, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Throne Speech talks about a major investment in an 
academic health sciences centre which will be announced in the 
next budget, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a very important 
commitment to citizens in my constituency and right across our 
province. 
 
This Throne Speech talks about the Project Hope initiative in 
health care that has been launched by our government, Mr. 
Speaker, which has now received national awards for its 
innovation, Mr. Speaker. Never recognized or acknowledged by 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, but recognized right across this 
country for the work that the member for Sutherland and the 
Premier are engaged in, Mr. Speaker. And I think that this is 
also going to be an important part of our social investment in 
the decade ahead. We are committed, Mr. Speaker, as a 
government, to dramatically reduce the addictions problem 
among our youth, Mr. Speaker, and Project Hope will be our 
vehicle for accomplishing that goal. 
 
The Throne Speech talks about increasing MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] capacity, and I’m very pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, that with the investments that have been made, that 
will be in place by March of next year, we will have doubled 
our MRI capacity in this province over a period of five years 
and sharply reduced our waiting lists for MRI services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the Throne Speech talks about our deep commitment to a 
publicly funded, universal health care system in this province 
which has been the foundation of the work of the New 
Democratic Party in social policy over the last 40 years, Mr. 
Speaker. Our commitment in this area is unwavering, Mr. 
Speaker, and the New Democratic Party is the only party in this 
province that can be trusted with confidence to manage and 
preserve our universal public health care system, Mr. Speaker 
— a publicly funded system, Mr. Speaker — and to fight for 
that, Mr. Speaker, at the national level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Premier has played a major role at the national level, 
together with the Premier of Manitoba, in fighting to protect 
this system, Mr. Speaker, which is under constant attack from 

our neighbours in Manitoba and their Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think constant attack from Conservative governments, 
Mr. Speaker, across the provinces where Conservative 
governments hold office, Mr. Speaker. We see a constant attack 
on the medicare system from those governments. And our 
Premier has stood firm, Mr. Speaker, in resisting those attacks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m told that I referred to the Premier of 
Manitoba as being one of those who attack medicare and of 
course, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the case. The Premier of 
Manitoba and the Premier of Saskatchewan have worked 
closely together, Mr. Speaker, to protect medicare in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud of that working relationship 
between those two NDP governments, Mr. Speaker. And we 
have resisted, Mr. Speaker, attempts by Conservative 
governments in Alberta and in many other parts of Canada in 
terms of eroding our medicare system. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of the other 
proposals on social innovation in this Throne Speech. And one 
of the ones that is the most important to me is the principle that 
no one in Saskatchewan will work for wages that leave them in 
poverty, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a very, very 
important principle. And it means, Mr. Speaker, a minimum 
wage that will not only be at the poverty line but above the 
poverty line, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud to be part of a 
government that is committed to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Throne Speech also talks about a very important 
investment in the community-based sector of our province, our 
community-based organizations. And we will be making an 
investment, Mr. Speaker, of $30 million over a three-year 
period to address wages and retention and recruitment in the 
community-based organization sector. And I’m very proud of 
that investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this Throne Speech talks about a pre-kindergarten program 
for four-year-olds. And that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the most 
exciting things in this Throne Speech because the principle that 
all four-year-olds in this province should have access to a 
universal pre-kindergarten program is a very exciting notion, 
Mr. Speaker, and one that will be welcomed by families right 
across this province. I can’t wait for that investment to be made, 
Mr. Speaker. It’ll be one of the most important things that our 
government does. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by talking for a moment 
about affordability in our province and about the prudent use of 
fiscal resources in our province. And this of course, Mr. 
Speaker, is one of the areas where the contrast between the 
opposition and our government couldn’t be greater. 
 
I just want to remind all members of the Assembly the situation 
that our government inherited in November 1991 when the New 
Democratic Party was elected again in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, after nine and a half years of Conservative government 
— with a province that was virtually bankrupted; with a 
province, Mr. Speaker, that had more than $14 billion of debt. 
A province, Mr. Speaker, where the relationship between debt 
and the total size of the economy, the debt was 63 per cent of 
the total economy, Mr. Speaker, after nine years of 
Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to what has been 
accomplished in the last 14 years where our debt-to-GDP ratio, 
Mr. Speaker, is now approximately 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
instead of 63 per cent. So our economy has grown and our debt 
has declined substantially. Here we have had, since the NDP 
has been elected, Mr. Speaker, 13 consecutive credit rating 
upgrades where, Mr. Speaker, we have reduced our total 
provincial debt by more than $3 billion and where we have 
rebuilt our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations, so 
that their debt load has been dramatically reduced. 
 
This is a massive turnaround from the state that the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party left our province, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s one that all citizens of Saskatchewan 
appreciate. 
 
And our plan, Mr. Speaker, is to go on balancing the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and to go on paying down debt. And this year we 
reduced debt by a further $179 million. And I’m very proud of 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And nothing, Mr. Speaker, could be a sharper contrast to the 
record of members opposite than our rebuilding of our finances 
that benefit all the people of this province in terms of reducing 
debt, Mr. Speaker, and with it being able to reduce taxes. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a reference to 
affordability because one of the important elements of the New 
Democratic Party’s commitment to the people of Saskatchewan 
in the last election was that we would continue to promote 
Saskatchewan being an affordable place to live, Mr. Speaker, 
and ensure in terms of the services that we delivered to people’s 
homes, that they could count on the lowest bundle of utilities 
anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That was a very important commitment, Mr. Speaker, that was 
made in 2003. And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that that is a 
commitment that has been honoured, both last year, Mr. 
Speaker, when a $137 rebate was paid to all families in the 
province — every home received that rebate, Mr. Speaker — 
and this year, Mr. Speaker, when we’ve made a commitment 
that we will once again be delivering the lowest natural gas 
prices in the country basically, Mr. Speaker, through a 
significant subsidization of our natural gas rates. And this is 
only possible, Mr. Speaker, because we have SaskEnergy as a 
provincial Crown utility. 
 
And what we have done, Mr. Speaker, is that instead of the 
average customer paying for natural gas at $10.88 a gigajoule, 
which has been the North American price in the last two or 
three months, Mr. Speaker, we are able to deliver that natural 
gas for $7.95 a gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. And this will be a major 
benefit, a major cushioning for every homeowner and every 
business in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m very proud that that commitment that we made to the 
people of Saskatchewan — that we would keep their utility 
rates affordable — is a commitment that has been kept and that 
will be kept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be part of a government that 
keeps its promises, that has an innovative social agenda, that 
has an innovative environmental agenda, Mr. Speaker, and that 

has advanced a prosperous economy for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I reject the claims of members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government is without vision. I think I’ve clearly demonstrated, 
Mr. Speaker, that this government has a bold vision, Mr. 
Speaker, for the future of Saskatchewan. And this government, 
Mr. Speaker, with this vision is very prepared to go into an 
election campaign two years from now, Mr. Speaker, which 
will see the members opposite defeated at the polls once again, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m confident of that. This vision, Mr. Speaker, is 
a vision that’s good for the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
and that we are proud to take into an election campaign, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll be supporting the main motion. I’ll be opposing the 
amendment, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
be able to rise in my place and add my comments and my 
thoughts with regards to the Throne Speech that was delivered. 
And I’ll certainly be speaking in favour of the amendment to 
the Throne Speech, as you will likely gather, in a few minutes. 
 
I would like to first of all, Mr. Speaker, give thanks to and 
appreciation to the constituents in the newly constructed 
Lloydminster constituency. It’s a very awkward constituency 
that is about 35 miles wide and roughly about 150 miles long, 
running parallel to the Alberta border. It’s not an easy 
constituency to serve as an MLA, but I’ve very much enjoyed 
the honour of being able to represent that constituency and the 
diversity within that constituency. You must remember that 
constituency is the centre of a very economically vibrant area, 
corridor. And the rest of the country, both Saskatchewan and 
Alberta, are looking to that area for a continuation of the 
economic prosperity that we are presently experiencing there. 
 
I would also like to thank my immediate family. In fact this 
afternoon I understand that I have three granddaughters in 
Saskatoon that aren’t in school today and may be watching this 
telecast. And I want to thank them for taking the time to watch 
their grandfather in the legislature, and I’m wondering if that’s 
going to be much more exciting than what they had normally 
planned for that period of time in a normal day. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about the 
Throne Speech and the vision that I was looking for, the people 
of the province are always looking for when it comes to the 
Throne Speech. People look at this as an opportunity to see 
what the direction is, what the opportunities lie forwards from 
the vision of this particular government. And I was pretty 
disappointed with the opportunity lost. 
 
But before that, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that I’m very 
disappointed with many of the speeches in this debate from the 
government side. What I’ve heard from those speeches is that 
we have been criticized on this side of the House for offering 
opinion. We’ve been criticized for offering our observations 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

and for questioning what is going on in . . . that the government 
is proposing. 
 
Some of the comments that have come to us is that we should 
be ashamed of ourselves for actually questioning what this 
government is doing, what they’re proposing, and of trying to 
put us in a position where we are in fact almost an enemy so 
that whenever they bring something forward and we don’t 
agree, we become almost the enemy of that state. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I lived in a state at one time where there was a 
single government, a single entity, a single party. And that party 
was supposed to be representing the people in that country. And 
it didn’t take long before that party representing the people 
became the party of government and then that party of 
government became the party that wanted to control everything, 
and nothing was allowed to be questioned. And it got to the 
point where if you were questioning the government in any 
way, you were certainly an enemy of the state. You had no right 
or privilege to do that, and in fact in those countries, people 
disappeared for that reason. 
 
We have the right to question this government. Our right is to 
challenge the government and hold them accountable for what 
they’re proposing and what they’re doing. And I’m really 
offended when they refer to me as part of this opposition, as 
part of the problem of this province and not part of being able to 
fulfill the mandate given to me. 
 
In this province which is governed and operates under the 
British Westminster parliamentary system, it is in fact an 
adversarial system. And the check and balance, as you know, 
goes from those in government and given the mandate by the 
people with the majority of the vote. And it’s true; this present 
government has that mandate to govern by one vote, but that’s 
their mandate. 
 
But it’s also true that we have the mandate and the mandate was 
given to me by the constituents to be able to challenge and to 
question and to hold the government accountable. And that’s 
what we’re going to be doing, and we’ll continue to do that 
whether it makes the government feel uncomfortable or not. 
That is the role as designed under the British Westminster 
parliament. 
 
The visioning part of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, leaves in 
my view . . . it comes up real short in a lot of areas. If you asked 
— and which I did, the people in my constituency on the 
weekend — did you know there was a Throne Speech in 
Saskatchewan? No was the answer. And I said if you had of 
heard the Throne Speech, what would you have anticipated 
would have been in the Throne Speech? Well they talked about, 
well I guess some kind of vision for what the government is 
planning to do. 
 
I guess the problem that we have, I have, with this Throne 
Speech is the things that are included have already been 
announced in large part. The things have already been given to 
us in terms of timing that hasn’t occurred at this point. A lot of 
the information and visioning is scheduled over 2008, 2010, 
some of it over 20, some over 25 years. It seems to me that if 

you want to give the confidence of your government and the 
confidence that you’re going in the right direction, you’d better 
have something a little more specific than just the generalities 
particularly that have been announced before. 
 
I have here for instance, Mr. Speaker, the highlights of the 
Throne Speech from the Government of Manitoba. This is a 
press release that was dated October 27 of this particular year. 
And in this Throne Speech they actually show some very 
positive and definite areas of where they plan to move forward 
in this particular year. And I’m just going to summarize one or 
two of them for you so that you get an idea that this is the kind 
of thing that is done in other provinces, and it’s not in 
generalities. 
 
For instance they talk about being prepared for emergencies. 
We are in an era now that people are fearful of the safety of the 
system, fearful for the emergencies that might come upon us, 
the news everyday talking about the avian flu, the hurricanes, 
earthquakes, and so on. So in Manitoba they’re actually talking 
about what they plan on doing for a pandemic that might be 
coming and people are talking about. They’re talking about 
plans for dealing with emergencies and the relationship and 
agreements that they’ve put together between regional health 
authorities and municipalities. That’s the kind of vision that 
gives the people some confidence that their government is 
looking after them and not looking after themselves as a 
government. 
 
They talk about the clean energy advantage. They talk about for 
instance negotiating with potential customers. What a novel 
idea. Find out what the customer wants and see how you can 
address that. And they talk about a power grid. 
 
In the health care system there is reference to definite priorities 
when it comes to the kinds of things that are putting on the 
waiting list. Four more additional priorities were put on the 
waiting list. They talk about . . . they have 235 more doctors 
registered and plan to register, more in Manitoba. And they also 
talk about developing an effective nutrition, exercise, and a 
healthy kids program. Those are specifics that people can 
understand, people can identify with and look forward to. 
 
They talk about combating crime and strengthening the 
prosecution against crime and gang crimes. They refer to 
specifics in rural Manitoba for instance. Something we didn’t 
see in our — hardly a reference — in our Throne Speech. 
 
For instance, for rural Manitoba, the Manitoba government is 
going to be implementing an additional 10 per cent reduction in 
farmland property tax in 2006, and that’s building on a 50 per 
cent reduction that’s already in place. That’s what farmers want 
to hear. They want to hear that there is something in the plans 
that gives them a bit of a light at the end of the tunnel. They talk 
about putting considerable effort and research toward agri-food 
and those kind of value-added that are going to make Manitoba 
prosper. 
 
They make references for northern Manitoba — what they’re 
going to do there in terms of health, schooling, and housing. 
They talk about specifics of children and youth in the future, 
child care spaces, the funding per student. They talk about 
curriculums being updated and working for the middle years 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

type of student. 
 
All of those things are positive. That’s an indication that Throne 
Speeches can in fact put vision statements in place with 
specifics enough to give people a good feeling that they are 
going to try and accomplish something. 
 
In this particular situation, why would we not be jumping up 
and down and doing cartwheels about the Throne Speech in this 
province? Well a lot of the things that have been announced that 
they’ve referred to in the Throne Speech have been announced 
before. And referring back to some of my earlier comments 
about government and the governing class, in fact it doesn’t 
take long before entitlement creeps into that equation. And I can 
see signs of that in this Throne Speech and in the actions that 
this government is putting in place. 
 
For instance they talk about reducing the property tax on the 
education portion of property tax. How many years have they 
been talking about that? So that’s been delayed, but in the 
meantime they have for themselves an immediate million 
dollars for an air terminal expansion. What they plan for the 
people and what they plan for themselves or their interests are 
two different things. 
 
There’s a health care mentioned for the last couple of years. 
Nothing is happening that I can see. In fact instead of adding 
money and resources in that direction, we see two new cabinet 
ministers put in place. That I think is called entitlement. Instead 
of addiction beds that’s so desperately needed in this province, 
what we see is some of the negotiated and settled contracts 
opened up to be quote “topped up” from some of this 
new-found money. 
 
The health care waiting lists and times, all getting longer and 
longer in this province, but in the meantime the Executive 
Council has expanded their communications and staff. 
 
When we talk about some of the things that need to be done in 
this province and what is actually done in this province, no 
wonder people become a little skeptical about the vision that 
they thought they were going to see in this budget but didn’t. 
 
And at this time, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
congratulate you on your election to the Chair and we hope that 
you will enjoy your session as the Deputy Chair and look 
forward to working with you. 
 
The fundamental question that I would have, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, is: what has changed in this province? We were a 
have-not province; we are now a have province. What 
fundamentally has changed to allow us to get into this new 
framework? And in fact are the fundamentals any different than 
they were before or is it in fact oil at $60 a barrel? That has 
nothing to do with the economic fundamentals of this particular 
province and this government. It is the fact that the world price 
has put it up to that level and this province is benefiting 
mightily from that kind of an economic stimulus. That has put 
us into the have province from the have-not. We still need all 
those barriers to growth removed from this province so that we 
can in fact attract new investment and grow on the kind of 
investment that is needed. 
 

I have an interesting quote, Madam Deputy Speaker, in an 
article. The author is Pierre Lemieux. He is a well-known 
author of economics and finance and even moral issues and 
social issues. And here’s what his comment is about the 
oil-based economy of our neighbouring province. He refers to 
Alberta. 
 

The province already ranks 8th in GDP per capita among 
the 60 U.S. states and Canadian provinces . . . 

 
But the important statement is this: 
 

Oil is not the main cause of wealth in Alberta. 
 

I want to repeat that: 
 

Oil is not the main cause of wealth in Alberta. There is no 
oil in Switzerland . . . [and there’s no oil] in Hong Kong, 
and oil does not prevent poverty in Nigeria. The main 
cause of Albertan wealth is less government intervention 
and [less government] expenditure. 

 
I think that’s the kind of vision that we have to recognize here 
in this particular province. 
 
We really want to look into the future and that’s what the 
Throne Speech is supposed to be representing. And we have a 
surplus this year in this province because of the fact of the 
economic royalties that have been coming into the province. 
 
But I wanted to comment on the fact, one of the comments by 
the previous debater in this Throne Speech who talked about the 
debt and the load that the current government is under. Well 
there’s no doubt that there is a great debt load in this province 
and it’s not entirely the fault of any one particular 
administration. 
 
I have, from the records back in 1992, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
from the then minister of Finance, that talked about the debt 
that was in place, 3.5 billion of it, was of course already put in 
place by the previous Blakeney administration. In fact I think 
that number was actually 5.95 billion and the Finance minister 
at that time called . . . a very modest debt. On top of that there 
was a $3 billion pension liability that was increasing the debt 
load on this province. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now have we improved significantly? Well from the fall report 
2005 volume 2, Report of the Provincial Auditor, I’m looking at 
numbers here that shows in 2005 our total debt number from all 
sources in this province are now 21 billion — 21 billion — and 
that has grown significantly, particularly over the last two years 
of this administration under the Premier of this province. 
Twenty-one billion now is a higher debt load for this province 
to carry than it has ever experienced before. In fact in 1991 it 
was only 17.6 when you add in the unfunded pension plan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, $21 billion. When you think about 
that, you and I and all of us here have a $21,000 debt load on 
each of our shoulders, that we’re carrying and increasing. That 
is certainly not sustainable. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, my 
poor grandchildren that . . . I don’t know if they’re still 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

watching or not. Each of those poor girls have a $21,000 debt 
load on their shoulders at this point too. That is not sustainable, 
and that’s a very important part of what this future of 
Saskatchewan is going to have to address. 
 
The Lloydminster area, Madam Deputy Speaker, is a very vital 
part, as I mentioned earlier, a very vital part of the growing 
economy in that area. And Lloydminster, as I’ve mentioned 
before, is a very interesting anomaly within that particular 
region. The city, as you know, is operating as a single unit but 
under two administrative philosophies and under two 
administrations — Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
In the year 2000, the national census had indicated that 
Lloydminster was a growing entity. The Saskatchewan side in 
fact was growing at about 3.4 per cent which was a very 
positive number for Saskatchewan. But the Alberta side was 
growing at about 18.5 per cent. It’s the same, same everything 
in place in the Lloydminster region. It’s the same sunshine, the 
same air, the same everything except for taxation, regulation, 
and attitude, resulting in a much more aggressive investment 
climate. 
 
In 2005 the city of Lloydminster did their own census to 
confirm that and virtually the same numbers — 3.5 per cent 
Saskatchewan side which is good for Saskatchewan side, but 
again eighteen and a half per cent or more on the Alberta side. 
So why in fact is that happening? If everything is rosy on the 
Saskatchewan side and there is no difference, why is the 
investment and the growth happening on one side of the border? 
 
Those are the questions that have to be asked and that is the 
questions that the government has to ultimately be accountable 
for. Because that is a pure economic model that needs further 
study and further explanation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the time that I have is running out and 
I just wanted to add one or two more perspectives from what I 
had hoped to see in this Throne Speech. The people in our area 
of the province, the constituents that I talked about, of course is 
very much driven by the oil and gas industry. And the 
infrastructure needed for the oil and gas industry is a very 
important part of that industry in the Lloydminster constituency. 
Specifically there is virtually no provincial highway running 
through it. There’s Highway 3 that runs through part of it, but 
the whole oil and gas generating area in fact is based on the 
movement of oil and the heavy oil particularly on the municipal 
roads of the RM [rural municipality] of Brittania, RM of 
Wilton, and the RM of Eldon. Consideration must be given to 
those municipalities for maintaining the infrastructure to keep 
the oil moving so the royalties can be generated by this 
government. And consideration has to be forthcoming for 
assistance in maintaining the role of the infrastructure. Those 
are important things. 
 
One of the other comments that I must make is the area of 
seniors and seniors’ care. That is in my critic area, and I guess 
in my age group, a very important part of what is needed in this 
province. 
 
It would appear that the people in my area are moved around 
from facility to facility. There’s no guarantee that they can 
become part of the health care or the long-term care of their 

own community. It’s almost like we’re treating these people as 
commodities instead of people that have built our province. 
And I think that’s a shame. I get lots of phone calls from 
families saying that their parent needs the care and why can’t 
they be put in care in their particular home. 
 
There’s several things that the elderly and the seniors need. 
They need to know that they have health care and their ability 
to receive health care in a timely fashion. They are concerned 
about accommodation because they don’t want to be left out in 
the cold. They’ve struggled their whole lives to be able to be 
independent, and they want to make sure there is some kind of 
accommodation. And they need some kind of financial security. 
 
Those are three areas, Madam Deputy Speaker, that are a real 
concern to seniors everywhere. And the only thing I saw in the 
budget speech at all was that seniors are going to be given a 
gold card. 
 
And maybe I’m the only one, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’ll 
be eligible for a gold card. So I’m looking forward to that. I 
hope there’s going to be several hundred thousand dollars credit 
limit on this card that I can use. I hope there’s all kinds of 
benefits that will follow from this gold card. 
 
But let me tell you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the situation 
in the health care, especially in the seniors, needs to have some 
attention. And we have to address it seriously very quickly. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to again reiterate that I am going to 
support the amendment to the original motion, and I’m pleased 
to do that. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
South, the Minister of Learning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It is a pleasure to rise today in the 
Assembly as the member for Regina South and take this chance 
to reflect upon the Speech from the Throne and the vision that 
has been outlined by the NDP government for the future of this 
province. 
 
Let me begin however by congratulating you, ma’am, on your 
election as Deputy Speaker. This is a well-deserved honour, and 
there is no doubt you will serve us well in this leadership role. 
 
Today I do want to talk about the Speech from the Throne. I 
want to talk about the vision that was outlined within this 
document and to talk about what it means for Saskatchewan 
people as we move forward. The Throne Speech is also an 
opportunity for us, I think, to build on the vision that we 
outlined to Saskatchewan people in the fall of 2003, a vision 
that would articulate how an NDP government would build on 
the century of success that we’ve seen on our common history 
of co-operation in this province, and on our promise to ensure 
that Saskatchewan is and remains the best place in Canada to 
live, to work, and to raise a family. 
 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

Madam Speaker, members on this side know full well that this 
can only happen by working together, by finding common 
ground, and by sharing common values — values like 
understanding that we are shaped by this place, by this land that 
we call home, and that it is from the people of this province that 
we gain our ability to make change. These are the core values 
that are behind our vision for Saskatchewan as we enter our 
second century. These are the core values that ensure that we 
can build a green and prosperous economy for all, values that 
commit to our tradition of ensuring that Saskatchewan people 
have access to the best quality health care in Canada and that 
they do so without consideration of their ability to pay. 
 
The strength of this province is built on making sure that we 
have the most affordable utility rates in the country and that the 
future of those utilities are controlled by the people of this 
province, not by the multinational interests of Bay Street 
brokers or American industrialists. 
 
We know that by building on these strengths of a green and 
prosperous economy, accessible public health care and 
education, the most affordable public services, we know that 
then we can build a better future for young people here at home 
in Saskatchewan. That, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the vision 
we went to the public with in the last election, and that’s the 
vision we’ve been building on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is a vision however that is sharply 
contrasted by that of the Saskatchewan Party. As you may 
remember we went into that last election facing off against a 
mean, extreme, right-wing agenda — an agenda that was 
personified by the member for Rosetown who was then the 
leader of the opposition. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, no one is 
fooled by who the true author of that plan was. It was the 
member for Swift Current. It is the current Leader of the 
Opposition. That was the plan he designed. That was the vision 
he set out — one of unfettered competition and one vision that 
would tear this province apart. That agenda was in fact a direct 
attack on the common values that we share as Saskatchewan 
people and indeed is perhaps better summed up by the 
member’s most recent comments in this debate where he talks 
about the mistakes of the last 60 years of socialism. 
 
It’s interesting that the Sask Party leader would choose to frame 
his response to the Throne Speech about what has happened in 
the last 60 years and to do so through the ideological blinkers 
that the Conservatives wear. They truly see only a 
Saskatchewan shaped by forces that have been hindered by a 
government that tries to protect ordinary people and keeps at 
bay the free enterprise forces that they believe blow in the 
winds that come from Alberta. It is a Conservative vision of 
defeatism. It is a defeatist attitude that does not reflect the core 
values of Saskatchewan people. 
 
The opposition has said many times in this legislature that the 
only thing that we could do to make the province better is turn 
back the clock 60 years — an interesting comment coming from 
the Leader of the Opposition. I think that particularly in this 
debate, as we begin our second century, as we’ve reflected in 
this our centennial year, this is a good time for us to think about 
what it is we’ve accomplished in those last 60 years. I’m not so 

sure that it’s a bad time to really think about how communities 
pulled together, farmers and business people pulled together, 
workers and neighbours came together to build this province 
over the last 60 years. 
 
They pulled together to create a province that uses its vast 
resources to create new things like hospitalization and 
medicare. They pulled together their resources to expand a 
school system to include some of the best technology and 
teaching methods available in the world. They have pulled 
together in order to create a system where we celebrate our 
differences, and we ensure each has the right to live free from 
want and fear in our communities through the benefit of solid 
social programs. From Douglas to Lloyd, Blakeney to 
Romanow, we have built on the common values of 
Saskatchewan people to ensure Saskatchewan’s successes in the 
last century. 
 
Indeed I find it odd that the Sask Party leader wants to turn back 
the clock to before 1944. I find it odd that the leader wants to go 
back to a time of crushing debt and poverty and disparity. I find 
it odd that he refuses to recognize the success of Saskatchewan 
people pulling together in the last 60 years to build what is truly 
the best province in this country to live in. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I find it of interest that the members opposite alternate in their 
message to this Assembly between calling for us to eradicate 
any sense of understanding of the CCF [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation] tradition from this province while 
at the same time standing in this House and calling on us to 
implement Douglas’s programs in things like agriculture. How 
is it that the members opposite can take such different views in 
the same debate in this Assembly? 
 
I think it’s fair to say that the members opposite are indeed 
unbalanced in their approach, that they are opportunistic in their 
attitude, and that they undoubtably are working from a position 
where they have a history of shame that they cannot be proud 
of. And they cannot ever — I think we all know this — cannot 
ever erase the stench of the Devine government that permeates 
their caucus, their policies, and their party. They ask us instead 
to turn our backs on the work of the pioneers and the people 
who built this province into the last world war. 
 
I think it’s interesting that we are into this debate this time in 
November, just after Remembrance Day. And I want to at this 
point just say to all the colleagues who spoke in the ceremony 
of remembrance, the special motion, that it was I think an 
opportunity for us to portray what is the best of this Assembly. 
And I particularly want to congratulate my colleague from 
Regina Elphinstone for very, very moving words as he summed 
up I think what so many of us felt on that day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — If I might just say I think that many of 
us . . . Well I’ll tell you many of us were moved to tears by his 
comments in being able to reflect not only on the impact of the 
history of his family in those great conflicts, but also to speak 
about others in our province in very specific ways who 
contributed. It helped in so many ways I think to move us away 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

from an abstraction of understanding what war truly means to 
understanding what the true consequences and commitments are 
that are needed to build a province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I say this because I think it is also an 
opportunity for us to reflect upon and remember the values and 
the courage of those who fought for our freedom. It’s also 
important for us to remember that when these same men and 
women came back to our homes after the war, they joined 
together in their communities. They built families and farms 
and businesses. They took up jobs. They became active in the 
life of their province. They made investments in our 
community. They elected governments, and yes they made 
choices to move Saskatchewan forward. 
 
Today as we enter our second century as a province, this 
Premier, today’s NDP are continuing to build on the 
foundations we laid 60 years ago. Our commitment to common 
sense and the common man and woman are as strong today as 
ever. 
 
And today more than ever we are in a position to take 
advantage of the strength of Saskatchewan’s economy that has 
returned from the abyss of debt and deficits left back when the 
opposition leader was working for Grant Devine. It has been a 
long road back for this province, back from the days when 
Grant Devine and the Conservatives of the day were spending 
$1.25 for every dollar they took in, from a time when we were 
losing 25,000 people a year from this province to out-migration, 
when our economy was in ruin and government spending was 
out of control. 
 
It’s interesting that it’s under NDP governments that we’ve 
been able to take Saskatchewan back from being the basket case 
of Canada under Devine to what is now an exclusive club of 
three, known as the have provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the Sask 
Party disparages the growth in our economy, an economy that 
has led all provinces, all jurisdictions in Canada in annualized 
GDP growth. The Sask Party leader conveniently forgets that 
while he was advising the Devine government in the ’80s to 
spend more, that it has been an NDP government that has 
worked with Saskatchewan people to turn the province’s 
finances around and that we have as a result been able to pay 
off $3 billion worth of public debt. 
 
As a result of that, today our debt is at its lowest point in 14 
years. We have reduced the interest payments from a staggering 
$800 million a year that was being paid when we took office. 
 
Now I hear the member for Moosomin defending the 
Conservative government that he was a part of. And I 
appreciate the fact that he feels vehemently and passionately 
that the choices that he was making as a member of the 
government caucus with Grant Devine were the choices that 
were good for Saskatchewan people. 
 
History however has proven him wrong. It has proven that there 
is nothing that we have been able to do to be able to erase, to 
erase that stench of the Conservative government that has 

permeated this province. It is important I think however to note 
that because of the work that we have been able to do in the last 
14 years, that today Saskatchewan’s people trust the finances of 
this government. 
 
We are now the recipients of some 13 or 14 credit rating 
upgrades. It’s interesting to note that this is now so 
commonplace that it is rarely reported in the media. And we 
have turned around an economy that used to be held ransom to 
the whims of bankers, federal bureaucrats, and depressed 
markets into an economy of growth in which Saskatoon and 
Regina in two consecutive years have led this nation in 
economic growth. 
 
It is from this position of economic strength that we’ve built. 
It’s our challenge now to figure out how it is we move the 
province forward, to take the prosperity we’ve gained and build 
upon that and create a province with energy. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have a tremendous set of assets on 
which to build a province of energy — from our pioneering and 
innovative spirit, to our well-educated population of young 
people, to our vast natural resources. Indeed Saskatchewan is 
perhaps better position than any province in this country to 
sustain real energy in our economic growth. Contrary to the 
Saskatchewan Party’s defeatist attitude, today Saskatchewan 
people are seeing that our economy and our communities are in 
an enviable position to gain prosperity through a more 
competitive and more productive economy. 
 
Sharpening our competitive edge does include the provision of 
well-trained, well-educated workforce made up of young men 
and women to take the positions that are being created in our 
ever-growing economy. And the investments we are making 
today in education and skills training, in technical training, in 
the training that happens in our regional colleges, at SIAST, on 
the job site, these are the investments in the future prosperity of 
our province. It is an investment in the people that is key to 
maintaining our competitive edge. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to tell you what you already 
know and that is that young people are on our side in this. 
Perhaps nowhere is that more easily demonstrated than in our 
party today. Young people on our campuses, in our trade 
schools, in our business community, in our workforce are taking 
up leadership positions in our party and joining our campaigns 
like never before. They are doing this because they too 
understand that the future of Saskatchewan, an affordable 
Saskatchewan that is truly the best place to live, to learn, to 
work, and to raise a family is based on the common-sense 
approaches and the commonplace values that built the CCF and 
the NDP. 
 
Like these young people we too know that there is no thriving 
or prosperous economy without a thriving and prosperous 
people. We also benefit in a province where we have per capita 
the youngest population in the country today. We have a young 
population. It is a population that is full of our friends and our 
neighbours, First Nations people, Métis people, the sons and 
daughters of immigrants, and those who are immigrating today. 
And I want to assure members of this Assembly, that as the 
minister of Education and the Minister of Learning, I am 
working hard to ensure this new generation of Saskatchewan 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

people has the education and skills training that’ll help them 
share in Saskatchewan’s success. 
 
This Throne Speech reflects the work that we have embarked on 
as a caucus to renew our school system, to embark on new 
programs that are strengthening our communities — like the 
pre-kindergarten program for four-year-olds, like KidsFirst, like 
SaskSmart and the Literacy Commission. And these are 
strengthening our post-secondary systems through a renewed 
focus on research and innovation, on skills training and trades 
education, and on ensuring our population of young people — 
many of whom come from families that have not known the 
pride of having a steady job — that we will work with these 
people, this new generation to make sure that they enter into the 
economy job ready. 
 
These, Madam Deputy Speaker, are our greatest strength. The 
greatest strength is our people. And when we combine that 
strength with the opportunities of a growing economy, we know 
that Saskatchewan’s future is truly one with energy. 
 
Consider for a second our natural strength and energy. 
Saskatchewan provides to Canada fully one-third of all the 
energy resources in this country. It is because of the work that is 
happening in our energy sector today in terms of enhanced oil 
recovery, in terms of initiatives in new technology, in terms of 
greenhouse gas sequestration; it is because of the work in 
horizontal drilling that we have seen the oilfields come back to 
life. It is because of the investments that we have made jointly 
with business and our federal government partners that we have 
been able to make sure that our energy resources have been able 
to renew this province’s economy. 
 
We know as well that we have been blessed by the fact that we 
sit upon the world’s richest resource in uranium and that we are 
now supplying about fully one-third of the uranium in the 
world. We’re seeing growth in that industry. We’re seeing 
worldwide demand for that growth coming. This morning for 
those of us who had the opportunity to attend the Regina and 
District Chamber of Commerce, listen to the Premier talk about 
the potential for growth as we can see that opportunity expand 
in Asia where they are looking for ways to create a more 
nuclear-fired electrical generation in order to deal with the 
environmental difficulties that they are having, we have an 
export opportunity for our uranium that will continue to 
enhance our economy. 
 
We also believe there’s a tremendous opportunity for us to meet 
that new demand through processing, refining. And we need to 
see that that processing is happening here in Saskatchewan soil 
as opposed to just in Ontario. 
 
We have also a tremendous opportunity in energy as it pertains 
to the natural growing environment around us. In terms of 
ethanol facilities at Lloydminster, the Husky facility there; in 
terms of the ethanol facility that we will see open in Weyburn; 
in terms of the opportunity for biomass expansion that we’re 
looking in the Northeast in Nipawin, we have a tremendous 
opportunity to take advantage in a new way of the energy 
resources that we are growing on our land. When Saskatchewan 
is the steward of 45 per cent of all the arable land in Canada, 
this in itself presents a tremendous opportunity for us. 
 

It’s interesting to note also that the Premier just recently cut a 
ribbon on a project that’ll bring us over 170 megawatts of 
wind-generated electricity — that we have gone from being the 
seventh largest producer of wind-based energy to being the 
third. Madam Deputy Speaker, we have a tremendous 
opportunity to harness the wind to be able to supply our energy 
needs. 
 
We have a tremendous opportunity to build on the strength of 
coal of which we have approximately 400 years worth of coal 
resource in this province. If we can match that resource with the 
opportunity that coal-fed methane, the clean cool technologies, 
the cogeneration, polygeneration opportunities bring, we can 
truly secure for Saskatchewan’s future and a future with energy, 
energy that is green, energy that is renewable, energy that is 
sustainable, energy that reflects the opportunity we have in this 
province, an opportunity that is built on natural strength in 
energy. 
 
Regina too will contribute to us growing this energy sector. 
Regina is indeed the energy centre of our province and is on the 
leading edge of energy research in the world. This is something 
we do not speak enough about in terms of the work that is being 
done at our universities in co-operation with the government 
research centres, in terms of our work with our federal partners, 
to make sure that we are expanding our ability to use our energy 
resource in a way that is sustainable and is in fact less 
destructive to our environment. Our universities, companies, 
governments, and our people are investing in making our 
energy resources more productive and more sustainable. 
 
At the same time in Regina we’re also seeing growth and 
opportunities in our IT [information technology] sector. We see 
the growth in information processing centres of excellence here 
in our Prairies through large and small companies alike. And we 
see an opportunity to leverage the strength of the resource that 
we have built here in the provincially owned telephone 
company, SaskTel, that is a leader in ICT [information and 
communications technology] technology around the world. 
 
We also see a city that is benefiting from our government 
investments in agriculture and food. Regina will grow on the 
basis of its partnership with rural communities around us as we 
work to expand on food processing in areas of meat production 
and value-added grain and oilseed processing. 
 
In the next few weeks my colleagues from Regina and I will 
begin work on a new strategy to make sure Regina’s position is 
well secured within our growing economy. It will be a strategy 
that is focused on our strengths in energy, in IT, and in food 
production. It will be a plan that is good for Regina and is also 
good for Saskatchewan because we know that when 
Saskatchewan’s regions are strong, Saskatchewan as a province 
is strong. We know that there’s a great potential by working 
together with our rural communities, our smaller communities, 
for diversification. 
 
It has been interesting listening over the last several days to the 
debate in this House, and listening to the Sask Party and the 
special interests that surround them continue to trash-talk our 
rural economy and portray our rural economies as victims of a 
world economy that depends on ever-increasing cash transfers 
to succeed. 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

I do not think that we can give in to the defeatist mentality of an 
opposition leader and his free enterprise party that believes that 
all we need to do is eliminate taxes without cutting services, 
reduce government without increasing handouts, and relieving 
itself of the burdensome chore of regulating the environment so 
that business can simply grow unfettered. That is not who 
Saskatchewan people are. That is not what we value. That is not 
the vision that has built this province in the last 60 years. 
 
As I listen to the contempt for Saskatchewan people and our 
common history that spews forward from the Sask Party on a 
daily basis, it makes me wonder how someone who so hates the 
history and heritage of this province should ever seek to lead it. 
It makes me wonder how someone who disparages the choices 
and contributions of Saskatchewan pioneers, veterans, and 
common people during the past 60 years, how so often they 
have disparaged this history, how is it that they should ever 
seek to lead us? 
 
[15:45] 
 
It is understanding the common values of our common man, our 
common history, and the uncommon strength of Saskatchewan 
citizens and families that is central to understanding the strength 
that’ll secure Saskatchewan’s future. We know this to be true 
because this is who we are. This is where we come from. It is 
central to our understanding of the common values we share in 
this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our vision is to build on our natural strengths. It is a vision to 
invest in innovation and research and development. It is to 
sharpen our competitive edge and it is to do that through an 
investment in Saskatchewan people. 
 
This is our vision to take our province forward into the next 
century. It’s a vision that recognizes that the social progress we 
desire is based on economic progress, but that you cannot have 
economic progress without social security and stability in our 
communities. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition speaks about the fact that he 
would rather have entrepreneurs than teachers, that he would 
rather have entrepreneurs than social workers, that he would 
rather have entrepreneurs than health care workers. This is how 
he opened his response to this Throne Speech — to disparage 
the teachers, the health care workers; to disparage the social 
workers and those who contribute to the public good in this 
province by saying that in his hierarchy there is no equality. He 
favours the entrepreneur above all others. I think that says a lot. 
I think it says a lot about the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
It was interesting to note over the weekend that the Sask Party 
looks like it will have a new candidate; that they have given a 
golden anvil to the current member for Kindersley and are 
going to boot him out of his seat so that he can be replaced by 
the former leader of the Conservative Party, Bill Boyd. 
 
In response, undoubtedly the member for Swift Current is 
concerned about his position as a leader, obviously concerned 
about what this means for his sense of entitlement as the Sask 
Party leader. And so he’s put up an interesting defence on his 
website, extolling his virtues on his website. It says — and I 
quote now — it says: 

[And the] Bloggers are . . . weighing in [quote]: “Brad 
Wall is the real thing [says this blogger]. A gifted speaker 
. . . communicates with vision, optimism, conviction, 
humour . . . and apparently, without notes,” wrote 
Catherine McMillan of smalldeadanimals.com . . . 

 
Well we may have to let the Leader of the Opposition have the 
small dead animal vote, but I will tell you that the 
Saskatchewan people that are going to go to the polls in the 
next election are not going to be swayed by the small dead 
animals approach to portraying the Sask Party leader as a 
visionary. 
 
It is clear that the vision that the Sask Party lays out is the same 
vision that the Conservative Party laid out and has always laid 
out in this province. It is one that always seeks to tear this 
province apart, that is not built on the strength of this province, 
that disparages the history and the heritage of this province. 
 
And I think it is interesting, it is interesting to listen to how the 
members opposite respond to even a simple comment in the 
Throne Speech that says that we should seek that no one in this 
province is left behind. It might interest the members to know 
why it is that that is so important to us. 
 
And the member for Moose Jaw North, I am sure, will address 
this many times as he speaks in this and other debates, but it 
was of great interest to all of us who listened to him tell the 
story this summer of travelling through the North, of going to 
meet the Canoe Quest that was travelling across the Churchill 
River. And it was a centennial event that all of us, I think, were 
quite interested in. It certainly received a lot of media attention, 
and we were quite proud — an exciting idea that people would 
canoe across the Churchill River to celebrate the breadth of the 
northern part of this province. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North tells us the story about 
how he was waiting for the Canoe Quest to come to an end, 
how they were waiting for the various entries to come across 
the finish line, and how it was that, as they gathered to wait for 
these canoes to come in, people were clearly aware of who was 
going to finish first. 
 
It was a race. People understood that. And they understood the 
benefit of finishing first, but they had waited for everyone to 
come in. They had waited for all the canoes to finish because it 
was an important venture, and it said a lot about the initiative 
and the effort these people put in. 
 
There was quite a gap, as the member from Moose Jaw North 
tells us, as they waited for the final four canoes to come in. And 
as he indicated, it turned out that two of the canoes had 
capsized, turned over. The two canoes that were in front of 
them had waited, helped them gather their gear, helped them 
pull their craft back into course, and helped them canoe down 
the river. It was as those four canoes came around the bend that 
it was obvious what was happening in that the four sets of 
canoes had waited to pull together to join hands to come across 
the finish line at the same time so that no one would be left 
behind. 
 
And you listen to what the members opposite say. Listen to 
what the members opposite say, Madam Speaker. And this 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

which says probably more about Saskatchewan spirit, about our 
ability to pull together as neighbours, as members of a 
community, as people who care about each other — what is it 
they say? They’re losers because they finished last. That’s how 
the Sask Party views this province. That is how the Sask Party 
sees this opportunity. That is what they believe is most 
important, is simply finishing ahead of your neighbour, of your 
friend, of the others in your community. 
 
That is a party that does not understand Saskatchewan. That is a 
party that so hates the heritage, so hates the tradition of this 
province, that they will not ever be given the opportunity to 
govern. That is why they lost in ’99. That is why they lost in 
’03. That is why they’ll lose in ’07. Because they do not 
understand what it is that makes this province of ours true. 
 
Madam Speaker, the vision that we have outlined in our Throne 
Speech is a vision of hope, is a vision of action. It is based upon 
shared values and shared opportunities. It is based on our 
tradition and our values as Saskatchewan people. And that is 
why I, on behalf of the people of Regina South, will be 
supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 
introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Northern 
Affairs, the member from Saskatchewan Athabasca. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. Just to thank the opposition for a few moments to 
introduce my guest and in particular the member for Rosetown. 
 
Just in your gallery, Madam Speaker, is a friend of mine, 
originally from Beauval. He now lives and works here in the 
city. He works with the Ranch Ehrlo Society. And he’s been out 
here for a number of months and really enjoys the city. And I 
asked him if he was homesick for Beauval, which is roughly 
700 kilometres north of here and he says he likes both locations. 
 
Just a short story, Madam Speaker, is that for his birthday he 
bought himself his own cowboy hat. It cost him 60 bucks and I 
want him to show off his cowboy hat. He can’t wear it in the 
Assembly, but he bought himself a cowboy hat for his birthday 
present and he likes it. 
 
So I just want to point out that I’d like all members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming Mr. Rene Lafleur from 
Beauval that’s here visiting today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I too 
would like to welcome our friend from Beauval to the 
Assembly, Mr. Lafleur. When I was leader of the opposition, I 
believe that I was in Beauval more often than the member was 
and certainly enjoyed my time up there. And we recognize that 
a lot of work has to be done in the North, and we’re sure it’s 
going to happen. 
 
I also want to say to all of my colleagues that I very much 
appreciate the fact that we’re having a fall session. I want to 
congratulate members on both sides of the House, members on 
both sides of the House for agreeing to a fall session. I think it’s 
a step in the right direction. And my hope is that the fall session 
might even become a little bit longer, perhaps six weeks in 
length, because I think it’s important to deal with legislation 
and the Speech from the Throne in the fall and then deal with 
the budget and subsequent legislation in the spring. 
 
Madam Speaker, I also want to congratulate you on your 
acclamation to the Chair as the Deputy Speaker, and we wish 
you well as you serve this Assembly in that role. We know that 
you will give this a good effort, and we appreciate that effort. 
 
I also would like to take this time — it’s my first speech in this 
new session of the legislature — to again thank my family and 
my constituents for their support. I am very appreciative of my 
wife who has sacrificed a lot so that I can be involved in the 
politics of this province and this country. I owe her a great deal 
of thanks . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and a date the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone suggested. Actually we were just 
on a date a couple of nights ago, and it was a fine time. We had 
a great dinner together. She’s getting better with every year of 
marriage we’ve been able to enjoy. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about the centennial celebrations 
of the past few months. Certainly the people of 
Rosetown-Elrose were equal to the task of celebrating the past 
100 years that Saskatchewan has enjoyed as a province, a great 
work by community committees and organizations, each one 
trying to outdo the other. 
 
And it was quite funny as I’d go from community to community 
through the summer, and they would want to know, how many 
entries did the town of Dinsmore have in their parade? Well 
we’ve got to have two more entries in our parade so that we 
have a longer parade. The next town would try to outdo the 
previous town. 
 
Thousands of people came back to these home communities to 
celebrate Saskatchewan’s centennial. The unfortunate thing is 
that these thousands mostly came from outside of the province 
of Saskatchewan. Had those people still been residents of these 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

community, they would be a community of thousands, not 
communities of hundreds. And that it was a stark reminder of 
what the last 60 years of primarily CCF and NDP government 
have done to the province of Saskatchewan, driving so many 
people out of our province. 
 
Madam Speaker, we also know that the Legislative Secretary in 
charge of centennials has been touting our centennial. But I 
have to confess, Madam Speaker, that he really didn’t do as 
much as he should have for rural Saskatchewan. He was pretty 
careful to make sure that there were some celebrations 
sponsored by the government in the larger cities of the 
province, but for constituencies like Rosetown-Elrose, he just 
wrote them off. There was no money. There was very little 
resources put into our celebrations. And I felt quite badly about 
that. 
 
In fact even when the Centennial Medals were presented, of 
which I had the pleasure of nominating several outstanding 
citizens in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, the word from the 
government side was don’t let the media know. We want to 
keep this a quiet affair. We don’t really want to celebrate in the 
opposition members’ ridings. And I thought that was 
unfortunate, about the only blemish that I can really point out in 
what was otherwise a great celebration. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, before I get on to the main thrust of my 
speech, I do want to talk a little bit about some of the comments 
of the member from Regina South. I listened very quietly and 
attentively. I didn’t heckle during the member from Regina 
South’s speech, unlike what members of the NDP are doing 
right now. But, Madam Speaker, he was plagued with a real 
problem, I think a similar problem to what the member from 
P.A. Northcote has. What he said just did not have a resonance 
with the facts. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I listened with great interest as he 
thrashed former Premier Grant Devine and his government. 
Now I’ve never been a defender of the Devine government, but 
I do remember it quite clearly. Madam Speaker, I remember 
that during the approximately nine or ten years that the Devine 
government was in office in Saskatchewan, those members, the 
NDP members criticized that government for not spending 
more money. I remember that. 
 
They said that Mr. Devine and his government was not 
spending enough taxpayers’ money in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So now the member from Regina South said that 
because Mr. Devine spent too much money, it created a stench. 
Well that really means that the NDP were trying to out-stink the 
Devine people, and, Madam Speaker, we did not hear that from 
the member from Regina South. He was not levelling with the 
people of the province. 
 
And the other thing that he forgot to say in his comments was 
the fact that Mr. Devine inherited half of the deficit of the 
province or the debt of the province from Mr. Blakeney. So if 
Mr. Devine was wrong, then Mr. Blakeney was equally wrong. 
In fact Mr. Blakeney was more wrong because he governed in 
good times when interest rates weren’t so high. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, the member from Regina South had it 
wrong. And I think he owed better to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, the Speech from the Throne should have 
concluded with . . . It’s interesting. You know, Madam Speaker, 
I very quietly listened to the member from the other side, and 
they’re not giving me the same opportunity to respond to the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Nevertheless, Madam Speaker, that speech should have 
concluded with the words, and they all lived happily ever 
afterwards because, Madam Speaker, that Speech from the 
Throne was a fairy tale if I ever heard one. The glowing words, 
the nice phrases — nothing is wrong in the province of 
Saskatchewan; we all live happily. We’re just sitting around in 
a circle singing Kumbaya according to the Speech from the 
Throne that we heard when nothing under the NDP government 
could be farther from the truth. 
 
Let’s talk a little bit about the equalization fiasco. Madam 
Speaker, I was at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] conference and listened to the address by 
the Minister for Municipal Affairs. And you’d think, Madam 
Speaker, that the entire problem in agriculture was because of 
equalization. You’d think that all of Saskatchewan’s problems 
were because of the federal Liberal government. The minister 
wasn’t willing to assume any responsibility for things that had 
gone wrong in the province. 
 
Now that reminds me of some words that I heard that I want to 
share with members in the legislature. And these words are . . . 
And I know that the Deputy Premier will listen very closely 
because I think he’s quite closely associated with these words. 
The Deputy Premier comes from the riding of Yorkton, and I 
wonder if he agrees with this statement. It says and I quote: 
 

But they do expect, and they have the right to expect, 
honesty. They have the right to expect to be able to trust 
this government, to be able to trust the men and women 
they elect. They have the right to expect that commitments 
made ought to be binding. 
 
People, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will forgive mistakes; they 
may even forgive incompetence; but they will never 
forgive betrayal. 

 
Now, Madam Speaker, those words are by the man who is the 
current Premier when he was sitting in opposition. And he went 
on to say in another speech in a couple of years later: 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it means we need a government in this 
province that views the treasury as a trust and not as a 
trough, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Now this is the same Premier that has just recently put the 
member from P.A. Northcote back into his cabinet. Now, 
Madam Speaker, the Premier said when he was in opposition 
that he could forgive mistakes. That’s laudable. Might even be 
able to forgive incompetence. Well you can forgive 
incompetence, but that’s about as far as it should go. And 
finally said that the people would not forgive betrayal. 
 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

Well, Madam Speaker, the member from P.A. Northcote, a 
member who negatively impacted my riding beyond anything I 
think the members on the opposition could imagine was not 
only prone to mistakes; that member was totally incompetent. 
And that member betrayed this legislature, and he betrayed the 
people of Saskatchewan. Now, Madam Speaker, according to 
the Premier’s judgment, that person . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Sure it was great that he apologized, but that person should 
not be given a position of trust. 
 
Let me tell you what happened in the Lucky Lake area as a 
result of this betrayal and as a result of this incompetence. 
Farmers who took the NDP government at their word invested 
thousands of their own dollars in machinery and potato 
production operations, saw the government change the 
contracts, change the deal, change the people that made the 
deal. And they lost. They lost in some cases everything that 
they worked for, for decades. Business people that supported 
the industry lost. There was foreclosures happening. There was 
a recall of equipment. And, Madam Speaker, this was all 
because the government betrayed the people of the Lucky Lake 
area, and the SPUDCO fiasco must not be forgotten. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I hope that the members opposite will 
apologize and not only apologize but fix the injustices that they 
have heaped upon not only the people of the Lucky Lake area 
but also all of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. For recently there 
was yet another lawsuit that they had to settle out of court and 
pay thousands and thousands of taxpayers’ dollars to settle. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency. It’s a great constituency. People 
work very hard. People are honest. They are hard-working 
taxpayers. They don’t complain a lot, Madam Speaker. But 
there are some things that need to be done in the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency that I have raised with this 
government and they continually turn a deaf ear. 
 
For one thing, Madam Speaker, they have never fixed a very 
simple but important component of transportation in our 
constituency. The Riverhurst ferry was a relatively reliable form 
of transportation across Lake Diefenbaker, but some bright light 
over there decided that they had to change the ferry, and it’s not 
worked properly since — in fact was not running most of the 
month of July, the highest month of tourism travel. It affected 
negatively a golf course, a regional park. It affected businesses 
that operated on both sides of Lake Diefenbaker. And time after 
time people from that area have appealed to this government to 
get it right, and they cannot get it right. They refuse to fix the 
service. 
 
Madam Speaker, there have been people who have lost their 
lives on Highway 4 in the South Saskatchewan River Valley. 
That road is in desperate need of widening and a passing lane 
being put in place to go up both the south side and the north 
side of that highway. There’s a provincial park at the bottom of 
the valley. There’s an 18-hole, first-rate golf course down there. 
There is more truck traffic on that highway in the past few years 
than we’ve ever seen. And because of the steepness of the grade 
and the narrowness of the highway, cars back up behind trucks 
that are travelling about five or six or ten miles an hour, Madam 
Speaker, and this government refuses to accelerate their plan to 
. . . They don’t have any plans, but accelerate even the process 

to get in place a plan to correct that. And there will be lives lost, 
I’m sure of it. I’ve driven that road many times and perhaps 
there’ll be a horrific accident — I pray that it doesn’t happen — 
but before this government’s eyes will be opened, and they’ll 
correct the problem. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I have to talk just a little bit about 
agriculture. The people who are making their living from 
agriculture have come to the conclusion that the NDP not only 
doesn’t care about them, but they’re trying to put them out of 
business. Madam Speaker, they were told that their education 
portion of property taxes would be reduced — be reduced by 8 
per cent — but most agriculture producers have seen their 
property tax bill go up in the last year or two. They are paying 
more property taxes instead of less, and this at a time when 
commodity prices are lower and input costs have skyrocketed. 
 
Madam Speaker, the NDP don’t even recognize the agriculture 
crisis that they are creating. And I know we’ve talked a lot 
about agriculture crises, and I don’t try to exaggerate the 
severity of these situations. But when some would suggest 
there’s a crisis, I make sure I do a little investigating before I 
jump on the bandwagon. But, Madam, Speaker, the situation 
today is the most desperate I’ve seen in my political career, and 
I’m not exaggerating one iota. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, the member for Regina South may say 
that this is not so. I call that rubbish. And the member for 
Regina South, a cabinet minister, should do a little investigation 
before he gets up in this House and says that everything is fine 
in rural Saskatchewan and agriculture is getting along fine, 
thank you very kindly. It’s not. And as Deputy Premier should 
know that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, the member from 
Regina South said everything is fine in rural Saskatchewan. 
Agriculture is doing well. He was chastising the opposition for 
being negative. He said you guys are putting rural 
Saskatchewan down. No we’re not. We’re telling the truth 
about rural Saskatchewan and the needs that are there, and the 
NDP are turning a deaf ear to those needs. 
 
Madam Speaker, it has become so bad . . . And I’m a fan of the 
show Corner Gas. I love to watch Corner Gas. And I get a real 
hoot out of it. It’s got that Saskatchewan flavour that brings a 
smile to all of our faces. But, you know, when in Dog River 
they get talking about the neighbouring town of Wullerton, you 
know, how they all kind of spit off to the side? You know, that 
rivalry between towns causes them to sort of put down 
Wullerton, the neighbouring town. Well when rural people now 
hear the word NDP or NDP government or the name of the 
Premier and his government, that’s the response. They think 
that the NDP government has become as despicable as 
Wullerton appears to be in the Corner Gas series. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I’ve got a lot of issues I want to touch 
on and I’ll touch on just a very few of them briefly. Madam 
Speaker, the NDP government decided to set up these mega 
school boards, these large, huge school divisions across the 
province. And the official opposition told them, you’re pushing 
this too fast. You haven’t got it exactly right. You’re going to 
create a lot of problems out there. We suggested if they were 
going to go ahead with the larger school divisions that they 
should not fully implement them until the beginning of the next 
school year which would be in the fall of 2006. 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

But no, the minister from Regina South was headstrong, 
decided that come whatever, he was going to put these new 
boards in place over the course of the year 2005, and they 
would take control in the year 2006. And, Madam Speaker, it 
has caused nothing but problems, divisions, arguments about 
whether decisions have been good or bad. 
 
There’s confusion in some of these divisions. There’s certainly 
some very, very bad feelings about what has occurred. I’ve 
heard complaints about the fact the department hasn’t kept up 
with the process and their bulletins haven’t been distributed 
soon enough or widely enough to help the new boards to make 
right decisions on right criteria and protocol. 
 
And so, you know, you hate to tell the NDP, I told you so. But 
we did tell them so, and they refused to listen. And as a result, 
there are probably . . . I’m sure there’s some additional costs 
and there are some problems that could have been avoided. 
 
I also want to talk just briefly about health care. We heard again 
a health care horror story in question period today. And I’ve 
certainly had to deal with them in the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency. 
 
But I noticed in the Speech from the Throne that the 
announcement of the Outlook Hospital occurred again. You 
know the Minister of Health was out in Outlook, and I was 
there the same day. And the announcement was made, oh, more 
than a year ago, probably closer to two years ago, perhaps even 
before that. And, you know, the program is under way. But 
you’d think, listening to the Speech from the Throne, that the 
decision was just made. 
 
You know they keep announcing things over and over and over 
and over again. I feel sorry for the people of Humboldt who 
have had their hospital promised to them five times, and they 
still don’t know whether they’re going to get a hospital, Madam 
Speaker. That’s cruel and unusual treatment for a community 
— to play politics in a riding even though it’s held by the 
opposition, to go year after year and tell them they’re going to 
get a new hospital and then do nothing about it. 
 
They did the same thing in Moosomin. It took years. I’m sure 
my colleague from the Moosomin constituency would agree. 
You know the NDP would come in and promise the hospital 
and then do nothing. And the community would try to raise the 
funds, and they would raise the matching funds that were 
required. And then the NDP wouldn’t get around to actually 
going forward with the project, and the cost of the project of 
course would go up. And then the community would have to go 
back and raise some more funds. And they would do that. And 
then the government would announce the project again, and 
then they would do nothing again. 
 
Madam Speaker, this is barbaric. You don’t do things like that 
in Canada. You shouldn’t do things like that to the people of 
Saskatchewan. But the NDP are smug. I see the Deputy Premier 
smiling. He thinks it’s a joke. He thinks it’s funny to tell 
communities they’re going to get a hospital to care for their 
people and then to be negligent, to negate on that promise, to 
negate that commitment to the people of that community who 
have worked hard and raised money and planned for the 
construction of a health care facility. And the member opposite 

knows that that’s absolutely true. 
 
It reminds me of SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres]. SARC had to come cap in hand to this 
government time and time again for more funds so they could 
pay their employees an adequate wage. And they were turned 
aside and turned aside. They finally, Madam Speaker, had to 
demonstrate out in front of the legislature to get the 
government’s attention. And then now we hear in the Speech 
from the Throne that they’re going to do something about it. 
Well we’ll watch to see whether they fulfill that promise or not. 
I know the people of Rosetown-Elrose that provide care to 
needy people who depend on the services provided by SARC 
will be watching very closely. 
 
Madam Speaker, I also noticed in the Speech from the Throne 
irrigation was mentioned. Irrigation is a good thing; it said 
something along that line. Well, Madam Speaker, if this 
government is really serious about promoting irrigation and 
making irrigation of our farm land a priority, let’s see them get 
beside the west side irrigation project in the Conquest area and 
Macrorie area north up to Perdue and Asquith. Let’s see them 
put their money where their mouth is. Very nice for them to talk 
about promoting irrigation in the Speech from the Throne, but 
let’s actually see something in the budget. Let’s see the money 
allocated to get the, not just the feasibility studies, but the 
project under way. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, I want to make one more quote before I 
conclude my remarks. This quote is also from just a few years 
past. This quote is from December 10, 1986. And I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’re here for one purpose, and it’s one 
purpose alone, and that’s to serve — to serve the 
constituents . . . [who] elected us; to serve the people of 
this province; and in so doing to serve our nation and to 
serve the hurting world of which we are a part. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when our days are done in this place, 
whether we’ve been a back-bencher, a member of the front 
bench, a member of the government, or a member of the 
opposition — when our days in this place are done we’ll 
be judged, not on the accolades or the honours that we’ve 
taken for ourselves; we’ll be judged not on the slickness of 
the image we’re presented to the press; we will be judged 
not on how eloquent or uneloquent we were in this House, 
we will be judged on how we have served, and judged on 
not how well we have served the privileged, but on how 
well we have served the very least among us. 

 
[16:15] 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, that also is a quote from the current 
Premier when he sat in opposition. It’s pretty sad to see that 
quote and realize that two premiers have served an inner-city 
riding in Saskatoon, and living conditions have not improved in 
that part of Saskatoon. In fact they’ve deteriorated. To see the 
violence, the bloodshed, the poverty, the poor housing, the food 
banks, the youth gangs, the vandalism, and, Madam Speaker, 
the Premier himself said this is what I should be judged on. If I 
can’t fix this kind of problem, then I shouldn’t be serving the 
public. 
 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

Well, Madam Speaker, the Premier has not served his own 
constituents well, nor did his predecessor serve his constituents 
well in the riding of Saskatoon Riversdale. And it’s the same in 
the city of Regina and similar in the city of Prince Albert. The 
poor are becoming poorer. The food banks are becoming larger. 
The violence is expanding. Youth are involved in criminal 
activities. There is physical and sexual abuse of young people in 
the inner-city ridings. It’s becoming so serious that our police 
forces who are understaffed because of broken NDP promises 
are not able to deal with that. 
 
This government is not concerned about the most needy people 
in our province. They claim they are, Madam Speaker. They say 
they are in the Speech from the Throne. But their actions betray 
them as they have been betrayed time and time again. And by 
extension they have betrayed the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in closing, Madam Speaker, I want to assure this 
Assembly that I intend to table another private member’s Bill 
calling for set election dates. I would just note to my colleagues 
that there is progress in other provinces. I expect as long as we 
have an NDP government that they will turn their nose up at 
this idea, and Saskatchewan will likely be the last province to 
accept set election dates if the NDP stay in power. If there’s a 
change in government, Madam Speaker, I expect that that will 
change. And we will be trendsetters as British Columbia is, as 
Ontario is, and some of the Atlantic provinces are. 
 
The other thing, Madam Speaker, that I want to say in closing is 
that I was really disappointed that the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders lost in Montreal the other day. And my colleague, 
the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs in his member’s 
statement talked about the fact that there’s a NDP curse on the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. 
 
Now I don’t believe in superstition and I don’t even believe in 
jinxes, but it’s true. Whenever we have an NDP government in 
office in Saskatchewan, the Riders have never won a Grey Cup. 
I can’t explain why that should be except — except, Mr. 
Speaker — perhaps it’s because the NDP portray a losing 
attitude. You know, they lose people. They lose jobs. They lose 
farmers. They lose economic confidence. They lose businesses. 
The NDP are a bunch of losers and I’m afraid that that is 
rubbing off on the Saskatchewan Roughriders. It shouldn’t be, 
Mr. Speaker. It shouldn’t be, but it seems to be. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if there was a Saskatchewan Party 
government I’m sure that, I’m sure that the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders from time to time would win the Grey Cup as they 
did under Conservative and Liberal governments. 
 
The member from Dewdney, the member from Dewdney is 
asking me to make a commitment. Will the Roughriders win if 
we form government? They will win, Mr. Speaker, if the 
Saskatchewan Party forms the government because we believe 
that Saskatchewan can win. We believe that Saskatchewan can 
grow. We believe that Saskatchewan can be the best province in 
Canada. We believe that we can keep our young people in 
Saskatchewan. And we believe we can have the best darn 
football team in the entire country, Mr. Speaker, even though 
the NDP don’t believe it. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want you to know that I will be supporting 
the amendment to the budget but I cannot support the window 
dressing that the . . . or not the budget, the Speech from the 
Throne. I’ll be supporting the amendment to the Speech from 
the Throne, Mr. Speaker. But I just can’t support the window 
dressing and the empty words that came from the NDP 
government in the form of the Speech from the Throne the other 
day. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre, the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
honour and privilege to rise in the House today and speak on 
this government’s Throne Speech, “Toward Our New Century,” 
the first Throne Speech of our province’s second century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “Toward Our New Century” delivers a powerful, 
clear vision of this government. It builds on our province’s 
foundation of an unbreakable social fabric. It’s all about hope, 
promise, and opportunity. And as I was sitting here listening to 
the former speaker over here — the doom and gloom and 
despair — and I saw a smile across his face. They seem to 
enjoy the negativity whenever they get going on negative stuff. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this speech embodies our government’s 
commitment to continue moving forward together on a path 
towards a prosperous, green economy for present and future 
generations. Mr. Speaker, truly we are a have province with 
heart. 
 
Now before I start, I want to say that I’m delighted to have you 
back as Mr. Speaker and it’s a delight to see you there. I wanted 
to make some comments to my colleague from Regina Wascana 
Plains and congratulate her on her election — I think this is a 
wonderful thing — as a Deputy Speaker. It’s especially fitting 
that her election represents the first as a woman that’s been 
chosen as Deputy Speaker. And I think it’s doubly wonderful 
that she’s been given this opportunity and that we start out our 
next century this way. 
 
I also want to take a moment to acknowledge and thank those 
who support me in my work in politics. This of course includes 
my family, my staff here in Regina and Saskatoon, and my 
executive. As you no doubt know, it’s really important to have a 
strong community that supports you. It’s critical to have that to 
be a good representative and they do deserve a big thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to represent the constituency 
of Saskatoon Centre. It’s a diverse riding that represents the 
arts, the business, the environment, and so many other groups in 
a significant way. The people of Saskatoon Centre come from 
all backgrounds, both economic and cultural, young and old, 
and a whole host of different things. It has its challenges but 
really, in many ways, it represents Saskatchewan. It’s really, 
truly a community of communities. 
 
These people are like all of us. We have our challenges but we 
rise to them and meet them head-on. What we do is we have a 
core set of values and this core set of values really is embodied 
in this speech — innovation, compassion, moving forward 
together. 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

But what really matters to the people of Saskatoon Centre are 
some very important issues and they include the economy, the 
education, safe communities, health, and the environment. And 
this Throne Speech meets the test, passing with flying colours. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the people of Saskatoon Centre know, the 
result of this vision of our actions is to improve the quality of 
life for the people and communities of Saskatchewan and to 
leave no person behind. It is the goal, Mr. Speaker, of myself 
and my colleagues on this side of the House to turn our vision 
into reality. The achievement of our aims is what motivates and 
inspires this government, Mr. Speaker, to work tirelessly in 
reaching our goals within a rapidly changing and evolving 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not rest until we ensure that all the people 
of this province, including Aboriginal peoples, youth, workers, 
families and those marginalized from society, have access to 
opportunities they require to meet their needs. It is the 
resilience, fortitude, creativity, and determination of the First 
Nations and our immigrants that has made Saskatchewan what 
it is today — a place where people value community, 
co-operation, and friendship. Mr. Speaker, these are the threads 
of our unbreakable social fabric. 
 
We could see the strength of the social fabric during our 
province’s extremely successful centennial celebrations. And 
I’d like to take a moment and acknowledge the good work of 
the member for Moose Jaw North, our Legislative Secretary, for 
the outstanding work he did coordinating and leading our 
celebrations. 
 
I’d also like to take a moment to acknowledge and thank my 
department for the role they played in the centennial 
celebrations. Our parks were abuzz with activities and I want to 
tell you some of the great results. We had over 370,000 entries 
into the Hunt of a Lifetime contest, nearly 1,000 entries in our 
parks passport contest, and more than 10,000 people voted for 
our provincial fish emblem contest. Now I’m proud to say that 
the walleye is nominated as our provincial official fish and 
we’ll see where that goes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has a bold vision to 
continue to build a greener and more prosperous economy. To 
this end I’d like to take a few moments and talk about our green 
initiative. Our government clearly recognizes that our 
environment and economy are not two solitudes. Rather they 
are woven together in a sustainable manner. 
 
We will ensure that our environment remains clean and healthy 
because on this side of the House we recognize that a healthy 
environment supports a strong economy and a strong economy 
respects the health of the environment. Now in the last election 
we made a campaign commitment to build a greener, 
prosperous economy and we are keeping that promise. We are 
moving forward together. 
 
This government will lead the country in energy conservation 
practices. This was made clear the day after the Throne Speech 
when we announced the Saskatchewan Energy Share program. 
It’s a major step in our effort to promote home energy 
conservation measures. 
 

One of the highlights of this program is it provides people with 
low incomes — generally those with older homes in need of 
more renovation upgrades — the opportunity to lower the costs 
of heating and powering their homes. Mr. Speaker, middle- and 
higher-income Canadians spend approximately 5 to 10 per cent 
of their income on energy while low-income earners, one-fifth 
of the Canadian population, spend more than 20 per cent of 
their income on energy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I was absolutely delighted when we 
announced our Saskatchewan Energy Share program. One of 
the initiatives is to improve 2,500 homes in the next five years; 
that’s 500 homes a year in eight different communities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now another area that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, is our 
water conservation strategy. And this will be announced before 
the end of the year. People have been talking about that. They 
value water as an important commodity here in Saskatchewan. 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made great strides in protecting 
one of the province’s natural legacies, the Great Sand Hills. We 
have legislated the highest protection possible for acres and 
acres of the Great Sand Hills. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn now to the great vision that 
we have for the future. I’m excited about being part of a 
government that has a vision about energy and expanded use of 
clean, renewable energy sources which will power our province 
in the future. In 20 years, one-third of Saskatchewan’s energy 
needs will be met by clean, renewable energy sources. This is 
powerful stuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to forestry and to 
being a leader in forestry as our vast forests . . . central 
Saskatchewan’s green and prosperous economy. Over the next 
20 years we’ve committed to transform 10 per cent of arable 
land to agroforestry. And we will utilize the expertise of the 
Saskatchewan forestry centre to make the most of our vast 
forest resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And they have placed an emphasis on the importance of our 
clean air, clean water, and the responsible management of our 
natural resources here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s been my pleasure over the last couple of months to 
participate in province-wide consultations with forums of 
diverse groups of stakeholders and members of the public. Now 
we’ve discussed many things, Mr. Speaker, including 
sustainable waste management, water stewardship, parks, 
stewardship of renewable natural resources, and the green 
economy. These forums have engaged both national and 
international experts as well as local groups and individuals 
representing a wide range of interests and backgrounds. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we committed to build on the results of a 
green strategy by expanding conservation activities, recycling 
programs, better integrated approach to managing our water 
resources. And, Mr. Speaker, our government will lead by 
example. 
 
Now despite what you may hear from the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, ensuring a healthy environment does not mean that we 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

must sacrifice our economy. In fact, Mr. Speaker, you don’t 
hear very much from them at all in terms of environmental 
issues. 
 
[16:30] 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne highlighted 
that 2006 will be our 75th anniversary of the Saskatchewan 
parks system. Our parks will showcase clean and green 
practices and our stewardship of protected land will be a lasting 
inheritance. 
 
In this Throne Speech we clearly state that we will work with 
northerners and First Nations towards recognition of the 
Churchill River as one of Saskatchewan’s natural legacies. We 
recognize that many northern people have a close connection to 
the Churchill River and the surrounding land, and we will be 
working with them to ensure that the beauty and significance of 
this river is maintained not only for us to appreciate and enjoy 
but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, that we will protect the 
Churchill River for generations to come. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s also very important that our vision 
recognizes that our community’s youth and families remain safe 
and healthy. The safer communities and neighbourhood 
initiatives have gone a long way to do that, and I’m delighted to 
see the missing person strategy as part of our Throne Speech. 
And as well, we are tackling issues head-on such as the crystal 
meth problem through the Premier’s Project Hope initiative — 
a project we’re proud to say has drawn national recognition 
under the leadership of our Premier — and that this project will 
be advanced in the very capable hands of our member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, the new Minister of Healthy Living 
Services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just take a few minutes and talk 
about the social programs that mean so much to the people here 
in Saskatchewan and to the people of Saskatoon Centre. I’m 
delighted to hear the words about the services of the midwives 
being recognized. I’m also delighted to hear about the 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. I’m also happy to see that we 
will be creating a pre-kindergarten program for four-year-olds 
to give them the best start to their education as possible. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, as a teacher I’m delighted to see that we 
have made it a commitment to have our young people lead this 
country in educational achievements in literacy rates. As well, 
Mr. Speaker, the seniors gold card, a great initiative, very 
innovative, to help our seniors access programs and resources 
that will help them out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also very, very happy to see that we will be 
leading the nation with the most progressive labour legislation 
that helps enable fairness in the workplace. And we will 
continue that tradition by awaiting the Commission on 
Improving Work Opportunities for Saskatchewan Residents, a 
report with recommendations that we will act upon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also recognize the valuable contributions of 
community-based organizations as identified in the Throne 
Speech. We have committed to providing increased funding of 
over $30 million over three years to address staff wages, 
recruitment, and retention. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a moment before I end my 
remarks and give a quote by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in a 
famous letter that he wrote from Birmingham jail to his fellow 
clergy in 1963. The context was here to keep working, to 
encourage people to overcome issues while others told them, 
don’t worry; things will be okay. And I think very much that 
that’s similar here — here where we have a Throne Speech 
that’s promoting innovation, rising to the challenges that are 
here before the people of Saskatchewan. He writes: 

 
I cannot sit idly [by] in Atlanta and not be concerned about 
what happens in Birmingham. Injustice anywhere is a 
threat to justice everywhere. We are caught in an 
inescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment 
of destiny. Whatever affects one directly, affects all 
indirectly. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this really is what our Throne Speech toward a 
new century is all about when we talk about leaving no one 
behind. We all move forward together to capture the next 
century of our proud history here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This Throne Speech reminds us of our collective responsibility 
to each other. It’s our vision to advance the collective 
well-being of all people in this province so that no one is left 
behind. We have work ahead of us in order to achieve that goal. 
But it is a conviction that we share as a government and, more 
importantly, as a people that will ensure prosperity in this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment but I 
will be voting for the original motion put forward from this side 
of the House because it recognizes not only our limitless 
potential as a province and as a people, but it recognizes the 
government’s plan to help them realize that. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to 
address this Assembly for my constituents from the Cut 
Knife-Turtleford constituency. My constituents have told me 
this past weekend that this Throne Speech is lacking. It’s 
lacking of direction, and it’s lacking of understanding of what’s 
really going on in this province. However in this centennial 
year, I look forward to putting my thoughts and words on the 
record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I farm. I still farm in the Maidstone area. I don’t 
apologize for being a farmer, although I certainly don’t acclaim 
great success in this venture as of late. We’re not a large farm. 
We farm approximately 1,300 acres of productive land. We 
grow mainly wheat and canola. 
 
My great-grandfather, Gothart Gilley homesteaded what is part 
of our family farm in 1904. He had dreams. His dreams were 
that this place, soon to become Saskatchewan, would be the 
place where he would provide for his family, his children, his 
grandchildren, and his great-grandchildren. It was a wonderful 
dream, Mr. Speaker, and he accomplished this dream in part. 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

His children prospered in this province and expanded their 
operations. They were educated and offered opportunities that 
must have been part of that dream. Together they built schools 
and places of worship and a successful family farm. Mr. 
Speaker, his children, including my grandmother, kept it up. 
 
My grandmother married a Scottish immigrant and, with the 
help of my great-grandfather, started Chisholm Farms, an 
enterprise that I am pleased, along with my wife Heather, to 
presently operate. My mom and dad had dreams and they 
wanted to contribute to this place called Saskatchewan. They 
wanted to surround themselves with their children and their 
grandchildren. But in some respects they failed, Mr. Speaker, or 
the province of Saskatchewan failed their dreams. 
 
I am from a family of three — one sister, one brother, and 
myself. My parents failed not on their own part but on the 
failure of this province and this government to reach the 
potential that it might have been. My sister works and 
contributes to the economic engine of the province of British 
Columbia. My brother, Mr. Speaker, works and contributes to 
the economic engine of the state of Texas in the United States. 
Heather and I are still here, so I guess at least we are 
contributing to the economic engine of Saskatchewan in part. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we also have failed. We have three boys. Our 
oldest, Ian, and his wife, Anne-Marie, operate a consulting 
business. They have received national and international acclaim 
for their work. Unfortunately there was no job opportunities in 
Saskatchewan when they returned from Europe, and they are 
now in Victoria, British Columbia. 
 
Ian was the recipient of the Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the 
Year and a Saskatchewan representative in the United World 
College baccalaureate program. Ian and Anne-Marie are now 
working in Victoria where they contribute to the British 
Columbia economy. We regret that our grandchildren are 
thousands of kilometres away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our second son, Bradley, is presently completing his degree of 
law from the University of Calgary. Bradley was also selected 
Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year and subsequently also 
represented Saskatchewan as a student in the United World 
College program. It appears that we also have lost Bradley from 
Saskatchewan as he has accepted a position in Calgary. 
 
Our third son, Stephan, is presently working in Alberta as a 
radio announcer. Stephan was a participant in the Canada 
World Youth program and had an opportunity to spend a 
number of months in Poland on this program. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that somehow my parents failed, 
one out of three, in their retention of their families. And Heather 
and I have failed even worse. We’re zero for three. We as a 
family have not done well to preserve our Saskatchewan 
heritage. I ask how long will we allow this to continue. This is 
unfortunately not a unique family situation. This Speech from 
the Throne does not address this loss and/or how we can turn 
this around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my background is that of my . . . the background 
of my constituency is a background based on agriculture and oil 
and gas industry and supplemental businesses that support these 

industries. That’s the economics. That’s the economics of the 
engine of our area. Maidstone is home for me. Maidstone has a 
population of approximately 1,200 people which has been 
relatively stable over the past 15 to 20 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to focus on two areas that I have 
identified as the drivers of our constituency’s economy. Firstly, 
agriculture. Our Agriculture minister has assured the agriculture 
industry that the programs that are presently available, that is 
the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program 
and the crop insurance program, provide the protection and 
safety net for this industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve run some numbers of my own from my own 
farm which will indicate the realities of these programs, and I 
would ask all members of this House to make their own 
conclusions. Firstly with the CAIS program. As you may or 
may not be aware, in the CAIS program, the maximum 
coverage that one can insure for is 92 per cent of your average 
production. In the past three years, the gross margin on my farm 
has dropped from $60,476 in 2003 to $49,274 in 2004 to 
$40,401 in 2005. So the protection that I receive from this 
touted program this year is 33 per less than it was two years ago 
when it came into place. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the crop insurance program is even 
worse. As I had mentioned before, we grow mostly wheat and 
canola, so I’ll just look at these numbers. And in my farm 
operation I have chosen the 70 per cent coverage level. In the 
three-year period ending 2005, the per cent of coverage that I 
am able to purchase through crop insurance has dropped by 61 
per cent . . . by 41 per cent rather, Mr. Speaker, and the 
premium has increased by 61 per cent. 
 
In my canola, my coverage has declined by 31 per cent, and my 
premium has gone up by 69 per cent. So I guess my question, 
Mr. Speaker, is for the members opposite: how would you like a 
70 per cent increase in your insurance premiums with a 40 per 
cent decrease in your protection level? 
 
Some one month ago, Mr. Speaker, I had to attend a conference 
of leaders of today, leaders of tomorrow in Edmonton. I noted 
in the Premier of Saskatchewan’s address to the leaders of 
tomorrow — young leaders from across this country — in his 
vision for Saskatchewan, agriculture was not even mentioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to show the disconnect that I sense in this 
government when it comes to business, is in the throne Speech 
they talk about agroforestry, a 20-year project that will 
eventually take over 10 per cent of the arable land of 
Saskatchewan for agroforestry. That’s interesting. The same 
day I received in the mail the Canada-Saskatchewan 
environmental farm plan program which outlines all the 
programs that the federal and Saskatchewan government are 
participating on in the next number of years. This program 
doesn’t show up here. So if this is really some kind of a serious 
change in the agriculture policy, I certainly would have thought 
it would have been covered there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Western Canada we’ve become the third 
priority area for oil and gas development, not because the 
reserves are not here but because of the tax regime, the royalty 
situation, and the layers of bureaucratic structure that exist. I’m 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

told that when drilling decisions are made in Calgary on similar 
potential sites in Western Canada, the number one choice is 
Alberta. The number two choice is British Columbia. And the 
number three choice would be Saskatchewan. So here too we 
are last. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past Sunday I discovered a parallel in looking 
at the development of this province’s resources and that of our 
neighbour’s to the west. We as a province may indeed not have 
the same resources as do have our neighbours. However, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve been blessed with resources, with talents if you 
will. In the Gospel of Matthew, Mr. Speaker, he talks about the 
use of talents that are made available to us. 
 
The master gave five talents to one of his slaves, two talents to 
another, and one talent to the third. 

 
The one who had received the five talents went off at once 
and traded with them, and made five more talents. In the 
same way, the one who had the two talents made two more 
talents. But the one who had received the one talent went 
off and dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s 
money. After a long time the master of those slaves came 
and settled accounts with them. Then the one who had 
received the five talents came forward, bringing five more 
talents, [and] saying, ‘Master you handed over to me five 
talents; see, I have made five more talents.’ His master 
said to him, ‘Well done, good and trustworthy . . . 
[servant]; you have been trustworthy in a few things, I will 
put you in charge of many things . . . 
 

Likewise, Mr. Speaker, the slave who had been given the two 
talents was able to return to his master with a matching two 
talents. However the one that had only received one talent came 
forward and said: 
 

. . . ‘Master I knew that you were a harsh man, reaping 
where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not 
scatter seed; so I was afraid, and I went and hid your talent 
into the ground. Here you have what is yours.’ But his 
master replied, ‘You wicked and lazy slave! You knew, 
did you, that I reap where I did not sow, and gather where 
I did not scatter? Then you ought to have invested my 
money with the bankers . . . what was my own with 
interest. So take the talent from him, and give it to the one 
with the ten talents. For to all those who have, more will 
be given, and they will have an abundance; but from those 
who nothing, even . . . [when] they have . . . [all been] 
taken away. As for this worthless slave, throw him into the 
outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing 
of teeth.’ 

 
The parallel, Mr. Speaker, is concerning. I question that the 
people of Saskatchewan do not want to be the worthless slave 
thrown out to darkness where there will be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the time for this province to come out of the 
darkness is nigh. It is time for this province to develop its 
talents. If today were the day of reckoning I don’t think we 
would score very well. 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Speech from the 
Throne but will be supporting the amendment put forth by the 
Leader of the Opposition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health, 
the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
enter into this Throne Speech debate and talk about the future of 
Saskatchewan and about the goals and the dreams that I have as 
the member from Regina Lakeview — goals that are based on 
my grandparents and great-grandparents who settled in this 
province — and about my children and the goals and dreams 
that I have for them and their children and my children’s 
children in the years to come, because this is about the future of 
the province of Saskatchewan. It’s about hope. It’s about how 
you instill the wherewithal for all of the people of this province 
to participate in building a society where no one is left behind. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we want for ourselves, we desire for 
all of our neighbours, our friends, our families, and the people 
who live with us. And I would venture to say that that statement 
also applies as we look at our country and as we look at our 
world. 
 
There are many things that we do in this province that are in 
some ways experiments, some ways positive attempts to sort 
out how a society can work together co-operatively. We do that 
in how we organize our economy. We do that in how we 
organize our education system. We do that in how we organize 
the social supports that we provide for everybody. 
 
So what we need to always remind ourselves is that people 
across Canada, in the United States, and around the world look 
at what we do in Saskatchewan and say are they working at 
goals that will build a new world, a new place for everybody in 
the world. And I guess what I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we have a long record of doing that, and we need to not 
forget that when we’re working . . . we have to work for the 
long, long term. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our vision set out in the Throne Speech is 
that there will be no one left behind on the path to opportunity. 
We’ll have a province with unbreakable social fabric built on a 
foundation of diverse and growing communities in a green and 
prosperous economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent Regina Lakeview. Regina Lakeview 
has a long tradition of providing leaders in our community and 
in our province. And I was very pleased to hear last week that 
when Statistics Canada did its review of the artistic community 
and people who are involved professionally in the arts, that the 
postal code which encompasses Regina Lakeview was the 
second in the country, after an area of Montreal, with the 
percentage of artists and people have their careers and their 
lives enveloped in the arts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge that group. But I also 
want to acknowledge the support of the whole province of 
Saskatchewan because what we have in our artistic community 
is people who put the words around, the images around, the 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard November 14, 2005 

stories around what we dream about as being the appropriate 
community for our province and for our country. And I want to 
thank those people for doing that. 
 
I also make a brief comment about the support that I have from 
my family, my wife Linda, my daughters, Ingrid and Solveig, 
who have for over 10 years now been part of this life and this 
community which we call the legislature. And that’s not always 
an easy task, but I have to thank them for living up to that role 
and being part of that role and giving me support in these years. 
 
I also need to thank my parents, Tom and Randi Nilson, who 
have provided an active interest in my political life. And also I 
want to thank the people in my local community who support 
me in all the work that I do through three campaigns. And 
specifically I want to thank Elaine Wood, who was my 
constituency assistant for 10 years, who is now retired; Karen 
Pattison who worked with her and succeeded her; and now 
Bernie Yakimchuk who have provided that role for me. 
 
I’m also in a very interesting situation, and a couple more 
people that I want to thank are Elaine Maksymiw and Wendy 
Hollinger. When I was appointed a minister this month, 10 
years ago, I had two people come and work with me. They’ve 
worked with me for the full 10 years that I’ve been in the role 
as a minister. And I want to thank them specifically for the 
support and guidance that they have provided over that time, 
along with many other people who have worked in my office. 
But they have provided the real source of stability which has 
allowed me to tackle some fairly tough jobs. 
 
Now in the time that I have allotted, I wanted to spend some 
time looking at the health highlights that we have in this 
particular Throne Speech which build on the work that we did 
and we’ve done around the Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Health which the Premier and I introduced in December 2001. 
At that point if you recall, we had a great deal of discussion in 
the community, across the province, and right here in this 
legislature in response to a report that was commissioned by my 
predecessors from Mr. Ken Fyke. 
 
Mr. Ken Fyke set out some fairly hard statements about what 
the health system should be in Saskatchewan and that 
engendered a lot of discussion. Out of that discussion came our 
action plan which has given us a guide over the last four years 
to do many things. And, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech that 
we have now that we presented last week identifies a number of 
further steps that we’re able to take to fulfill the commitments 
we made in our action plan. 
 
The first one that I want to talk briefly about relates to the 
renewal of our health infrastructure. We know that we have lots 
of work to do around the physical structures in our province. I 
think we have about 269 facilities across the province. And 
we’re continuing to work with communities to rejuvenate, 
create new opportunities, create new facilities. And I 
specifically want to thank the communities, the leadership in 
the regional health authorities, and the staff in Saskatchewan 
Health who have been able to take the dreams and ideas of local 
communities and bring them forward to fruition. 
 
In this particular year we have a number of facilities. In 
Moosomin we’re on the way to developing a new health care 

facility there which will clearly serve that community for the 
next 40 or 50 years. And the local people and their creativity 
around raising funds there working, together with the regional 
health authority, were able to have that project move ahead. 
 
I was up in Preeceville not that long ago to affirm the work that 
they’re doing there in their community around building a health 
care facility that allows them to build a new long-term care 
facility attached to the health care building that’s there. They 
have been able to work with their consultants and with the local 
community and all of the neighbouring communities to come up 
with some very, very good and positive ideas, and I’m pleased 
to say that that project is moving right along. 
 
I also had the pleasure last month — or just over a month ago 
— to go to Maidstone and do a groundbreaking for their new 
health care facility which will allow them to build a new 
long-term care facility which is attached to the health care 
centre. 
 
Anybody who travels west from this legislature going towards 
Swift Current knows that when you hit Swift Current there’s a 
big construction project taking place on just the northeast corner 
of Swift Current which is the new regional hospital for the 
Cypress Health Region. That particular facility is the result of 
good, hard work by the local Action Swift Current working 
together with all of the communities in the Cypress Health 
Region. The leadership from the civic officials and local 
officials, from the reeves of the RMs and the mayors of towns 
in that community allowed them to come together with a 
common vision of what they needed in that particular area. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that I think they now 
have two storeys up on this facility and are starting to close in 
parts of it, and we will have a brand new facility in that region 
providing a great deal of service to the people of southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In Outlook, Mr. Speaker, they’re working on an integrated 
health centre which will allow for rejuvenated health care unit 
attached to the long-term care facility and once again the 
leadership in the town of Outlook, together the leadership in the 
RMs and other towns in that whole vicinity, have come together 
with a vision about the kind of care that needs to be provided 
there. And, Mr. Speaker, that project is moving along, and I 
look forward to next summer and seeing the construction 
starting at that place as well. 
 
[17:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Herbert, also in the Cypress Health Region, 
they have now come to an agreement as to how to do the 
renovations at the long-term care facility to incorporate the 
various clinic aspects that they need. And that project is 
proceeding as well. 
 
Humboldt, St. Elizabeth’s Hospital, this has been a project that 
we’ve been working at for quite a while. The Saskatoon Health 
Region, working together with the local people, are close to 
getting the final functional plan done for the whole new hospital 
that’s being built there. Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot of work, 
many different people to get everything organized. But I’m very 
pleased to report that St. Elizabeth’s Hospital is moving along 
as well. 



November 14, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

In Ile-a-la-Crosse, together with my colleague the Minister of 
Learning, we’re building what will be a unique facility in 
Canada where we have the high school and community college 
building attached via a central, sort of, cafeteria area and 
meeting area with the long-term care and the acute care part of 
the facility. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s possible to look on a website 
and see this particular project as they are monitoring it from all 
locations. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker we’ll continue a little bit later. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Members, it now being past the 
hour of 5 o’clock, this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. this 
evening. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................105 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................105 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................106 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................106 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................127 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Bullying Awareness Week 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................107 
 World Diabetes Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................107 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................108 
 SaskEnergy Share the Warmth Project in Moose Jaw 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................108 
 University of Saskatchewan Huskies Win Hardy Cup 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................108 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................109 
 Music Therapy Program in Wynyard Area 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................109 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Federal-Provincial Energy Accord Negotiations 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................109 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................109 
 Agroforestry Development 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................110 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................111 
 Wait Time for Surgery 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................112 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................112 
 New Facility at Regina Airport 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................113 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................113 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 7 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................114 
 Bill No. 8 — The Western Development Museum Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................114 
 Bill No. 9 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2005 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................114 
 Bill No. 10 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2005 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................115 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Page 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................115 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................115 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................115 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................119 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................122 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................127 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................131 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................133 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................135 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


