















































Hansard: May 13, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 112A  FRIDAY, MAY 13, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3063 
 May 13, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reputation of 
Highway 32 is spreading far and wide, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
present a prayer on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills and 
other communities around the province: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petitions are signed by individuals from 
the community of Leader, Prelate, Kindersley, Coleville, 
Saskatoon, and points in Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I’ve yet 
another petition on behalf of the staff, participants, and families 
of the Wheatland Regional Centre Inc. and other like centres 
across the province that provide services for individuals with 
disabilities. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly will please consider implementing the 
minimum compensation recommendations for staff 
members who support people with disabilities as outlined 
in SARC’s human resources plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition are from 
the communities of Rosetown, Beechy, and Brock, 
Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those people very 
concerned about the assistance to autism-affected families. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to improve access to resources for 
families who desperately need help for their autistic 
children. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Estevan. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who 
are very concerned about the lack of health care services in 
rural Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Trossachs, 
and Khedive. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
today to present a petition on behalf of concerned parents in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much 
needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Budz, Buckwold, and Overholt 
Crescent, and Kenderdine Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
that citizens want to terminate the contract of Jim Fergusson: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by residents from the town of 
Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 



3064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Asquith and Grandora. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned with the consulting contract of former CEO [chief 
executive officer] Jim Fergusson of the Saskatoon Regional 
Health Authority in which he receives monthly payments of 
$13,000. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by good citizens of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present a 
petition dealing with the contract of Jim Fergusson in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I will read from the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon 
Eastview and Saskatoon Greystone. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
farmers concerned with agriculture in Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 

receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Flaxcombe, 
Kindersley, Coleville, Brock, Eatonia, Smiley, and Cudworth, 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for the Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to rise and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of the province who are very concerned with this 
government’s reluctance to implement the SARC’s 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres] human 
resources plan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly will please consider implementing the 
recommendations as outlined in SARC’s human resources 
plan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Ituna, Hubbard, and Melville. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) they are hereby 
read and received: 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan praying that 
your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
government to improve access to resources for families 
with autistic children — sessional paper 814. 
 

And addendums to sessional papers nos. 96, 666, 715, 716, 
800, and 808. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
91, The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3065 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole of this Bill 91. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for the Information Services Corporation that Bill 
91, The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
Bill No. 99, The Canadian Information Processing Society of 
Saskatchewan Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Information Technology Office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Bill 99 in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister Responsible for the 
Information Technology Office. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 99 — The Canadian Information Processing 
Society of Saskatchewan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Information Technology Office that Bill No. 99, The Canadian 
Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 117 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: is the Anti-TB League 
Superannuation Plan indexed to inflation? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 117 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: is the workers’ compensation 
superannuation plan indexed to inflation? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 117 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: is the Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Plan indexed to 
inflation? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 117 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: is the STC superannuation 
plan indexed to inflation? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of similar questions along the 
same line regarding different departments. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 117 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: how much money has the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan Eastern Region No. II based in Archerwill 



3066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

received from the government and for what programming? 
 
And I give notice I shall on day no. 17 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: how much money has the Mutual Equity, 
Trade and Investment Inc. received from the government 
and for what program? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning, the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased today to introduce to members of the 
Assembly and yourself a group of eight students who have 
joined us in your gallery. 
 
These students are from across our province and are 
representing Saskatchewan at the Interchange on Canadian 
Studies that is being held in Medicine Hat starting on the 15th. 
 
The Interchange on Canadian Studies is one of the pre-eminent 
events that goes on in our country to help students debate, 
discuss, think about current issues that are happening within our 
Canadian context. 
 
And we are represented this year by a group of eight students 
from across Saskatchewan. They are — and I’m just going to 
read their names, if they could just wave as I do so — Layne 
McDonald from Elrose; we have Catherine Abenstein from 
Regina; Christina Boobyer from Naicam; Craig Turner from 
Saskatoon; Linda Xiao from Saskatoon; Curtis Bellegarde from 
Regina; Chris Sanchez from Strasbourg; and I don’t know how 
Strasbourg got two, but this year they’ve got two, Amanda 
Willcox from Strasbourg. 
 
So I want to thank these students very much for their interest in 
this program and their agreement to represent our province at 
this interchange. The students are going to be taking a look at a 
number of issues around environment and the economy. They 
will be talking about the BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] crisis in the agricultural industry. And they’ll 
be talking also about how to deal with issues that affect young 
people in terms of the environment. 
 
So I want to invite all members to join with me in welcoming 
this group of students here and thanking them for representing 
our province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise and 
join the minister in welcoming the students on the Interchange 
on Canadian Studies here this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of introducing Christina 
yesterday and speaking with her and part of her class from 
Naicam. And I know that all of the students are very 

enthusiastically going to represent our province in this 
interchange in Alberta. And I understand they’re even going to 
have dinner with Premier Ralph Klein as part of this whole 
program. So bon appétit and enjoy your interchange. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to 
welcome a group of students from the Montreal Lake Cree 
Nation. They are eight grade 12 graduates. They are role models 
and they are a smart looking bunch of students that are here 
visiting with us today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they’re accompanied by two teachers, and maybe they 
could wave as I mention their names: Larry Bear, Joanne 
Gaudry. 
 
And these are the students, Mr. Speaker: Leonard Bird, Percy 
Bird, Jacqueline Halkett, Donald Bird, Randy Henderson, Kris 
Bird, Ervin Henderson, Keewatin Bird. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like everyone to welcome them to 
the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to introduce to you and all members of the 
Assembly two young people who are in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m very fortunate to have Cathy Ulmer working for me, and 
maybe Cathy could just give a little wave. She’s joined my 
office in the beginning of May. She’s attending university at the 
University of Saskatchewan, and she has an excellent academic 
record and is involved in many student organizations. And I feel 
very fortunate to have her working in my office. 
 
And she’s joined by Josee Steeves who is working in Executive 
Council for the summer, and I’m looking forward to having an 
opportunity to visit with Josee in the days ahead. 
 
And I’d like to invite all members to join me in welcoming 
these two young people to our Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members in the 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3067 

House 38 grade 8 students from Red Wing School who have 
come to visit today. They’re seated in the west gallery. 
 
I’ve had a wonderful visit with the Red Wing students at their 
school just recently, and was received very warmly with them. 
And I found out in fact that they are incredible singers, Mr. 
Speaker, but I won’t ask them to sing today. We had a great 
visit earlier on this morning. 
 
And they are accompanied by the principal, Mr. Robert Paul, 
and by teachers Holly Abrey-Hare and Chris Elchuk. They’re 
also accompanied — and I wonder if Mr. Paul could give a 
wave and Ms. Abrey-Hare and Chris Elchuk. Thank you. And 
parents, just give a wave: Jim Bowers, Holly Brotzel, Edna 
Dmyterko, Terry Hoover, Candace Johnson, Roman Mamczasz, 
Rob Reimer, and Mary-Ann Sherwood. 
 
I must take this opportunity as well — and I’m afraid it sort of 
gives away my age — to acknowledge two past students who 
are the teachers accompanying the Montreal Lake First Nation 
students, Joanne Gaudry and Larry Bear. 
 
So I’d like all members to welcome the Red Wing students and 
chaperones to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you two people who are sitting in your 
gallery. And I’ll ask them to acknowledge the Assembly when I 
mention their names. 
 
The first person is Dr. Murray Knuttila, who is a professor at 
the University of Regina. He’s also Chair of the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Regional Health Authority. Sitting together with 
him today is Benjamin Santamaria Ochoa who is from Mexico 
originally. He’s an accomplished writer, journalist, poet, actor, 
teacher, and long-standing activist for the human rights of 
children. 
 
He’s a recent convention refugee in Canada. He fled Mexico in 
the summer of 2002 after his lawyer was shot to death by 
assailants who left a note behind which threatened all those 
involved with her on human rights issues. 
 
He’s published a number of books. In 1997 he was appointed 
the first Ombudsman for the children of Mexico, and he’s had 
the pleasure of meeting together with our Ombudsman here in 
Saskatchewan during this week. 
 
He is presently a writer-in-exile through PEN Canada and he’s 
serving as a scholar-at-risk at Acadia University in Wolfville, 
Nova Scotia since July 19, 2004. Before that he was at George 
Brown College in Toronto and Trent University, also in 
Ontario. 
 
I ask all members to welcome him here to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Loon Lake Graduating Class Chooses to be Smoke Free 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The Ernie Studer School in Loon Lake in my constituency has 
their graduation tonight, and there’s something very special 
about this class. I’m pleased to stand in the Assembly today to 
congratulate the entire 2005 graduating class of Ernie Studer 
School for choosing to be smoke free, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also note, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland — and also who was a member of the 
all-party Special Committee on Tobacco Control — is a former 
graduate of Loon Lake, Ernie Studer School. Mr. Speaker, this 
is a province where youth smoking rates are a concern, so I 
think it’s very clear that this class has set an excellent example 
for other young people in Saskatchewan to follow. 
 
They made a commitment to help one another either quit 
smoking or refrain from starting. And over the last year they 
have supported each other in order to ensure they were able to 
achieve their goal of being a graduating class of non-smokers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Tobacco Control Act that has been in place here in 
Saskatchewan since January is all about reducing exposure to 
second-hand smoke, denormalizing tobacco use by making it 
the exception rather than the rule, Mr. Speaker, and to help keep 
young people from smoking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely proud of these students who have 
taken this step, leading the way to help ensure a healthy future 
for themselves and for those around them. And I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating the graduating class of 
Ernie Studer School for their commitment to each other and for 
making an extremely positive difference in their community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Fundraising Events in Eastend and Maple Creek 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 
small town Saskatchewan faces numerous challenges in the 
provision of services to its residents, especially in the 
maintenance of its recreational facilities. However, Mr. 
Speaker, rural people regularly show unrelenting fervour in 
their efforts to improve their beleaguered communities. This 
past month two communities in my constituency have 
demonstrated this conviction by organizing innovative and very 
successful fundraising initiatives. 
 
On April 9 an NHL [National Hockey League] alumni hockey 
game was held in the town of Maple Creek, which garnered a 
profit of $55,000 for the new rink complex. This marked the 
first time that a three-on-three celebrity tournament of this 
calibre had been held in Maple Creek. The event also included 



3068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

an auction and celebrity dinner. And even a three-hour power 
outage couldn’t quell the small-town spirit as the dinner quickly 
became a candlelit event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize Connie Burton, whose name 
might be familiar to you, who spearheaded this initiative, and 
all of those on the planning committee for their tireless 
dedication to this successful project. 
 
On April 30 the town of Eastend played host to an extreme pro 
bull riding event. A sold-out crowd of 650 people, a number 
greater than the town itself, filled the grandstands to watch 29 
professional bull riders from across Canada, the US [United 
States], and Australia. 
 
When all was said and done the event raised more than $15,000 
for the Eastend rink complex. The local organizing committee, 
under the leadership of Val Bidaux, deserves full credit for its 
success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to join with me in 
offering our belated congratulations to these two communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Recognition of Centenarians in 
Saskatchewan Rivers Constituency 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, today I would like to honour 
three more centenarians from Sask Rivers constituency. 
 
Matrona Petruk was born in Kiev and immigrated to Canada 
with her husband Tom in 1929. They homesteaded north of 
White Fox, then closer to Smeaton where they raised a family. 
Tom passed away some 30 years ago, but Matrona continues to 
live in the family farm home. Mr. Speaker, when Matrona came 
into Smeaton to receive her award, she was already looking 
forward to another spring of gardening and flowers. 
 
Elsa Ostlund came from Minnesota in 1932 with her husband 
Walter and two children. They homesteaded southwest of 
Choiceland and farmed there until 1975. After Walter’s passing, 
Elsa eventually moved into the North Haven Care Home in 
Smeaton. Mr. Speaker, Elsa used to spin raw wool using a 
cream separator, and she would knit that wool into heavy mitts 
and socks that according to her family will last well into this 
next millennium. 
 
My final centenarian is Palmer Hanson. Palmer’s family 
homesteaded just north of Spruce Home. In the 1920s, Palmer 
hauled freight to La Ronge and Stanley Mission, cut and hauled 
cordwood, and cleared the right-of-way from Spruce Home to 
the national park. He helped build schools in the area, was a 
gymnastics instructor, looked after the local cemetery, ran a 
machine business, and was a certified seed grower for over 20 
years. Mr. Speaker, Palmer Hanson is the great-uncle of Cyndal 
Halcro who’s among the Red Wing students today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Helen Swedberg, Josephine 
Olenchuk, Laura Matz, Matrona Petruk, Elsa Ostlund, and 

Palmer Hanson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

World Lupus Day 2005 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to speak about the second annual World Lupus Day 
that took place on May 10. More than 5 million people around 
the world are affected by this puzzling disease. It is up to us to 
increase awareness and understanding of lupus. 
 
Lupus is a chronic autoimmune disease in which the immune 
system attacks the body’s own healthy cells, causing tissue 
damage and organ failure. Lupus can strike any tissue or any 
organ in the body including the skin, muscles, joints, lungs, 
heart, kidneys, and the brain. More than 50,000 Canadians are 
affected by lupus. Lupus strikes men, women, and children of 
all ages, but primarily women of child-bearing age. 
 
The symptoms of lupus vary drastically from person to person 
and can mimic other illnesses, making it hard to diagnose. 
Common symptoms of lupus include skin rashes, joint pain, 
extreme fatigue, fever, chest pain, and seizures. Early detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of lupus help to slow the debilitating 
effects of the disease. Effective treatment can minimize 
symptoms, reduce inflammation, and improve overall quality of 
life. We can make a difference in the lives of people living with 
lupus by helping to increase awareness and understanding of the 
disease. 
 
I commend Betty Bellamy in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs who works diligently with the Saskatchewan 
branch of the Lupus Society in educating people of all ages 
about the disease of lupus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all my colleagues in the Assembly 
to recognize World Lupus Day 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Aboriginal Playwrights Festival 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the pleasure 
of attending the third annual Aboriginal Youth Playwrights 
Festival here in Regina. The evening was culmination of an 
intensive eight-week process linking professional theatre artists 
with emerging young playwrights. Together they explored the 
writers’ story ideas, developing them into one-act plays. On the 
final evening the plays are staged, script in hand, by local 
actors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a great evening filled with the power, the 
emotions, and comedy that can only come from live theatre. 
There was The Journey by Andrew Kinniewess. There was 
Three Two One by Heather Dawn Abbey. And the grand finale, 
the pièce de résistance was Simon Moccasin’s hotly anticipated 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3069 

work, The Bingo King. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the festival was produced through Common Weal 
community arts and their youth theatre initiative. The readings 
were staged wonderfully by members of the Red Feather Spirit 
Lodge society. I want to acknowledge everyone involved with 
the festival, in particular Ian Black, southern artistic coordinator 
of Common Weal, Ben Henderson, Pam Bustin, Mark Dieter, 
and Errol Kinistino, who lent a hand with direction and who 
helped the playwrights give voice to their stories. 
 
I also want to give notice, Mr. Speaker, that many of these same 
talents will be on display again during the Cathedral Village 
Arts Festival in the coming weeks. 
 
To close, Mr. Speaker, to the Aboriginal playwrights festival I 
say this: bon travail, good work, and Egosi, Egosi — thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Raymore Centennial Art Project 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to talk about a project going on in Raymore. 
The Raymore School has been awarded $806 from the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board for a centennial art project to be 
completed by the students. 
 
Local quilter and teacher Eva Dionne is spearheading an 
endeavour to bring together the efforts of the grade 4 and 11 
classes with local artists and senior citizens to produce a 
centennial quilt which will be a lasting display for the town of 
Raymore. 
 
Local senior citizens have been visiting the grade 4 class to talk 
to the students and relate their stories of the past. The seniors 
also have brought in photos and various artifacts to add to these 
stories. Each child was then asked to draw a picture related to 
one story. 
 
After that the pictures were given to the grade 11 class who are 
currently reproducing the pictures as artwork on blocks of 
fabric. Local artist Edie Marshall was brought in to help the 
students with aspects such as colour theory and technique. 
When the fabric blocks are completed, then local community 
members will help sew the blocks together into a quilt. 
 
This project is an excellent way to bring the students together 
with local seniors and artists to encourage their interest in the 
arts. 
 
I would like all members to help me congratulate Eva Dionne, 
the students, and the community of Raymore for their excellent 
project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Athabasca. 
 

Aboriginal Head Start Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
most gratifying moments in any MLA’s [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] life is when you witness community 
pride at its finest. I attended such an event in the community of 
Buffalo Narrows where we gathered last Friday to celebrate a 
10-year Aboriginal Head Start anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was indeed a celebration. Bev Norton and her 
board and staff with the Head Start program put on a 
community show that featured the Churchill River Reeler dance 
group, messages of congratulations, balloons, cultural pride, 
and the list goes on. I couldn’t help but feel a great sense of 
community and pride as I watched Manny Campbell lead a 
group of young Dene powwow dancers from the Buffalo River 
Band. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was followed by a presentation by the dance 
group from Buffalo Narrows who jigged themselves right into 
the hearts of the entire audience. It was a sight to see. I also 
want to mention, Mr. Speaker, Toni Lemaige of La Loche who 
rounded out the evening’s activities with a closing song. 
 
Mr. Speaker, absolutely everyone enjoyed themselves, and if 
we continue to have events like this event throughout the entire 
North, there’s no question in my mind that problems in our 
community will begin to take care of themselves. Mr. Speaker, 
pride, recognition of our children, and hope are the catalysts 
that will help us build better communities together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the event, I lost a jigging match to an older 
lady by the name of Germaine Pederson, but I gained an 
incredible amount of respect and admiration for the entire 
people of the region and of Buffalo Narrows and all that they 
accomplished that evening. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting Times for Surgery 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
spring we raised concerns of Regina and area men waiting for 
urology procedures. The wait for these procedures in Regina 
and area are the longest anywhere in this province and in this 
nation because of a shortage of urologists. But the situation 
doesn’t appear to be getting any better. 
 
Rick Roland of Regina who is here today to tell the government 
his story . . . And this is his story. On April 5, 2005, his doctor 
found a tumour in his bladder and ordered emergency, urgent 
surgery. Almost six weeks later, he is still waiting for a surgery 
date. The quality care coordinator told him he may have to wait 
in till June for this surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister please explain why it takes over 



3070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

eight weeks for urgent surgery in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand what the 
member opposite says is that this patient has taken the 
appropriate steps of working with their doctor, their specialists, 
with the quality care coordinator, and the people involved with 
the surgery registry and making sure that these cases are dealt 
with as quickly as possible. I don’t have full details about that 
particular kind of surgery here in the House today. But I know 
that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority is working very 
diligently to recruit more urologists for Regina because we do 
have a shortage right now. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Roland 
retired in March after serving 41 years in the fire service. His 
last posting was a fire marshal for the city of Regina. He is 
married, has a daughter and two grandchildren. He has worked 
his whole life and is looking forward to his retirement years 
with his family and friends. 
 
But now he faces uncertainty not knowing when he’ll receive 
this surgery. Mr. Roland is worried that this tumour may be 
cancerous and wants it caught now because we all know that 
early detection is only good with early intervention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Mr. Roland cannot receive the service here in 
Regina, will the minister guarantee him service either in 
Saskatoon or outside this province so this can be addressed as 
soon as possible? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the services provided in the 
province are those provided by the surgeons who work and they 
will make appropriate recommendations. It is possible to refer 
patients to Saskatoon, and if that’s appropriate in this case, that 
will be done. 
 
I do feel empathy for people who are caught in this time of 
unknowing around surgery. But I would point out that we have 
been recruiting more urologists for Regina, and there’s a 
urologist that’s supposed to start within the next couple of 
months. But I do recommend that appropriate steps be taken to 
see if there is a referral available to Saskatoon. And if the 
specialists think that that’s not soon enough, then they could go 
to Calgary or Edmonton or somewhere else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about the 
Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network. Well the goal of this 
network is to perform 95 per cent of cancer or suspected cancer 
surgeries within 3 weeks. That’s their goal. Mr. Roland right 
now has waited twice that time — over 6 weeks for surgery that 
should have been done in 3 weeks. 

But Mr. Roland isn’t alone. When you check the Surgical Care 
Network website, you’ll find that 49 per cent of patients waiting 
for urology procedures in Regina wait longer than 6 weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. That is absolutely unacceptable. 
 
And it gives no consolation or no hope for people on these 
waiting lists when the minister says, I think we might be getting 
another urologist in two or three months. That does nothing to 
allay their fears or deal with the issue immediately. This issue 
didn’t come to light just this week or last week; this has been an 
issue for years in this Regina Qu’Appelle health district. What 
is the minister doing to address this obvious shortfall in the 
Regina Qu’Appelle health district? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to answer that 
question very specifically. In this budget this year — and I ask 
that member to vote for this budget when it comes up over the 
next few days — we’ve allocated $8.9 million to reduce wait 
times for surgery. And one of the things that we’ve done in 
Regina is actually had the purchase of a robotic arm which will 
assist the surgeon to do these kinds of surgeries much faster 
than otherwise. 
 
We have one surgeon who is coming in the summer, a second 
urologist who is coming also this summer. Mr. Speaker, we 
continue to work to provide the services that people need across 
this province and we provide many, many services across the 
province. But there are problems in certain areas at certain 
times and this is one that we have identified and we’re working 
to correct. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Nursing Resources 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the government has spent 
millions and millions of dollars on its website to track waiting 
lists in this province. What Mr. Roland needs is not a website. 
He needs a urologist and nurses to do the procedures, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Roland needs day surgery. That means that there’s 
very limited time in the hospital. He checks in, has the 
procedure, and checks out. His case is marked urgent yet he 
faces an unacceptable wait. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister can spend millions on studies and 
millions on websites, but why doesn’t he put that into front-line 
care workers that we need in this province — urologists and 
nurses? When will he do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member 
opposite raised some questions about nurses and about the 
numbers. And I would like to say that I have now some 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3071 

information that would speak directly to his particular issue. 
 
And the number of paid full-time equivalent SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] people working in our health 
system in 2002-2003 — so the end of March 31, 2003 — was 
5,219. That number at the end of March 2005 is 5,695, an 
increase of 9.1 per cent. As far as the regular paid hours go, the 
increase in paid hours has gone up 3.67 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been doing a number of things right 
across the board to find more staff to deal with problems within 
our health care system including training, recruiting, all of those 
other things. We will keep working at this and we’ll keep 
making sure that Saskatchewan residents get good health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the questions 
yesterday and didn’t receive an answer. It was interesting to 
hear the minister attempt to answer it today. The question I 
asked yesterday is the fact that there is 11,500 nurses in this 
province — 11,500 includes RNs [registered nurse], RPNs 
[registered practical nurse], and LPNs [licensed practical nurse]. 
 
Now it’s interesting. When we talk about the issue around 
nurses, he tends to leave out LPNs. Doesn’t he class those in the 
category of nurses when we talk about nurses? Because he said 
that there’s a 1 per cent vacancy rate in this province, which 
would mean when you look at the total number of nurses that 
would mean there is a vacancy rate of only 100 vacancies in the 
province. But his own numbers last year said 203. He failed to 
answer that question. How come there is a drop from 203 
vacancies last year to 100 this year, counting all the nursing 
professionals including LPNs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think we have a good 
record on this side of the House of including all health workers 
as health workers — not like the opposite where they’ve named 
a few that shouldn’t be included. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the specific question about 100 fewer positions 
open: well the fact is we’ve hired 100 more nurses. That’s the 
simple answer. 
 
Now I have a report as of today. It’s dated this morning. And 
this lists how many nurses’ positions are open today. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there are not very many open nursing positions in 
Saskatchewan today. And that becomes a challenge. But I can 
pass this over to the member opposite. And this is something 
that we can continue to work at because there are parts of the 
province that require nurses and we should get the people there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think what everybody needs to remember is 
that we have a plan as a government to improve health care for 
the people. Those people over there have been trying to figure 
out how to cut money out of health care. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. Because we 
have listened to what SUN has had to say — the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses — and the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association]. And neither one of those organizations 
will agree with this minister. So either SUN is completely 
wrong or this minister is completely wrong because SUN is not 
saying that there have been a whole pile more nurses hired 
full-time because if there had been a number of more nurses 
hired full time, we wouldn’t hear the issues of overtime. We 
wouldn’t hear the issues of increased WCB [Workers’ 
Compensation Board] claims. We wouldn’t hear the issues of 
poor morale and poor working conditions. That’s what 
front-line workers are saying in this province. 
 
Unlike what the minister is saying that they’ve hired a whole 
bunch more nurses to deal with the problem, they haven’t. The 
answer to the questions that I’ve been asking him is they’ve 
axed full-time positions. Will he agree with that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we will allow the SUN 
operation to work with the employers and the bargaining agents 
to deal with the contract. And we’ll continue to allow for some 
of those issues to be dealt with there. 
 
What we will do is consistently look at how we’re providing the 
services, doing the appropriate planning, setting out the 
budgets, and getting the money to make sure that we provide 
those services. And I ask that member opposite and everybody 
across to support 7.1 per cent increase in health care because 
that makes a difference for the people across this province. 
 
It’s extremely important that we continue to be very diligent 
and careful about how we move forward and what our plans are 
for this province. Our goal is to provide a stable, long-term 
health care system that we all can afford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Children’s Hospital in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week the 
Children’s Health Foundation of Saskatchewan expressed 
frustration with this NDP [New Democratic Party] government. 
They have not come forward with support for a Saskatchewan 
children’s hospital. 
 
That prompted the Minister of Health to express new-found zeal 
for idea no. 9 in the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas book. That 
would be the book so contemptuously dismissed as a pamphlet 
by the Premier, but the one he used this week for two of his 
government’s announcements. 



3072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap. Is the minister actually going to do 
something to make the children’s hospital a reality in this 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that I’ve 
been in discussions with the people in Saskatoon who are 
promoting a children’s hospital for a couple of years because 
we continue to work at this. I met with Ms. Brynn Boback-Lane 
this morning downtown in Regina, and we talked more about 
how this can go forward as a co-operative effort, taking into 
account all of the different services that are provided in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very committed to providing good 
pediatric services in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, P.A. 
[Prince Albert], right across the province, centred around a 
children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. And that is a 
very good idea based on what they do have in Edmonton. 
 
We continue to work there. We will provide the resources as 
needed, as the planning goes forward as we are doing now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister was 
asked if there was a timeline for support of the children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon. And he gave his usual answer, the 
answer to every question asked this session. The answer about 
all the challenges that he faces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hard-working men and women in Saskatoon, 
in Regina, and across this province, who have raised money for 
this project, deserve the truth. Is he actually going to do 
something in support of the children’s hospital in Saskatoon or 
is he going to just keep talking about the challenges that he 
faces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to that 
question is yes. And we will continue to work and build with 
the people in Saskatoon who are providing the service for 
children there and across the province. They are planning to 
work together with the people here in Regina and other, other 
centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we see this morning is a very interesting 
little reaction that we see on a regular basis. When those people 
opposite set out their plan, their latest plan, it was just to go 
around and gather all of the information that they could around 
the projects that were already on the go in the province and then 
say this is our plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that kind of a plan doesn’t show any vision. 
It doesn’t show anything other than we’re gathering together 
information. Mr. Speaker, you need to sit down and think and 
talk with people as to what you’re going to do before you lay 

out your plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Health 
Foundation has been operating in this province for six years for 
trying to get a hospital in this province. When asked yesterday 
this minister . . . if there was a firm commitment for a 
Saskatoon children’s hospital for Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. Order 
please. Order. Order. The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, when asked yesterday if 
this was a firm commitment for a children’s hospital, here’s 
what the minister had to say, where it slows down a bit is where 
Saskatoon Health District has been doing a very careful review. 
So this is the firm commitment that the minister is contingent 
. . . some kind of firm . . . some kind of health district or review. 
 
There appears to be no time frame. It seems to be contingent on 
a review. What the Children’s Health Foundation and the 
opposition are asking the minister to do is to show some 
leadership at the provincial level and to establish a provincial 
children’s hospital. 
 
So I ask the minister, will he commit today unequivocally to a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon for the children and 
families across this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, that statement was made 
again this week and has been made in conversations with the 
groups as we move forward. And the specific quote that the 
member didn’t say everything that I said related to the fact that 
in Saskatoon they’re examining how they provide all their 
services and where they should be located — whether they 
should be in St. Paul’s, City Hospital, University Hospital. And 
that is a much bigger process and where the children’s hospital 
within a hospital fits is there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that member specifically was very involved 
with the Conservative Party before and now he’s back with the 
Conservative Party. And, Mr. Speaker, he has a consistent 
long-term record of being part of that group which virtually 
wrecked our province. And, Mr. Speaker, we in this side are 
going to continue in a very, very careful way to make sure that 
we make decisions that we can afford and that will provide the 
services for children in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
April 27 . . . 
 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3073 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on April 27 in this Assembly the 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment said there 
is no question that families were sending a clear message they 
want a stronger ability to intervene when children are 
experiencing addiction problems. On May 6 she said she 
wanted to speak to the Children’s Advocate. On May 9 she 
indicated she wanted to speak to Aboriginal representatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has this been done? And is she anywhere closer to 
finding a way to give the parents the tools they need to help 
their children? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yes my staff are setting those meetings up as we speak. And I 
would have to say that I remind the member opposite that the 
colleague that she brought here from Alberta is part of the 
government who decided to wait a year to properly implement 
that legislation. So I’m not sure exactly why she is in such a 
rush to do this. 
 
But I will tell you that if a child’s addicted and if they’re still 
connected with their family and if they choose treatment, the 
health region certainly responds to that. If a child is in need of 
protection, our department has committed to respond to that. So 
I think we are going as far as our current laws allow us and I 
think we’re having success — the 24-hour HealthLine, the 
expanded treatment centres, Mr. Speaker, we have taken 
considerable action on this matter. But I think there’s some 
important discussions that need to take place first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that’s my point exactly. We’ve 
gone as far as the current laws will allow us. We have to change 
the laws. The minister’s been saying that she wants the same 
thing as I do. She wants to give parents the tools they need to 
help addicted children. But it doesn’t look like she’s putting 
anything new forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning on CBC National they interviewed 
the member from Saskatoon Northwest about his family’s 
experience with crystal meth. CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] then stated that the Saskatchewan legislature had a 
similar Bill to the Alberta Bill before our House. Mr. Speaker, 
will this NDP government confirm nationally that our children 
in Saskatchewan are as important as Alberta children? And will 
they confirm that Saskatchewan parents are as capable as 
Alberta parents by passing this Bill? Or will she at least commit 
to using this Bill as a basis for discussion this summer on the 
important issue of addictions in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just want to illustrate a few facts here. In some of the cases the 
member is raising opposite, these children are over the age of 
25. These are not children who would even come under this 
Bill. So let’s be factual about who we’re talking about here. I 
don’t know if she’s recommending that we expand close 
custody compulsory treatment to people over the age of 18. 
When it comes to children under the age of 18 in need of 
protection, we are prepared to apprehend and get them to 
treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
farmers are literally pouring millions of dollars into the ground 
right now planting this spring’s crop. The problem is, Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t have millions of dollars. Now the Premier’s 
been in Ottawa for the full week. He’s still down there today I 
understand. And yet I found out that all he’s talking about — 
and is very important to Saskatchewan — but is an equalization 
deal and an energy accord. But neglects to bring the . . . 
highlight the problem that we have with farmers in 
Saskatchewan today. Will the Agriculture minister stand in his 
place today and tell us why the Premier is not bringing up the 
problems and the shortfall of cash in the agriculture industry 
that we have today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we should remember 
that when the Premier goes to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, to have a 
conversation with Ottawa, and you just need to pick up a 
newspaper, Mr. Speaker, or turn on a television set or listen to a 
radio over the last six months, Mr. Speaker, and what will you 
see? You will see that Canadians today, not only people in 
Saskatchewan, are better off because of the health care accord, 
of which, Mr. Speaker, our Premier led the charge on the health 
care accord, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And you can take a look, Mr. Minister, 
and see what the new equalization deal is for not only 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but for Canada. And what do you 
see, Mr. Speaker? A new equalization deal for Canada of which 
our province benefits as well. 
 
And our Premier, Mr. Speaker, has led the charge on child care. 
He’s led the charge, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to municipalities 
because Saskatchewan people are a priority, including farmers. 
And when we ask for 60/40 changes, Mr. Speaker, we want to 
see, Mr. Speaker, the new Conservative Party opposite us 
supporting us in those kinds of changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



3074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is kind of turning into an NDP trend of neglecting 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. Let’s look at Jack Layton when he 
made his deal to prop up the federal Liberals never once 
mentioned agriculture in Saskatchewan. And in fact for that 
matter I don’t think he even mentioned Saskatchewan in his 
deal. So the federal NDP have totally ignored Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we have the Deputy Premier, who spent most of the week 
bashing federal MPs [Member of Parliament] who he may have 
to deal with later in the . . . whoever turns out to be government, 
and once again the Premier is not highlighting the problems we 
have in agriculture. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, is at a time when the Prime Minister 
can’t find enough people in Canada to give money to. 
Everybody’s getting money except Saskatchewan NDP and our 
Premier hasn’t come back with one red cent, hasn’t come back 
with an equalization agreement, hasn’t come back with an 
energy accord, and again has done nothing to help farmers in 
Saskatchewan. When will they make agriculture a priority in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll take our record on 
agriculture any time and place it up against the new 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker. Any time of 
the day we’ll put it up against those men and women, Mr. 
Speaker. Because when we needed more money for 
transportation, Mr. Speaker, we got more money for 
transportation for Saskatchewan farmers and Canadian farmers, 
Mr. Speaker. When we needed more money for BSE, Mr. 
Speaker, that Minister of Agriculture and this Premier went to 
Ottawa and got more money, Mr. Speaker, for BSE, Mr. 
Speaker. And when we needed more money for crop insurance 
programs, Mr. Speaker, this government and this Premier and 
that minister got additional money, Mr. Speaker. And what I 
hear today, Mr. Speaker, is the member from Saltcoats-Melville 
standing up and supporting his Conservative friends, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Of course he’ll support his Conservative friends because they’re 
exactly of the same colour, Mr. Speaker. They’re Conservatives 
in Ottawa, they’re Conservatives in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the same family. And the Leader of the 
Opposition also stood up just recently, Mr. Speaker, in 
November and says — when he was asked by the media from 
Regina, who are you — he said, Mr. Speaker, I’m a right-wing 
party. That leader from Swift Current believes he’s a right-wing 
party . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, now. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
ask leave to go to government orders. 
 
The Speaker: — The government Deputy House Leader has 
requested leave to proceed to government orders. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Order please. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 118 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to be able to stand up and speak to the water rights 
and Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. The member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill has some very interesting aspects, in fact may be a very 
contentious Bill that I think we’re going to have many, many 
questions to be answered in this Bill. 
 
Just for an example, Mr. Speaker, one of the sections speaks 
about the powers of SaskWater— this new Bill that’s coming in 
— water rights and Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. And I 
might read that into the record, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Subject to subsection (2), for the purposes of conducting 
an inspection, any officer or employee . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. There seem to be 
two or three debates going on at once here. And I would ask 
members if they have . . . Either wait their turn for the debate, 
or if there are really pressing matters perhaps they could arrange 
to meet elsewhere. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3075 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, there’s 
a number of contentious issues within this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re going to have very many, many questions on it. One 
of the clauses that I find somewhat interesting, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ll read into the record is: 
 

Subject to subsection (2), for the purposes of conducting 
an inspection, any . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I find that even 
though I’ve asked members once, I will ask only one more time 
that members pay their respect to the member that is speaking. 
The member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m with you this 
morning. Mr. Speaker, just carrying on from where I was before 
on this clause that I think is just one of the many clauses that 
we’re going to have problems with or certainly need an 
explanation of what it’s doing in this Bill. But it says: 
 

. . . for the purposes of conducting an inspection, any 
officer or employee of the corporation authorized by it for 
the purpose may, at any reasonable time, without warrant, 
do any of the following [And this is where it gets 
interesting, Mr. Speaker]: 

 
(a) enter and inspect any place or premises where wells are 
drilled or being drilled; 
 
(b) enter any place or premises containing any records or 
property that are required to be kept pursuant to this Act or 
. . . regulations or that relate to the drilling of wells and 
inspect those records or that property; 
 
(c) make a copy of any records . . . 

 
Sounds a little bit familiar, Mr. Speaker, to maybe some of the 
labour Bills that we’ve saw being debated very strenuously in 
this House this week. But it says: 
 

. . . to be kept pursuant to this Act or . . . regulations or that 
relate to the drilling of wells and inspect those records or 
. . . property; 
 
(c) make a copy of . . . [those] records described in clause 
(b) or, if the officer or employee is unable to make . . . 
satisfactory copy, after giving a receipt remove and retain 
the records for any period the officer or employee 
considers reasonable . . . 

 
Sounds very close to what we’ve debated all week, Mr. 
Speaker, where this government can go in and seize anything it 
likes out of a businesses, a residence, or wherever, and seize 
that property, unlike any other province in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. They go on to say they require the well driller or 
owner of the well to provide the officer or employee with all 
reasonable assistance to make possible any tests that he or she 
considers necessary. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think as usual we have a problem when it 
comes to this government having the authority or putting forth 
the authority to a member of one of the Crowns at SaskWater, 
SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management] — any one of those departments — to be able to 
go into a personal residence or a personal business and seize 
records from that business. I think there’s a problem with that 
when we have to resort to that in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on my side of the province, we have had many 
problems over the past number of years with drainage. And a 
lot of those problems I believe have been caused by the 
direction and the abilities or non-abilities of people within 
SaskWater, SERM, and whatever. 
 
And we’ve even saw the case where the RM of Churchbridge 
was taken to court by this government — by SaskWater, by 
SERM — to prevent them from doing something that was 
making improvements on their land that really in essence were 
helping the agriculture industry on our side of the province 
where the drainage was to be drained into the Assiniboia River, 
so it really wasn’t going to hurt other farmers in the same area. 
And what did we do? We took one of our local municipalities to 
court. 
 
So as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to have many 
concerns on this Bill. We were just going through this Bill. It’s 
just in the last few days been put forward. We will be going 
through this Bill from one end to the other. We will be checking 
with stakeholders, and there’s many stakeholders in the 
province that are interested in what’s in this Bill, concerned 
with what’s in this Bill and especially on my side of the 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So at this time I would like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melville-Saltcoats 
has moved debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 109 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 109 — The 
Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill will be going to 
committee today. We have some significant issues with this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to provide our police 
officers and our police forces with some tools to fight organized 
crime. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is one of the worst 
pieces of legislative drafting that I’ve seen since I’ve been 
elected. 
 
There is no stated purpose in this Bill, and the Bill provides 
wide, sweeping powers to the police and to the courts to allow 
for the seizure of property and to allow businesses to be shut 
down. Mr. Speaker, the problems with this Bill is that there is 



3076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

no direction, no things that the court is to consider as they go 
on. I’ve raised these matters with the minister and the minister 
feels, leave it to the courts to decide. The problem with that is it 
is yet another one of the examples of this government throwing 
up their hands and saying, trust us. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t trust them. The people of 
Saskatchewan don’t trust them. And for us to go forward with 
that Bill in this draft or in this form is highly troubling. 
 
The Bill is prefaced on applications being brought — and a 
series of different methods — by police officers in the province 
to allow for business licences to be taken away, other licences 
to be taken away, and businesses to be closed down. Mr. 
Speaker, this government should be more supportive of 
businesses in a broader force. And they should try and provide 
the specifics that are necessary so that criminal activity can be 
ferreted out and stopped rather that using a broad-brush 
approach saying, we’ll leave it to police officers; we’ll leave it 
to the courts. 
 
The troubling aspect of this Bill is that it is not brought in the 
name of the Crown or in the name of the Attorney General who 
is the person that is primarily responsible for justice in this 
province. We have effectively, by passing this Bill, sloughed it 
off and saying, we’ll leave it to police officers to decide 
whether this is going on; we’re not going to be assuming any 
responsibility for this. There’s a horrific potential for abuse 
with this Bill. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, we want to be supportive of 
things that will reduce or eliminate organized crime in this 
province. This is not the type of legislative drafting that is going 
to lead to that end. The analogy that I would use, Mr. Speaker, 
is this is using a chainsaw as a fly swatter. You’re not going to 
get what you got as your target, and what you will do is cause 
an incredible amount of damage elsewhere. Unfortunately it’s 
something that this government is not willing to address, to look 
at, or deal with it. 
 
The real problem that we have in this province is street crimes, 
street gangs. We need this government to live up to its 
commitment that was made in the 1999 election for 200 new 
police officers. I can imagine no better way to fight crime than 
having front-line police officers on the street. 
 
We usually hear from the government — the members opposite, 
from this NDP government — that they want to fill things over 
their mandate, that they regard election promises as sort of 
being open-ended. They will fill them during their mandate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this was a promise that was made in the 
1999 election. They had an entire term that they didn’t fill it, 
and now this minister is playing games with the figures that are 
there. We have 81 out of 200 filled. He’s announced another 18. 
He talks about another 40-some. But none of those have been 
filled yet. And he keeps announcing, re-announcing. What 
we’re seeing is announcements and pronouncements and no 
follow through and no money to support the real initiatives that 
have to take place. 
 
If this minister was serious about fighting crime in this 
province, he would deal with the youth crimes and the youth 

criminals that are on the street, as part of these street crimes, 
and he should do it earlier on and take initiatives that would try 
and help or reduce crime at an earlier stage before it becomes 
crime. How about a renewed commitment to community 
schools, SchoolPLUS? How about doing something more 
constructive for fetal alcohol syndrome? 
 
And how about passing the Bill that deals with crystal meth 
instead of going around saying, well Alberta’s a year off on the 
thing. Well Alberta’s passed their Bill. They got a specific date. 
They got specific targets they’re going to deal with it. And what 
we’re hearing from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is 
they’re still looking. They’re still talking and they’ve 
announced things. And once again, announcements and 
pronouncements and no follow through on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s high time that we got something other than 
announcements and pronouncements and we saw cash 
committed to where it needs to go. Let’s try and deal with the 
problems before we’re focusing on them as corrections and 
safety and dealing with them before they become justice 
problems. Let’s deal with them when they’re an education or a 
social issue, when the children are three, four, five, and ten 
years old. 
 
The organized crime . . . the crime suppression Act is a 
band-aid, and there’s unfortunately the wrong kind of teeth in it. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m hopeful that the minister will sit down and 
have a look at the drafting that’s here and be able to come up 
with some positive direction that will give the courts the right 
tools to deal with this and focus on the things that they are to 
consider. And that’s if a business is being used for a criminal 
purpose, if there is a criminal element in that business that’s 
supposed be there, give the courts the positive direction they 
need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 109, The 
Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act, be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 109, The Criminal 
Enterprise Suppression Act, be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 109 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3077 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 100 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 100 — The 
Police Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides a number of 
different amendments that deal with complaints against police 
officers. And, Mr. Speaker, I fear that what we’ve got is some 
window dressing that may satisfy some visible concerns and 
may lack the necessary consultation or depth to do what it’s 
intended to do. I always worry when something comes forward 
with the idea that it’s going to address a whole scope of wide 
range of problems that exist. I believe that we have not done 
necessary and sufficient consultation. We’ve got, I think, a lack 
of consultation and somewhat of a lack of direction with this 
Bill. 
 
We will, as a result of this Bill, have a new police complaints 
panel or police commission with five members on it, with one 
Aboriginal . . . or one First Nations, one Métis person and one 
lawyer and two other individuals on that. I’m wondering 
whether that addresses the concerns of First Nations people, 
whether that’s necessarily the direction that should take from 
there. But I’m also more worried about whether this adequately 
addresses the concerns that come from police officers. 
 
The concerns, Mr. Speaker, that we heard during the last year or 
so from police officers was that the process was often not well 
defined. The officers who were under investigation may not 
know, necessarily know that they are under investigation and 
were not given a suitable opportunity to rebut or answer the 
allegations that were made. There was issues with 
representation, and I’m not sure that this Bill goes far enough to 
address the concerns that are there. 
 
We rely on police officers as our front-line support system to 
provide public safety in our communities. These people work 
hard. They put their lives at significant risk to ensure that 
safety. Their decisions that they make on a split second are later 
on put under a microscope and analyzed very carefully, and 
there’s incredible public scrutiny under the decisions that they 
often make during a crisis. Those decisions have to be made as 
well as can be done. And when those decisions are put under 
scrutiny, when they’re put under a microscope with the 
magnificent benefit of hindsight, we have to ensure that that 
process is open, transparent, fair, and treats the officers with 
dignity, with respect, and gives them the appropriate method of 
answering the complaints. 
 
Some of the things that should take place and I’m not sure are 
adequately addressed in this Bill — unless there is an issue of 
ongoing allegations and there has to be a . . . [inaudible] . . . 
specifics of the complaint have to be provided to the officer in a 
timely manner. Once the complaint has been made there has to 

be a very prescribed and very tight timeline because what it 
does, Mr. Speaker, is as soon as the complaint is made it puts 
the officer’s ability to function in the public or wherever the 
officer is functioning — undercover or wherever else — it puts 
that in question. And it puts a cloud over the officer’s life. It can 
have a very profound effect on the officer’s personal life and his 
professional ability to function. 
 
[11:15] 
 
There has to be prescribed timelines. I don’t see anything in this 
Bill that indicates around the background information that there 
was any consultation as to what an appropriate timeline might 
be. 
 
There has to be some very real impartiality in how this process 
takes place. It may be that that panel has inherent conflicts, so 
there has to be methods. And there should be something 
prescribed in the statute that where it’s appropriate, somebody 
from outside, possibly outside the province — certainly outside 
the municipality or jurisdiction — to complete the investigation, 
complete the review, and to make a determination. And I don’t 
see, I don’t see provisions in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another complaint that we have heard from police 
officers is that there’s not always a right to have appropriate 
representation. Police officers generally in this province are 
represented by a professional association. Not all police officers 
have the same professional association; some don’t have one at 
all. And there’s issues about whether officers in other 
jurisdictions or other areas are done. And I don’t believe there’s 
been suitable consultation or input from whether the 
professional association should be able to appear as a party to 
the proceedings or whether it should appear in its own right or 
only in a representative capacity. 
 
This type of Bill should have had some kind of public hearings, 
some kind of better consultation with all the affected members 
in the community, not just the police officers and the Aboriginal 
community, but municipalities that are the employer, and other 
citizens as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re hoping for when this Bill goes to 
committee is that people that are affected will contact members 
of the legislature and will have the opportunity to have broader, 
more open input. And I’m hopeful that the Justice minister will 
be receptive of some of the comments that no doubt all 
members will be receiving over the next few months, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 100, The 
Police Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



3078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 100, The Police 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 100, The Police Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 119 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 119 — The 
Election Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a result of a lot of 
hard work from an all-party committee. It includes provisions 
that should depoliticize the appointment of returning officers 
and should depoliticize some issues within the electoral system 
as it existed. It also recognizes certain rulings of the Supreme 
Court as to who is entitled to vote and gives significant updates 
to our existing elections Act and, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 
this Bill going to committee for further discussion. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 119, The 
Election Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 119, The Election 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 119 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill 119 stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 120 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 120 — The 
Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill 120, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, just to point out a few things. This Bill, basically the 
intent is to lower the fuel tax on aviation fuel and reduce the tax 
from 3.5 cents per litre to 1.5 cents per litre. Mr. Speaker, that is 
a good thing. 
 
But I would like to point out to the members that the fuel tax 
comparison between Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta and 
other areas, on gasoline, Saskatchewan is charging 15 cents; 
Manitoba is charging 11.5 cents; Alberta is charging 9 cents. 
Then on to diesel, Mr. Speaker: Saskatchewan is charging 15 
cents; Manitoba, 11.5 cents; and Alberta is 9 cents. Railway 
fuel tax: Saskatchewan is charging 15 cents; Manitoba’s 11.5 
cents; and in Alberta they’re only charging 1.5 cents on railway 
fuel. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious there’s a big problem and a 
concern concerning the differences in what the tax rate is. As 
we know this government likes to keep the taxes very high. 
Unfortunately that is really a deterrent to investment in this 
province. When you look at the railway fuel tax, well it’s 
obvious that any business . . . And I’m sure the railways look at 
this situation and say, well we’ll fuel up when we’re heading 
west in Manitoba before we enter Saskatchewan. And when 
they’re leaving Alberta heading east they’ll fuel up in Alberta at 
every chance when they’re only paying 1.5 cents per litre tax in 
Alberta. 
 
And so this is something this government just doesn’t 
understand or doesn’t get that when you have higher taxes, that 
it costs jobs. It costs business. It costs a potential of investment 
which in the end of the day attracts more tax revenue into the 
province so we have more money for education, health, and 
other things that the people of Saskatchewan need. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that this government, they 
move very slowly when it comes to tax reductions which 
they’ve done on the aviation fuel. But they haven’t translated 
that into reductions in other areas like the gasoline and diesel 
tax and especially the railway fuel tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting when you look at the railway fuel tax. You 
know, what are the railways getting for that huge expenditure in 
tax revenue to the Saskatchewan government? And you know, 
do we see better crossings? Do we see safer crossing? Do we 
see more lighted crossings? I think that’s questions that have to 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3079 

be answered. 
 
And this is the reason, Mr. Speaker, that we are speaking to the 
stakeholders in the province. We will be discussing these 
matters further. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we would like this 
Bill to go to Committee of the Whole so we can ask more 
questions and hopefully get some answers to these very 
fundamental questions concerning the differences between the 
tax rate between Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta. And 
again try to get an understanding of what the government’s 
thinking is and why they keep the taxes so high which we all 
know is a deterrent to investment in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned we would like this Bill to go to 
committee where we can ask more questions. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 120, The 
Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
120, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 120 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 125 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 125 — The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this 
opportunity to address the NDP’s latest attempt to kill the 
private sector investment in Saskatchewan, the corporate capital 
tax amendment Act. 

Of course this legislation doesn’t actually have anything to do 
with the corporate capital tax at all. It simply adds another tax 
on the sales of a significant part of the oil and gas industry in 
Saskatchewan. In fact if you believe the NDP’s budget 
estimates, something most people don’t do any more given the 
NDP’s habit of keeping two sets of books — the budget 
documents that are released to the public and the real budget 
numbers that are kept behind closed doors in the NDP’s cabinet 
offices — but if you actually believe the NDP’s numbers, this 
legislation will slap a tax of $20 million on the oil and gas 
industry this year and $40 million next year. 
 
So while the Minister of Finance told the Assembly and the 
people of Saskatchewan on budget day that the NDP’s budget 
contained and I quote, “no tax increases,” that simply was not 
accurate, Mr. Speaker. In fact the NDP’s budget increased taxes 
in the oil and gas industry by at least $60 million over the next 
two years. 
 
And even the name of this legislation is inaccurate and 
misleading, Mr. Speaker. The NDP calls the legislation the 
corporate capital tax amendment Act. But the NDP’s tax 
increase has nothing to do with the corporate capital tax. The 
legislation slaps what the NDP calls a resource surcharge, a tax 
on the sales of resource companies and now resource-based 
income trusts. And the minister perpetuated this misinformation 
when he moved second reading of the legislation on May 9 
when he said that the corporate capital tax will raise $373 
million this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is well aware, or at least he should be, 
that the corporate capital tax is charged against taxable capital 
of general and resource corporations at a rate of point six per 
cent. According to the information from his own department, 
from the Department of Finance provided to the official 
opposition by the minister himself, the NDP expects the 
corporate capital tax on general corporations to raise $94.2 
million in this fiscal year. Saskatchewan Finance estimates the 
corporate capital tax on resource corporations will collect 
another $60 million this year and the NDP expects to collect 
another $12.5 million, Mr. Speaker, in corporate capital tax 
from banks and credit unions. 
 
So the corporate capital tax actually generates a total of $176.2 
million. The member from Battlefords will be interested to hear 
this I’m sure, not the $373.7 million that was actually 
inaccurately reported to the legislature by the Minister of 
Finance on May 9. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation before the House today, as I said 
earlier, does not increase or does not decrease the corporate 
capital tax despite its misleading name that has been given to it 
by this NDP government. In fact it has nothing to do with the 
corporate capital tax at all. What the legislation does is expand 
the NDP’s tax on the oil and gas sale of resources to include 
sales of resources and income trusts. In other words, the 
legislation increases the sales tax the NDP government charges 
on the sales of oil and gas industry by $60 million over the next 
two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s oil and gas sales tax, or the resource 
surcharge as the NDP government calls it, is a tax on the 
resource industry sales and is estimated to rake in $197.5 



3080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

million in provincial revenue in ’05-06 according to the 
Department of Finance. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, increasing the sales tax on oil and gas 
companies in Saskatchewan is a major disincentive to new 
investments in Saskatchewan’s energy industry. It’s kind of like 
cutting off one of the legs of the golden goose that lays the 
golden egg. Because last year the oil and gas industry generated 
1 out of every $5 in own source revenue for this NDP 
government. 
 
And thanks to the oil and gas prices that are expected by 
everyone except this NDP government to stay strong through 
the rest of the year, the oil and gas industry will likely generate 
at least 1 in $5 of the NDP government’s own source revenue in 
this year as well. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to strong oil and gas price because . . . I say 
thank you to strong oil and gas prices because thanks to things 
like the NDP’s decision to increase taxes on the oil and gas 
industry through the legislation we are debating today, the 
industry is actually — and the member from Moose Jaw I’m 
sure would like to hear this — the industry is actually planning 
to drill fewer wells in Saskatchewan this year and next year, 
fewer wells in light of 50-plus dollar oil. Shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact the NDP’s own budget documents say as much. 
According to the Department of Finance — page 40 of the 
budget summary if you’re following along, and I hope that the 
ministers opposite are — the oil and gas industry will drill 
1,700 new wells this year, down, down 10 per cent from last 
year and then slip to 1,600 new wells next year, a further 6 per 
cent decrease in drilling activity, Mr. Speaker. And that was 
before the NDP decided to increase their oil and gas sales tax 
by $60 million in this year’s budget. . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . What were they thinking indeed, Mr. Speaker? What were 
they thinking? 
 
Now very strong oil and gas prices will likely ensure that the 
province oil and gas revenues stay strong this year in spite of 
the NDP’s high-tax approach. But it doesn’t change the fact 
even before this piece of destructive legislation was introduced, 
even before the NDP decided to increase its sales tax on oil and 
gas — Mr. Speaker, the resource surcharge, $60 million over 
the next two years — this government was already imposing the 
most aggressive corporate tax structure in North America. And 
now the NDP’s plan is to introduce another $60 million in 
resource surcharges over the next two years which will make a 
bad situation even worse, Mr. Speaker, a bad situation even 
worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party strongly opposes the 
legislation before the House today because it simply increases 
the NDP’s sales tax on oil and gas activity and is therefore yet 
another barrier to new investment in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few days ago I had the opportunity to make a 
presentation to the provincial business tax review committee in 
Yorkton. And I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance 
and his government for moving forward with this independent 
review of Saskatchewan’s oppressive business tax regime. It’s 

certainly long overdue. And hopefully Professor Vicq will 
finally convince the Premier and this NDP government that 
what they have been doing is indeed not working. I see that 
members opposite agree. 
 
Well let’s have a look at the NDP’s brutal record. On most 
economic measures . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well at least 
I hope they agree. I hope they agree. I’m not sure if they do, but 
I sincerely hope that they do. I think we’ve made the case, and I 
think they should agree. Yes, I think they do. 
 
On most economic measures, Saskatchewan has ranked at or 
near the bottom in comparison to other provinces in Canada for 
the last two decades. It’s a well-known fact. And even the 
Minister of Industry and Resources has said, you can’t argue 
with the facts. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here indeed are the facts. No province 
except Newfoundland has a worse population record over the 
last 15 years, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts. Those are the 
facts — as sad as they are — those are the facts. That’s why 
changes are needed. That’s why changes are needed in the tax 
regime, and that’s why changes are needed in this political 
regime that we have next door. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another fact. Saskatchewan has the worst job 
creation record in Canada over the past five years. Nobody 
takes any glee in that. Even the member chirping in the back 
from North Battleford, I’m sure he doesn’t take any glee in the 
fact that we have the worst job creation record in North 
America. 
 
It is a fact, Mr. Speaker. I’m not proud of it, but it just 
emphasizes the changes that are needed in the provincial tax 
structure but more important, changes in the government, Mr. 
Speaker. And those changes will come. Those changes will 
come, Mr. Speaker. They’ll come very shortly but not too soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another fact. Only Newfoundland loses more of its 
young people to other provinces than Saskatchewan. How long 
is this going to continue, Mr. Speaker? When are changes going 
to happen? 
 
I hope that the changes are led by the Minister of Finance when 
he introduces changes that’ll be necessary. Fortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan has built a well-earned reputation as an 
anti-business province thanks mostly in part . . . mostly to the 
last 60 years of CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party] government policies that 
have either chased the private sector away or kept them from 
coming in at all. That’s what we’re seeing right now. It’s 
keeping them from coming in here at all. 
 
But there is some good news, Mr. Speaker. There is some light 
at the end of the NDP tunnel. And I’m sure the member from 
Regina Rosemont will know exactly what I am talking about 
when we talk about lights at the end of the tunnel. 
 
Last fall Saskatchewan Party leader Brad Wall released a paper 
entitled The Promise of Saskatchewan: A New Vision for 
Saskatchewan’s Economy. It was well . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind member, use of titles is 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3081 

the parliamentary process when referring to another member 
rather than names. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The paper was 
well received by . . . The paper authored by my leader was well 
received across Saskatchewan as providing a solid framework 
for where Saskatchewan needs to go if we are to compete and 
succeed in the global economy of the new century. I was proud, 
Mr. Speaker, to table that paper as part of the Saskatchewan 
Party submission to the independent business tax review 
committee, and I am confident the committee will find its 
recommendations useful in preparing their final report. 
 
Our proposal recommends significant changes designed to build 
a Saskatchewan advantage when it comes to competing with the 
rest of Canada and the world for jobs and investment. Our 
proposal recommends reductions in the small-business tax, the 
corporate income tax, and, Mr. Speaker, also reductions in the 
corporate capital tax. And while the Saskatchewan Party is not 
recommending any change in the application of the resource 
surcharge or the rate of the surcharge, we are recommending 
that the NDP government reverse its decision to expand the 
resource surcharge on resource sales and income trusts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to tax lawyers across this province 
recently and they say this is a bad idea; this is bad legislation. 
All the income trusts have to do, with a stroke of a pen, is no 
longer be Saskatchewan income trusts but be Alberta income 
trusts and carry on the work that they have done here. No longer 
can this government build walls around this province and 
expect capital to stay in this province. It no longer happens this 
way. So indeed, Mr. Speaker, I agree with tax lawyers across 
this province that this is bad legislation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party opposes this resource sales tax because 
it’ll create yet another barrier to new private sector investment 
in Saskatchewan. We need to create a competitive tax 
environment to encourage new investment and growth, and I 
would hope members opposite would at least agree with me on 
that point. We need a competitive environment to ensure that 
we have investment and growth happening in this province. 
That means, Mr. Speaker, tax reductions, not tax increases as 
the NDP is proposing with this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite the minister and his government to read 
the Saskatchewan Party’s progress proposals for creating a 
positive climate that will stimulate new business development, 
drive job creation, and, Mr. Speaker, certainly create economic 
growth in our province. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to this Bill 
going to committee and having a vigorous debate at that level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill 125, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
125, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005, be 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 125 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 121 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 121 — The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
only take a few minutes today because I think we are in 
agreeance with the changes that are being made in this Bill. I 
believe these amendments further define the obligation of 
producers and lenders and the government in dealing with these 
loan guarantees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know — and I believe the minister and 
myself agree on this — that the feeder co-ops or feeder 
associations are a very important part of our agriculture industry 
out there, especially the cattle sector. And the minister spoke 
when he introduced the Bill, Mr. Speaker, about the proposed 
amendments will allow feeder and breeder associations to enter 
into agreement with the minister to proceed with debt collection 
after a guaranteed payout has been made to the lender while 
working in partnership with the government in recovery of 
government’s loss. And I think that’s fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He also talked about the existing legislation. An association 
loses the right to recover money from a member after the 
guarantee has been called. As well the proposed amendments 
will provide increased safety for member funds. And that’s 
important, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve saw what’s happened in 
a few occasions in the past where some of these funds became 
at risk and have hurt the whole membership of those 
associations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we will have questions in committee, at this 
time I would like to refer this Bill to committee. 
 



3082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Agriculture and Food that Bill 
No. 121, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005, 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I move that Bill 121, The Farm 
Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005, be referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill 121 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 123 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 123 — The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure today to stand and speak about Bill No. 123, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason I’m pleased to stand today regarding 
this Act is because most of the land that we’re dealing with in 
this Act is directly involved with my constituency. And 
therefore I’m pleased to speak on its behalf. 
 
When I look at the Bill, I notice that the last part of the Bill 
deals with a small portion of land around Iroquois Lake that 
needs to be subdivided. And we have no problem with that 
because I believe it’s only six acres. 
 
When I look at the part of the Bill where it takes 320 acres of 
WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act], which is wildlife 
protection Act, out of the Act, and it’s used to settle TLE [treaty 
land entitlement] agreements . . . And, Mr. Speaker, as a 
member of the Wildlife Federation and a long-time member of 

the Wildlife Federation, to many members in the Wildlife 
Federation organization, members work very, very hard to put 
this land into critical habitat wildlife land because somewhere 
in the province there needs to be land set aside for the 
preservation of wildlife and environment. And that’s the whole 
reason for this land going into this area. 
 
In the last two or three years, there has been a total of 92,000 
acres taken out of WHPA, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, 
and turned over to satisfy TLE agreements. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
this causes red flags to most people in Saskatchewan, especially 
those regarding the Wildlife Federation and hunters in the 
province. So, Mr. Speaker, when this happened, naturally 
Wildlife Federation members from my area and of my 
organization phoned and said, what’s happening? 
 
To date we have little information regarding this Bill as where 
this is going. And for all intents and purposes, Mr. Speaker, it 
all may be good. But when the minister brings over and hands 
us just a map of the area with no details to it, what’s happening? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my critic asked me to speak on this behalf 
because we need more time to get more information from the 
minister in regards to this Bill as what’s happening with this 
320 acres that’s going to be taken out of wildlife protection Act 
and put in to satisfy TLE agreements. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, too, the sports enthusiasts, the hunting enthusiasts 
of this province, they look at this as what’s happening and why 
it’s happening. Because once this land comes out of protection 
habitat land where hunting can take place and is turned in to 
satisfy TLE agreements, there is no hunting availability. So all 
this land, this 92,000 acres that was once in wildlife protection 
Act is now gone. So it causes great concern. 
 
Again I want to stress the fact that there’s 320 acres of this 
same land that possibly will come to the same problem that 
we’re having with the rest of the 92 acres. And therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we need time for the minister to come up with 
some details on this, to see why it’s being done, and maybe 
there’s good reason for it. But until that time happens, Mr. 
Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook that the debate on second reading of Bill 
No. 123, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 
2005 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 124 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3083 

Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill deals with people who have been injured in 
catastrophic . . . who have sustained catastrophic injuries as a 
result of automobile accidents. In the main part, Mr. Speaker, it 
deals with those that have been injured since the advent of 
no-fault insurance, but this Bill has gone beyond that as well 
and also deals with some of those who were injured prior to 
no-fault insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is some good effects in this Bill and there 
are also some questions that need to be asked in relationship to 
this Bill and to how it works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the clauses in this Bill, clause 8 states in section 115 
that, “This section does not apply to students.” And it’s talking, 
Mr. Speaker, about compensation for loss of employment 
income, Mr. Speaker, that someone who has suffered a 
catastrophic injury would normally receive. And that they 
would normally receive the average of the average industrial 
wage in the province of Saskatchewan. So I think there needs 
. . . the minister needs to be prepared to answer a question 
related to that as to why students do not qualify. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, there are a number of elementary school students 
across this province who have paper routes, who cut lawns for 
their neighbours, all for which they receive compensation. 
Especially those with the paper routes, Mr. Speaker — they 
receive a regular remuneration from the paper owners for whom 
they are delivering the papers, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are a number of areas where elementary school students do 
work for compensation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
High school students, Mr. Speaker, also do many, many jobs for 
which they receive compensation. Some of them even are 
regular part-time employees working perhaps three or four 
evenings a week in restaurants or stores or whatever it may be, 
Mr. Speaker, farm employment, as the case may be. 
 
Post-secondary students, Mr. Speaker, many of them hold down 
full-time jobs and remain students studying in university, 
studying in SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology], studying in whatever post-secondary 
educational institution they wish to pursue their careers in, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re all students but they’re all receiving 
compensation. So why would they be excluded, Mr. Speaker, 
from this particular section of the Act? 
 
I think that’s a very important question that the minister is 
going to need to provide answers for. Because if they are 
injured, Mr. Speaker, catastrophically and unable to carry on 
any kind of livelihood, but they would have had that 
opportunity prior to their injury, Mr. Speaker, why do they not 
receive compensation? Because that’s what this no-fault 
insurance is about and that’s what the compensation for lost 
income is about, Mr. Speaker. And so those students deserve to 
have a hearing and those students deserve to have a recognition 
for their lost earnings as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the other sections of this Act, Mr. Speaker, deals with 
injuries that occurred pre-1995. And that, I think, Mr. Speaker, 
is a very worthwhile expansion of this — that those people who 
were catastrophically injured prior to 1995 and receiving no 

supplementary income, receiving no loss income protection, 
certainly deserve it as well, Mr. Speaker. I guess the question 
has to be for the minister: how broad was this interpreted? Was 
it very narrowly defined if someone had signed off on their 
insurance claim in 1990, received a lump sum payment, are 
they entitled to receive this additional compensation now, Mr. 
Speaker? So I think there are some questions to be answered. I 
don’t believe the numbers involved here are very great. But we 
need to be able to get answers to that on how broadly this is 
being defined, Mr. Speaker, and just how this is going to be 
interpreted. 
 
For those that were post-1995 and pre-2002, Mr. Speaker, I 
think the questions there that need to be asked and answered by 
the minister are related to why did this occur. Why were those 
that were injured from ’95 to 2002 not receiving the proper 
compensation? What happened that denied them the full 
amount that they were entitled to, that this legislation had to be 
brought forward and changed to provide that for them? 
 
One of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that is of concern to me in 
relationship to the income replacement, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that it talks about the average industrial wage but does not 
provide that full amount . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kindersley on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Kindersley has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce, seated in your gallery, my family — my lovely wife, 
April, seated with our two sons, Blake and Spencer. And 
they’re here just to see where daddy works today. And I’d ask 
all members to welcome them and hopefully nothing 
unbeknownst will happen to the building in our short visit. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 124 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2005 

(continued) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
concerns I have about income replacement is that while it’s 
based on the average industrial wage, Mr. Speaker, the claimant 



3084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

does not receive the full amount of that benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
They receive a percentage of that benefit based on UIC 
[Unemployment Insurance Commission] being deducted from 
it, based on CPP [Canada Pension Plan] being deducted from it, 
based on taxes being deducted from it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But unfortunately those three deductions — UI [Unemployment 
Insurance], CPP, and the taxes — are not provided to the 
agency for which those would normally be applied. So CPP 
does not receive any funding from SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] under this no-fault insurance, Mr. 
Speaker. Rather it’s being deducted from the claimant’s income 
but not being remunerated to CPP. 
 
So that means, at the end of the day, there is no record of those 
calculations being passed on. There is no tax credit being 
accrued by that client. So, Mr. Speaker, while they have an 
income, they do not have any additional deductions that they 
can apply against the taxes that may have been paid. So if a 
person has additional medical expenses, they cannot apply those 
expenses to recover to get a refund on some of those taxes. If 
they have additional transportation costs that could be deducted, 
they have no taxes paid to be able to get a refund. If they are a 
student, Mr. Speaker, they cannot use their tuitions to apply 
against the taxes that were paid so that they could get a refund, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there needs to be some adjustments and some corrections 
available for the income provisions within the no-fault 
insurance that a person receives, so that they can capture all that 
they’re entitled to, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a one-size-fits-all 
situation so it doesn’t seem to matter whether . . . what your 
personal circumstances are as far as taxes and UI and CPP may 
be concerned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think there are a number of issues on this particular Bill 
that the minister needs to be able to answer in committee. 
Therefore this . . . we will allow this to move ahead so that 
those kind of questions and answers can be provided. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance that Bill 124, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister Responsible for 
SGI. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 124, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill 124 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for this Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
estimates for Health. Could the minister introduce his officials 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. It’s my pleasure to have with 
me John Wright, the deputy minister; and Mike Shaw, the 
associate deputy minister; Bert Linklater, who is the executive 
director of the regional accountability branch; and Max 
Hendricks, who is the executive director, finance and 
administration branch. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The first item of business is Central 
Management and Services (HE01). I recognize the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a number of 
questions again in a number of different areas and so I’ll 
probably been moving through them fairly rapidly. But I’ll try 
and . . . you know anywhere from the mental health facility in 
Saskatoon, proposed, to the ambulance contracts, to just 
out-of-province treatment. So it’s going to bounce around a 
little bit and it probably won’t get too terribly in-depth on any 
one issue because of the timelines that we’re looking at. 
 
The first one is the mental health facility in Saskatoon that has 
been talked about and announced a number of times. I think it’s 
been in the planning stages for about seven years. Currently the 
Hantelman Building is certainly unsuitable for the programs 
and patients that are having to access it. I believe it was 
announced just recently again. I guess I’d like to know the 
status and, you know, a timeline. When are they looking at 
moving into a new facility or construction of a new facility? 
Could you give me a timeline on what to expect in that area? 
 
[12:00] 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3085 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. The plan is 
to do a refurbishment of the existing building and an add-on. 
And the net result will be 54 adult beds or beds in general, and 
then 12 youth beds. And the plan is that we have money now 
budgeted for this year and next year. So we’re hoping to get it 
done over the next year and a half, two years. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So it will be refurbishing the Hantelman 
Building and adding on, and that construction will be starting in 
the next fiscal year. If the money’s been set aside, can we be 
assured that that construction will be starting this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The planning is going on right now. And 
as soon as that’s complete, then we would be letting tenders, 
and they would start construction. We’ve actually planned that 
we would be able to spend some money around construction in 
this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just one last question regarding this facility, 
I’m not real familiar with it. So you’re saying 54 beds and 10 
youth . . . 12 youth beds. What is the capacity of the existing 
facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What’s happening . . . And if you haven’t 
ever visited this building, it was originally built as a residence 
for medical students. And so it’s quite interesting as a building, 
but it’s not very good as a mental health facility because of 
where the rooms are and that kind of thing. 
 
So the plan is to build an add-on where you would have better 
patient rooms and more appropriate treatment and then use the 
old space as office and meeting space. And so the . . . it’s not 
about expanding the number dramatically, but it is about 
making sure that they’re much better quality rooms. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes I think my question, and the reason I 
ask that question was, I certainly have heard that it was 
unsuitable for the work that was being done there. I guess my 
only concern was with an add-on and refurbishing, is that it had 
at least the existing space if not more space and not that it was 
being . . . not that there’d be less capacity in that facility. 
 
Just one other question not regarding that, another area was 
when we talked on May 2 at our second last round of estimates. 
And when I started out, we had quite a long discussion. At that 
time, there was some issues in Alberta between . . . Dosanjh 
was out there and Klein was talking, and we were talking a little 
bit in this province of delivery of some of these services and 
what is done privately, contracted through the health district. 
 
I would be very interested in this. It doesn’t have to happen 
today. It can happen whenever. I would like to get the answer 
whenever. But if you have a list of different services that are 
delivered by a private delivery service . . . we’ve talked about 
some. I mean, chiropractic is one and ambulance service is 
another and, you know, there are a number. I’d be very 
interested because those are just what come to mind. I’d be very 
interested in a list from the Department of Health of different 
services that are provided privately, if I could. 
 
Okay. Moving on then to the ambulance contract around the 
province, and we had a number of questions regarding that the 
last go-round, and I was reading Hansard again on May 2 and 

what some of your answers were which then of course caused 
me to think of more questions. 
 
First of all could you give me sort of an update of what’s going 
on in Yorkton right now with the ambulance strike that they’re 
experiencing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My sense is that they’re are trying to 
resolve it out there. It is a contract between the RHA [regional 
health authority] and a third party, so it’s not one that fits with 
the overall provincial bargaining, which is usually the questions 
that I get. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Further to the ambulance contracts and not 
just specifically, but how is it determined to the 12 health 
regions what is set? Is it just a global amount that goes to the 
health regions? Is it broke down by line item as to what goes to 
the health regions? 
 
I guess what I’m trying to get at is . . . of the 12 health regions, 
they are granted so much money from that global budget. They 
determine how much is for ambulance. How is that determined? 
Is it just a lump sum that’s given to the health regions? Or does 
the department determine line by line . . . I mean ambulance 
service in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health District will require 
this amount of money. The Saskatoon Health Region will 
require this amount of money. How is that determined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer is that it is a 
form of global budgeting. But what happens is that the regional 
health authority will present a budget where they set out what 
they think they need to expend in each area, and then that’s 
reviewed and discussed with the officials in the department. If 
they agree, well then everything’s fine. But if they don’t agree 
and they’ve maybe put too much emphasis in one area, well 
then there’s some adjustment. 
 
And so it’s that form. But it’s based on past years’ actual cost, 
too. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes I was going through Hansard from 
May 2, and you had mentioned that, that it was on the past 
history of that health region. But what it seems to me . . . And 
you also mentioned a number of times that the conflict — or not 
the conflict — but the negotiation is between the health region 
and the private service provider, the ambulance service 
provider, for example in the Yorkton area. But the argument 
could be said that there is not enough money from the 
Department of Health to the regional health authority that can 
then supply the ambulance service that is needed in the Yorkton 
area. 
 
Yes, I realize that the final contract is negotiated between the 
health region and the ambulance service provider. But the 
health region is only going off of so many dollars. And I guess 
that’s my question . . . how does the department determine how 
much money goes to the health region? There seems to be a bit 
of a block there. The health region is saying this is how much 
money we get from the Department of Health, so this is how 
much we can supply to the ambulance provider. And the 
ambulance provider is saying we need more from Sask Health 
to the health regions so that it can address this problem. 
 



3086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

So I guess my question is, how do they determine, from the 
Department of Health to the health region, how much should be 
allotted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think we can start from the Sask 
Health, Health Department perspective . . . is that the job is to 
fairly allocate funds around what’s needed. The historical 
allocations that went to each of the regions were based on 
numbers of kilometres and numbers of patients. And so that is 
always a base in the background. 
 
And then there were adjustments made around the resources 
that did go into this particular area over the last number of years 
to deal with some of the wage issues. And the operators that 
were private operators got a share of that overall money that we 
put towards emergency medical services workers in a fair way 
across the province. And that’s where the challenge comes, 
when many operators seem to be able to function with it and a 
few don’t. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well I guess that becomes a question 
because I certainly have heard it from operators . . . is that they 
don’t seem to have any idea. And perhaps that would be an 
education process that the department could go through with 
some of the private operators, how the department determines 
how much will go to the health region and then in turn what 
they have to negotiate with when they enter into their contract 
negotiations. I mean, the health region has so much money, but 
most of the operators don’t have any idea of how the 
Department of Health determines how much will go to that 
health region. 
 
You talked about number of kilometres and patients and that’s 
historical. But for example in the situation where, you know, a 
health region may want people on 24 hours a day when they 
didn’t before . . . and that all enters into then the service 
provider having to go to the health region saying, you know, we 
need more money because we’ve got people 24 hours a day. 
And the department is saying well if over the last number of 
years that hasn’t been the issue, so we’re only allowing this 
much money. 
 
And so I think, where there’s a bit of an issue with 
communication is that the private providers don’t have any idea 
of how the department determines how the money is given to 
the health regions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think this is kind of a curious 
question as it related to your previous one about what’s the role 
of private operators in health systems in general because 
basically this is a negotiation between the private operator and 
the regional health authorities. So the private operator is 
accountable to the regional health authority to provide the 
service. And in turn, the regional health authorities are 
accountable to the overall provincial system to make sure that 
they’re providing the service that is there in their area. And so 
they get a global amount of money to do that. 
 
When we’re looking from, you know, year to year on budgets, 
in this year as you know on an overall basis for health, a 7.1 per 
increase, well there’s some higher increases in some areas like 
cancer agency. Other areas there’s lower increases. But in a 
global sense, that’s how much the increase is. 

What happens here is that if there are special needs or special 
changes in services or there’s a new facility or there’s new 
business that requires some other things, then those are the 
things that are included in the budget planning for each year, 
and that would be recognized as the global budget is developed. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’ll move on to a different area. Regarding 
the smoking ban and the whole issue that our province is facing 
right now with the legislation that was passed and eliminating 
smoking in all public places . . . but I guess not quite all public 
places, public places that I guess this government has 
jurisdiction over. But I would like a statement from the minister 
because, I tell you, in rural Saskatchewan . . . and a elected 
member from a constituency that has a number of small-town 
bars, when I go into those bars on business, I am faced with this 
continually. 
 
And so I would like to know, have a statement from the 
minister first of all, where is it all playing out? Because I mean 
we continually hear it’s an uneven playing field, you know, and 
there’s just a whole lot of issues around it. I’d like to hear a 
statement from the minister on where he’s at with having a total 
provincial ban on smoking in public. Or are we anywhere close 
to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The goal clearly is to have a smoke-free 
Saskatchewan, and a smoke-free Canada for that matter, and so 
some of these issues we raise at a national level. It would be 
extremely helpful for example if Alberta was more in line with 
what’s happening in Manitoba and BC because that would 
eliminate some of the concerns. 
 
But I think that what I would have to say is that we’ve made a 
decision around those areas where we have jurisdiction and 
we’re going forward. We’re strongly encouraging First Nations 
to recognize that they’re part of a bigger community where also 
we know that some of the municipalities that have service 
agreements, they are examining how those apply to the different 
facilities that are located on the urban reserves. And we know 
that discussions in communities where urban reserves are being 
contemplated they are getting very clear legal advice as to how 
to proceed to make sure that this challenge — I’ll use that word 
again, because it is — is part of Saskatchewan life. 
 
[12:15] 
 
But I think overall we’ve had very high compliance with the 
legislation and I think people are pleased that we’re taking that 
direction. But they recognize that there are many people that 
require help and guidance and assistance to eliminate smoking 
from their lives. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well I certainly agree with the legislation 
that was passed. I supported it. I had no problem supporting it 
even though I did run into some concern as I was doing my 
business around the constituency. But what I ran into more 
often than anything else was the whole . . . after the Bill was 
proclaimed and there wasn’t going to be enforcement, and then 
there was enforcement. 
 
And talking to some of the owners, you really put them . . . The 
minister put them in a tough position because what they found 
is they were reading the papers and hearing well there’s not 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3087 

going to be any enforcement for six months or whatever the 
time frame was, and then there was going to be enforcement. 
Perhaps that person that came in that wanted a smoke in the 
fellow’s bar said, well you don’t have to enforce it; that’s the 
way . . . we’ve read that in the paper. And then the bar owner 
was saying yes, I do have to enforce it. And they were really put 
in a tough spot that way because of, you know, the whole 
enforcement part but then the bigger picture on the two-tier, 
where we can smoke in some facilities in our province — 
on-reserve, you know, casinos — but you can’t in others. 
 
And I guess the concern that we’re hearing now is that instead 
of moving forward on this process we’re having some slippage. 
In Yorkton for example, which had been a smoke-free facility, 
now they’re allowing smoking in there. And so we’re not going 
forward, we’re slipping back which is causing great concern for 
a number of local owners and local establishments. 
 
You know, I think they can say that, you know, this is going to 
hit their business hard. And they realize that and they think they 
can maybe work their way through it, not real happy about it. 
But there is nothing more frustrating than to look across the 
street and see somebody that is allowed to have smoking in 
their facility. And it’s a double standard. So I think, you know, 
the way it was handled for that first couple of months after 
really caused a lot of grief for a number of owners. And I guess 
I’d call for the minister’s response on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We live within the country of Canada. We 
have a constitution which sets out powers and responsibilities 
that has served us well for many, many years. We make 
adjustments now and again like we did in 1982 with the 
Charter. And we continue to see what we can do as a country. 
 
What we’ve been able to prepare and do is based on what the 
constitution says. And it’s clearly identified that there are some 
issues when there are jurisdictions that are given certain rights 
by the federal government. The federal government knows that. 
As we all know, this isn’t exactly the week that this is the most 
important problem on their mind. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — A couple more questions in this area 
regarding . . . I remember sitting in the committee room 
downstairs, in committee room no. 8 I believe it was, when they 
were asking questions in the lead up to this piece of legislation. 
And some of the comments made by yourself, Mr. Minister, 
really, truly led us to believe that the homework had been done 
on this and that there was going to be no problems going 
forward. And although I don’t think those comments really one 
way or the other would have changed the way I voted on this 
piece of legislation, but I do know there are other members in 
this House that really felt that it was going to be a level playing 
field, and that they voted on the piece of legislation with that 
information that you had given them. 
 
We see today that, you know, whether there was some 
homework done — but it was the incorrect homework, which 
I’m certainly used to — but whether there was some homework 
done and it didn’t come through, or whether the homework just 
hadn’t been done. Because it did influence the way people 
voted. 
 
So I would be interested to know just, you know, from the 

minister’s point of view what changed. Either we misinterpreted 
what the minister said in the committee room or something has 
changed from that point. And I’d just be interested in knowing 
what the minister had to say. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well based on the information that I had 
at the time, and based on the discussions that I’d had with First 
Nations chiefs and others who were working on this file, what I 
presented was what I assumed at that point. I was extremely 
disappointed in the fall when there was an about-face on these 
things, especially as it relates to Yorkton, but about, just in 
general across the province. And so there’s ability to, I think, be 
quite upset with what happened over those numbers of months. 
I think the better task that we have is, well how do we move 
forward to make sure that in all areas where we don’t have the 
jurisdiction that we traditionally had thought, that we would 
make sure that things work for the people in Saskatchewan. 
And that’s the mode we’re in. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Prior to the legislation, the minister was 
asked if there’d be any extra cost for enforcing this piece of 
legislation. Now that the minister has . . . You’ve included some 
additional monies in this year’s budget for public health 
officers. Is that money going towards public health officers and 
their mandate will be to enforce the smoking legislation? Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s a sum of $300,000 that goes for 
the public health inspectors’ work. And it, I think most of that 
would be related to this additional task that they have. And so 
that’s the budget that we have now. We’ll keep monitoring it. 
We’ve only been four and a half months into this new 
legislation and I’m sure we’ll learn more as we proceed. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So there is an additional cost now since the 
legislation has passed. I mean you had said that there’d be no 
additional cost with this legislation. You felt that the number of 
inspectors would be sufficient that we had prior. But now 
you’re saying that we’ve got to hire more inspectors to enforce 
the legislation. So there is an increase in cost. I can see the 
minister shaking no, so I’ll let him answer that first of all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The amount of money that we’ve 
included, the 300,000 this year, is to cover overtime and 
additional education to train people. It’s a one-time cost this 
year. We don’t anticipate that it’ll be there next year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So there have been no new inspectors hired. 
If you had X amount, and I don’t even know how many . . . 
Maybe that’s one where we could start is, how many public 
health inspectors did we have last year compared to this year? Is 
the 300,000 just simply for training these officers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question that I think you 
asked here related to this 300,000. We do also have some other 
money where we are hiring some additional public health 
inspectors. But that relates to some longer term concerns around 
the numbers across the province, and we continue to recruit 
public health inspectors as they are needed. But many of the 
compensation issues were resolved with the . . . or not resolved, 
but substantially resolved with the last contract. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I started out by asking if there . . . 



3088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

started out by stating your statement that there would be no 
additional costs. But there will be additional costs. There will 
be . . . And, you know, I may agree with those, probably agree 
with those. But there will — I’m just trying to get in black and 
white — there will be additional costs because we’re hiring 
more officers and having to train officers in a different way. 
You said that there’s an extra amount of money, and we’ll be 
hiring new officers that will be going forward. And maybe 
they’ll be inspecting restaurants. I don’t know. But we’re hiring 
more officers, and I would believe that some of it is because of 
the piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I beg to disagree with you. You put 
words into my mouth because what I did say was . . . what I 
said was there’s $300,000 which is allocated to deal with 
education and the extra overtime that would be required in this 
initial year as we look at the tobacco enforcement. So that’s one 
issue. That’s a one-time expenditure; we don’t expect to see it 
next year. 
 
There is on top of that around $200,000 which is going to look 
at hiring some new public health inspectors. It hasn’t been 
allocated yet because we haven’t passed the budget. We will be 
discussing with the regional health authorities . . . But there are 
some pressures. Frankly one of the pressures relates to water 
inspection in northern Saskatchewan, and so that’s where the 
additional officers are being hired. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So my question would be that if we’re 
hiring additional officers for water inspection for, say one 
example, in the North, the inspectors that were perhaps doing 
that before, are they being moved over and their main, sole 
purpose now is to enforce the tobacco legislation, or is it just a 
whole new hiring of officers because this is a new area that 
wasn’t being inspected before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the answer is that with our new 
water strategy and basically looking and dealing with all of the 
new water systems in the North, there’s a broader expanse of 
what’s there. There are a number of other public health 
inspector concerns in the North, and so that’s one of the things 
we work at. There are some other issues across the province. 
 
But we are not hiring people in one place so we can divert 
people over to the tobacco inspection role because this is . . . I 
mean we’ll continue to monitor this, but at this point we see that 
the compliance is substantially compliance by citizens. And, 
you know, owners of facilities know that citizens get really 
concerned when this particular law is breached. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And I would agree that certainly not only 
citizens but what’s even more frustrating again is the owners of 
facilities that know down the road, you know, bar A is allowing 
smoking and bar B and C don’t, and it affects their traffic. It 
affects the traffic through their facility because people go down 
the road. Because I mean for people that are . . . want to smoke 
in a licensed facility, they’ll find out where that is, and they are 
attracted there. 
 
But just one last time. The minister said last year that there 
would be no additional costs, and we can safely say that there is 
an additional cost of about $300,000. 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ve allocated $300,000 unless . . . if 
there will be some additional costs. We think that there may be. 
But there may not be because we haven’t had the full year yet. 
 
Now I would be interested to go back . . . And we didn’t 
anticipate that there would be additional costs over the long 
term around this because we didn’t think that it was going to be 
a major compliance issue. I think that’s still my position. That’s 
what I said last year. That’s what I say this year. But we have in 
this particular budget made sure we made an allocation in case 
we needed it. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Okay. We’ll leave that one alone. I think 
I’ve kind of got it. You’ve put $300,000 aside in case there are 
some problems with compliance — extra overtime. So my 
statement was, will it cost any more? You’re saying, well we 
don’t know for sure, but we put money aside just in case. 
 
And I would say that that money will be quite easily spent in 
this next fiscal year because I think most of us from rural 
Saskatchewan could have told you there’ll be a huge 
compliance problem throughout the province. Especially when 
you have a double standard the way we have in our province, 
there’s going to be a huge compliance problem. And I would 
probably submit to you that $300,000 won’t even touch the 
overtime that’s going to be needed unless health officers’ 
regular shifts are from midnight to 3 o’clock in the morning 
inspecting these bars because that’s certainly going to be, you 
know, an area that has to be investigated. 
 
We know for a fact . . . I know for a fact that there are facilities 
that haven’t complied and there are other facilities that have. 
And the facilities that have complied are questioning 
themselves, why are we complying. Because I think if he can, 
down the road I should too. It’s affecting my traffic. It’s 
affecting my traffic. 
 
[12:30] 
 
And we know as a . . . you knew as a government that it would 
affect their traffic and that’s why the money was set aside for 
the shortfall of the VLTs [video lottery terminal]. And I mean 
the government has felt that shortfall. But you have to realize 
that the local bar owners are feeling the shortfall of lack of 
revenue through VLTs, lack of sales of alcohol. 
 
I mean I would be very interested to follow the numbers in the 
next year of the government-owned liquor board stores and see 
the increase in revenue for them because it’s taken away from 
small-town bars. They’re just not going to the bars and they’re, 
you know, they’ll buy whatever they need and go home and 
smoke at home and have their drink. So I think you’ll see that 
that $300,000 is short. And I would say in the next year or two 
you’ll be looking at putting quite a bit more money into this, 
this tobacco Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think we need to bring this conversation 
back to why we passed this legislation. Tobacco kills. I mean 
we know that. We know that this is one of the best public health 
laws that can be passed in any province, any state, any country. 
And we’re seeing that right around the world. And I don’t 
apologize for a minute for the fact that we’ve gone ahead with 
this. 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3089 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, I couldn’t agree with you 
more. Let’s go back to that fact. I agree with you. But what I’m 
trying to get from you is the cost. You have said one thing one 
year and we know that it’s going to be different and that’s all 
I’m asking you. 
 
I’m not debating or denying that the legislation was probably 
the right thing to do, but I think it’s very important that you 
know the impact. But more importantly that I can get a straight 
answer as what you said last year and what’s in the budget this 
year. If you didn’t think it was going to cost the department 
anything last year but now you’ve changed your mind and said 
yes it is going to cost for enforcement, that’s all I was looking 
for is simply that. 
 
I just want to move on . . . If you want to answer, go ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think you answered your own 
question in that previously you indicated that last summer I did 
not anticipate that the First Nations would not comply with the 
law. So that’s a new piece of information that we had in the fall. 
And some of the issues around compliance, you relate directly 
to that particular issue. And therefore that was something that 
was not there last summer. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — We’ll move on to out-of-province and 
out-of-country treatment because I think we could probably 
keep going on this tobacco thing for far too long. 
 
If a person has a rare disease or condition that there doesn’t 
seem to be any expertise in the province or perhaps even in 
Canada, could you walk me through the steps of what a patient 
has to do to seek out-of-province or country treatment for 
something that they cannot receive treatment here in the 
province? If you could walk me through the step, because we 
certainly have people come to our office who said they can’t get 
the timely treatment. I think we saw of a case here in the 
legislature earlier today where a person was waiting twice the 
targeted time frame for some . . . from a procedure and I think 
they would like to know. 
 
You know we have 12 health regions, but there doesn’t seem to 
be the real smooth transfer. If we can’t do it here in three 
weeks, perhaps we could’ve had it done in Saskatoon in three 
weeks. What’s the communication lines? What’s the process 
that a person has to do? I’m talking interprovincially and 
internationally, but also provincially there’s some issues with 
transfers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Within Saskatchewan if somebody who 
has gone to see a surgeon or an internal medicine specialist in 
Regina and there’s a concern about some of the length of time, 
there can be a referral quite easily to another centre in 
Saskatchewan. And that would be a discussion between the 
patient and their doctor. 
 
When there’s a referral out of the province, that will . . . that’s 
information that would usually be discussed with the 
department. But if in the fact the service is provided in another 
province under the Canada Health Act, if it’s a hospital service, 
we would cover those services. It’s when they go outside of the 
country that we require some review by the GP [general 
practitioner], specialist, and then a Canadian specialist, that that 

particular service is not available in Canada in a timely way. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Could the minister explain then, who makes 
the decisions as to whether or not Sask Health will cover an 
out-of-country treatment? And what is the criteria or what is the 
decision based on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The process for approval is that there is a 
recommendation from the medical specialist that goes to the 
executive director of the medical services branch, who is sitting 
beside me, and he makes the decision. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — What is the time frame then for a request to 
the turnaround time so that they know for sure that they can go 
out of province and it will be covered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Depending on the situation these kinds of 
decisions can be made within a few hours. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last question in this area. Is there an 
appeal process? For example if the person doesn’t get the nod 
— they say no, this is not, doesn’t fit in the criteria — is there 
any place for that person to go then to appeal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What would typically happen in this 
situation if there was a refusal that there would be other things 
offered. And a common discussion goes between going to a US 
[United States] specialist versus going to Toronto or Vancouver 
or Edmonton. And so that alternate information would be 
provided. Sometimes there isn’t sufficient information in the 
request and that would go back to the physicians involved to get 
that information. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess the question . . . The reason why I 
was kind of going down this line of questioning and I certainly 
wasn’t the health care critic at that time, but remember the 
situation with the young girl, the Wipf girl, who needed to go 
down to the Mayo Clinic and it was kind of a long process? It 
certainly wasn’t a turnaround in a couple of hours. And I’m just 
. . . so that’s why we’re asking that question. It was certainly, 
you know, I guess whether the process was sped up when she 
appeared here or not but it just seemed like it was an issue, one 
that certainly eventually was covered but at the time there was 
just some real concern around the whole process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that in some situations you would 
end up working with the specialist in Saskatchewan and when 
it’s children it’s quite often that person in Saskatoon. They 
would work then with specialists in Calgary or Edmonton and 
try to assess, well what is possible within Canada. That may 
take a few days. 
 
When conditions are chronic or longer-term ones that require a 
full, long course of particular treatment then they really do take 
care to look at that. I think that in the number of some of the 
challenging ones, eventually all of the specialists agree that this 
is the right place for a particular person and then that happens. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I just have a couple of questions regarding 
home care and long-term care and long-term care assessment. 
My first question . . . And certainly I think there . . . I don’t 
know, I can’t speak for all the MLAs on this side but I know it’s 
an issue that comes to our office an awful lot. We have, you 



3090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

know, parents that have been living in their home maybe longer 
than what they should and how do they get them into long-term 
care. And there always seems to be a lot of headaches around 
that. 
 
I’ve got one situation right now where the person is in a health 
facility and the long-term . . . the SWADD [System Wide 
Admission and Discharge Department] team wants to move him 
back home. He doesn’t feel he can go home. The family doesn’t 
feel he can go home. Usually it’s the other way around. It’s that 
the family thinks the person needs to go into the long-term care 
and the parent doesn’t. 
 
So are there uniform criterion assessments, first of all with 
home care for the needs of home care service across each health 
care region? Because that’s the other thing we hear is there’s a 
discrepancy from region to region. Is there some sort of criteria 
that kind of covers the whole province as opposed to criteria for 
one region which may vary with the criteria from another 
region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The assessment process for home care and 
for long-term care is pretty consistent across the province. It’s 
something that was developed a few decades ago and continues 
to be improved as we go along. But there is a fair consistency. 
 
I think where the challenges arise though is that in certain 
communities and certain parts of the province, they have a 
different array of available services. And to give you an 
example that in Weyburn they have sort of assisted living, 
seniors kind of housing, and then they would have some of the 
personal care homes, quite some choice, and then the long-term 
care. And so the possible choices are a little greater. 
 
Well we know in Regina and Saskatoon, there’s pressure on 
personal care homes and long-term care homes, assisted living 
kinds of places and so that’s . . . ends up that there aren’t as 
many options in the local community. 
 
And so what I think if people are willing to go where the spaces 
are available, then there are some more options. But that’s not 
very helpful either when family and friends want to be there. 
 
So what we’re working at is making sure we build new facilities 
and are part of encouraging the development of facilities in 
places where its needed. We’re also watching very carefully in 
other areas that maybe they don’t need quite as much service 
and we should then take those resources and move them into a 
neighbouring place. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So it would be very possible then that a 
person in one health region may be eligible for long-term care, 
but in another region because of capacity is not eligible. Or do 
they . . . How does that work? 
 
You know, we’ve certainly heard of cases where they are 
accepted in one region and in the next region they say no, we 
don’t feel that that person needs long-term care. And so you 
wonder if it isn’t an issue of capacity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’ll repeat once again that the assessments 
across the province are relatively consistent and then you look 
at what are the options. Now if a person says I’m willing to go 

anywhere in the province, well then there may be some other 
level of facility that will be there. 
 
But practically, most people want to stay in their home areas 
and so sometimes the pressures build at different points. And 
that’s exactly why we are going ahead with a number of 
projects. 
 
It also relates to some of the facilities aren’t as modern as, for 
example the facility in Melfort which is, you know, quite 
incredible. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Must have a very strong MLA from that 
area. 
 
One last question regarding long-term care is the whole issue, I 
mean with gauging whether the person is eligible, it’s such a 
subjective process. Because I mean I’ve had people come in and 
talk to me in my office about their parent, and they will say 
when they’re asked those questions, they’ll answer every one of 
the questions. And then they’ll go home and they don’t know 
whether they’ve got the burner on or not. You know, they don’t 
want to be put into that facility and they can answer every 
question that is asked. They do a great job of tricking and then 
the assessor leaves and the child goes and checks on their 
mother and father a couple of days later and there is no way that 
that person should be living on their own. 
 
The other example though is that . . . I have two examples that 
I’m dealing with currently. One’s in my constituency, one’s out. 
And I mentioned this, where there’s an older gentleman. He’s 
94 years old. He’s having trouble walking. He can barely walk 
and he went into the health care centre, which has a long-term 
facility right on the health care centre. They want to keep him in 
that facility. He wants to be left in that facility. He doesn’t want 
to go home because he can’t get around. He lives on his own. 
But the people in that facility are saying no, you can’t stay here. 
You have to leave. And they’re again making an assessment 
that when he gets home, he’ll be able to function properly, 
where the child that I was talking to says there’s no way that he 
can function on his own at home. 
 
So is there, I mean, I guess, I saw the minister saying, you 
know, that he doesn’t . . . Maybe it’s not as subjective as what I 
think it is, but it just seems to be, often on the — and I don’t 
mean to use . . . it’s not whim — but on the impression of one 
or two assessors, and, you know, that can be very tricky I would 
think. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The assessment that’s done is using a 
common tool. And you basically have nurses or social workers 
who have this job as assessor, and they’re very used to working 
with people. And part of the question always when you’re doing 
assessments and using professional judgment, is to make sure 
that they have, that sufficient information is there. And so some 
of the kinds of things that you’ve raised here relate to the fact 
that the assessor maybe needs more information about what’s 
happened for that particular family. 
 
If there’s a concern about an assessment, that can be appealed to 
the manager of that particular area, or it can be raised with the 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3091 

quality care coordinators which are located in each regional 
health authority. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last question/statement is, at the time 
that the assessment is being done, are the children allowed to be 
there to follow that assessment? Because you were just saying 
that sometimes the assessor needs more information. In other 
words they may not be getting all the information from the 
senior that is either not wanting to go in or not wanting to get 
out. So are the children allowed in when that assessment is 
taking place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the normal situation would be that 
the family members would be there unless the individual client 
didn’t want them there. But I think practically, the professionals 
who work in this field work with the family and with the 
patient, or the client, and they try to make sure that they’ve got 
the right fit for service for that person. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think that pretty much does it for the 
questions that I have for today anyway. I’ll turn it over to my 
colleague from Canora-Pelly. But I’d like to thank the minister 
and his officials for the answers that he provided and look 
forward to that list that I asked that can come in the future. I 
appreciate it. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. And, Mr. Minister, I’ll try to be as quick as I can 
regarding three issues and they’re from three different 
communities, Mr. Minister; Kamsack, Preeceville, and Yorkton. 
And I’ll begin with the issue that is confronting the 
municipality, the town of Kamsack. I think the minister is 
aware that Kamsack and surrounding municipalities operate one 
of, I believe, very few personal care homes in the province of 
Saskatchewan that is totally operated by a municipality or 
municipal shareholders. 
 
And the question, Mr. Minister, is over the last number of years, 
the Eaglestone Lodge, the board of directors that operates 
Eaglestone Lodge, has been in a deficit situation. And the 
question, the first question that I’m asking, Mr. Minister, is are 
there any dollars that could be provided through health 
departments for funding of a personal care lodge that is owned 
by a municipality and other municipal shareholders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is no. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I anticipated that 
answer. Mr. Minister, as we confront delivering health care 
services in the province of Saskatchewan, is there any lobby 
from the Department of Health then of the Department of 
Government Relations to look at a funding system where there 
can be credit given or there can be some way that a municipality 
can access taxpayer dollars through the provincial government, 
through Government Relations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding is that these operations 
are usually set up as non-profit, but they are basically designed 
to cover their own expenses which is why a municipality or 
somebody else may get involved with them. And so, at this 
stage I know of no intention of doing that. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if 
that’s true then, could you clarify whether or not individuals 
living within the Eaglestone Lodge, and there . . . was my 
understanding there are 42 beds of which 55 residents are 
within this home. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government announced, through DCRE 
[Department of Community Resources and Employment], 
announced a program of rental supplements. Would residents 
who are living within Eaglestone Lodge, do you know whether 
or not they would qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I do not know. I think that would be a 
question that you should raise with the Minister of Community 
Resources 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s a problem 
though, is that the minister’s office responsible for that program 
suggests that this is a health-related facility because these are 
level 1 and 2 patients. And the question . . . And the dilemma 
that is facing these residents is that the criteria around rental 
supplement, even though it’s a rental of a space, is that because 
Eaglestone Lodge provides food, a meal, they are not eligible 
— those residents themselves. And this is the problem that 
these individuals are facing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what happened in Eaglestone Lodge this 
spring, because the board of directors needs to operate as 
you’ve indicated, a facility at at least the break-even point, 
they’ve had to increase the rates. And they increased the rates 
by $100 per person. 
 
The situation that is confronting two cases is that their 
combined pension — old age security, Canada pension — does 
not meet the amount of money that is being asked for; not only 
the fee for being a resident of a facility — renting space is the 
term I’m using — they don’t have the money. They have no 
additional assets. They have no additional sources of income. 
And yet the rental supplement suddenly becomes not available. 
Secondly we’re finding that through social services there isn’t 
the ability to access additional funds. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess I’m looking for guidance. Can you tell 
me where I can turn to on behalf of these people who have been 
confronted by a situation where they have to provide X number 
of dollars? Their pensions, all of the resources available to them 
does not meet that. Yet the rental supplement announced by the 
Minister Responsible for DCRE, they are not eligible or they 
don’t seem to be eligible. Social services doesn’t seem to want 
to assist. Where do these people go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — One of the challenges here, these are 
private operations whether it’s owned by the municipality or 
some of the privately owned personal care homes in the 
province. And when the rates go up and it’s not affordable to a 
person, well then they end up having to look for another place 
to live. And so it would be the same for anybody else where 
your living accommodation costs went up. And so that’s an 
issue. 
 
Now if there are income . . . If they are in a situation where they 
qualify for social assistance, then there are programs that will 
help families — couples in that particular case. But this is not 



3092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

an area where Health puts any money into the personal care 
homes at all. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a few 
questions about the Preeceville facility. You announced in the 
— or the Minister of Finance announced in budget that there 
was approval to proceed with additional health care facilities, 
and Preeceville was mentioned again. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you questions last year when we went 
through the last phase. And could you clarify for the record 
exactly what the community of Preeceville and the surrounding 
districts, what will they be doing regarding the construction of 
their facility that you’ve indicated has been approved. What 
will Sunrise Regional Authority be expected to do, and what 
timeline is in fact in place for this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically the money is in place in the 
budget. The community is working well with the consultants 
there. They’re just about finished the functional plan which will 
then allow . . . which is step 8 and they’ll be able to go into step 
9, which is the design of the documents. Once those design 
documents are done, they can go to tender and start the 
construction. 
 
We have the bulk of our money available for expenditure in this 
year, which is between now and next March. So my sense is 
everything is moving along. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, you make reference to steps 8, 
steps 9, steps 10. Would your officials have a chart that they 
could supply to me? Not necessarily today, anytime, sent 
directly to me, that would identify the steps and would indicate 
where Preeceville is on the chart? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In previous estimates this fall . . . that’s 
why I referred to the steps, I read them all into the record. So if 
you want to look on the Hansard, you can see them there. But 
we’ll provide you a copy as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, as we proceed down the highway to Yorkton, my third 
spot, you’ve indicated in the budget as well that there are six 
satellite dialysis machines operating in six different 
communities. One of those communities is Yorkton. And, Mr. 
Minister, there are a number of people in my constituency who 
require dialysis treatment and in fact a number of them do not 
receive treatment in Yorkton. They travel by bus through 
Regina and spend a considerable amount of money and time 
receiving treatments. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you be able to, or would your officials be 
able to supply a record that would show for the last two years 
— 2003 and 2004 if that’s how you keep those records, on 
either a calendar year or your fiscal year — it’s whatever fits 
the situation — would you be able to indicate how many days 
per week the satellite machine is operating in the regional 
hospital at Yorkton, how many hours per week, the full amount 
of time that the satellite machine or the satellite dialysis 
machine at Yorkton is operating in each of the last two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In Yorkton it’s a six-day operation, so that 
it’s . . . You usually I think need two treatments a week, so they 

do it in a six-day basis. In the budget this year, we have money 
to expand the operation of the dialysis. And right now the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority and the pathologist there 
are discussing with Yorkton how to expand the hours so that 
they can use the facility there for more hours. 
 
And I’m anticipating maybe another question is how decisions 
are made around expansion of services. We plot every single 
patient who requires renal dialysis in Saskatchewan and where 
they have to go. And there’s a committee, a province-wide 
committee, that then makes recommendations as to whether you 
should expand in Yorkton or in Tisdale or wherever you would 
go. And if there’s a number of patients that show up in a 
particular area, then we have to make adjustments. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, I was heading 
in that direction because you indicate or your government 
indicates that they will increase dialysis treatments by 8,000 
procedures. And that’s a significant increase. 
 
So I’m wondering then, could you outline . . . When your 
officials put together the numbers for Yorkton over the last two 
years, would you be able to indicate how Yorkton is fitting into 
this? You’ve indicated that there is tracking that goes on of all 
of the people that are . . . I’ll refer to it as east central 
Saskatchewan or within the Sunrise Region; that’s who’s being 
served by that regional facility. Would you be able to then give 
me an indication of what plans your government is looking at in 
actually enhancing the services in Yorkton? 
 
[13:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It is possible for me to give a very good 
estimate, but I think the better way would be to provide that to 
you. But basically the plan was to increase the renal dialysis 
across the province but specifically to enhance what’s 
happening in east central. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister and 
your officials. Mr. Minister, I’m aware that we have some time 
frames today. And in order to accommodate those, I’m going to 
ask a couple of specific questions. And then I’m going to ask 
some questions on crystal meth that I will just put on record. 
And hopefully the minister’s office can get back to me in a 
timely manner and give me those answers so that we can 
accommodate your schedule and my questions. So I’d 
appreciate that. 
 
I’m going to start by asking about a specific case that I gave 
you the information on yesterday, a lady in my constituency 
who was looking . . . whose family member was looking for an 
MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] after being diagnosed with 
an illness. And the treatment that would be required in our 
constituency would take about two weeks, but it could be done 
quicker in another health region. And I had asked if this could 
be accommodated. Have you had the opportunity to look at that 
case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I had received the information yesterday, 
and then my staff will be looking at that. And I think the issue is 
around a CT [computerized tomography] scan as opposed to an 



May 13, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3093 

MRI, yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Pardon me, it is a CT 
scan. And I’m wondering if that’s something that can be looked 
at fairly quickly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, we always look at these very 
quickly. And I know they were looking at it yesterday so . . . 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would imagine 
then by the beginning of the week, you’d be able to give me 
some indication of what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Minister, Foam Lake primary care centre, this is an issue 
that is of great concern to the residents and the community of 
Foam Lake area with the hospital downsizing. In the last round 
of closures, they were concerned that they weren’t receiving the 
care that they needed in that area. 
 
And I know that the minister had indicated that this would be 
one area where primary care would be looked at. And it would 
be sort of a pilot project. And I know that they would be 
reassuring to the people in that area to hear the minister say that 
this is an issue that is a priority for this government, that he 
would be talking to the Sunrise Health District and letting them 
know that this is of special interest to the Department of Health 
and that they could be assured that they were going to receive 
the health care that they needed in that area. 
 
So could you just give me a brief outline of what your 
department is doing for this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well my understanding is that this is one 
that the officials are actively working on to get the primary care 
facility in place at Foam Lake and so that it’s one that 
everybody has a common goal. And they’re just trying to get all 
of the things organized. What I would say is, last year at March 
31, we had 34 primary health care units in the province. 
Nipawin came on board just now so that we actually have 35 
today. Our goal by the end of next March is to have 57, and one 
of those is clearly Foam Lake. And we’re hoping that it’ll be in 
place, you know, this summer or early in the fall. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m sure I’ll 
take those . . . your word to the people of the Foam Lake area, 
and I know they’re going to be very appreciative of the fact that 
they can be looking forward to something by summer. 
 
Mr. Minister, the questions that I have on crystal meth are 
dealing somewhat with the strategy, and some are the issues 
that we have talked about in the last while. And I know that the 
crystal meth strategy must be falling under your department 
because addictions is now under mental health. So it’s an area 
that I’m sure that the minister is responsible for. 
 
Earlier on we talked about the issue of meth, and the minister 
had indicated that six years ago he had attended a conference 
and was aware of the issue. And for many people in 
Saskatchewan, it was something that we weren’t aware of until 
the last couple of years. So I’m wondering if you can tell me 
what exactly the minister and his office learned about six years 
ago and what they did to educate, inform, and warn people 
about the issue. 

I looked back in Hansard and saw that on April 6, and when I 
asked a question about where the money was going to for youth 
stabilization strategy, the minister indicated that in the budget 
there was money committed to expand the mental health unit, 
the Hantelman Building in Saskatoon, and in that project they’d 
be working to have some very specific youth treatment spaces. 
But last week on May 9, I asked about those beds. And the 
minister had indicated that in this year’s budget, money was 
available to build particular bed. So that’s what they’re doing. 
But the challenge is, where do we put them? So my question is, 
are there actually going to be beds in that centre or not? 
 
Also in crystal meth strategy on page 17, there was a statement 
that Sask Health: 
 

. . . recently contracted an individual to provide dedicated 
support to the network to lead development and 
implementation of new provincial and community 
initiatives. 

 
Can you give us an idea of what is the length of the contract, the 
terms? Who is the person that was hired, the background, the 
qualifications? And how do communities access this person? 
 
On page 18 it says in 2004 municipal police services and public 
awareness campaign. I’m wanting the minister to discuss with 
us the fact that many police services don’t have the resources 
they need and if the department is making money and resources, 
for example posters and information, available to police 
services? 
 
And also on that page, it indicated that Moose Jaw area drug 
strategy coalition was formed, but members of that coalition 
said they need funding. Is the department going to have money 
available for organizations like this? 
 
On page 15 it says the La Ronge alcohol and drug services has 
adopted a longer-term detoxifying protocol for crystal meth 
patients. Can you tell me who developed these protocols, and 
will they be used by other treatment providers in the province? 
 
And my last question is, on page 13, The Mental Health 
Services Act can be applied, forcing a person to enter treatment 
for addictions. Can you tell me how many times this Act has 
been used over the past year and over the past five years? 
 
So, Mr. Minister, knowing that you have a time frame this 
afternoon, I’m just taking for granted that you’ll answer these 
questions for me. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that method, and I will 
provide the answers to you. I would just say about the 1998 
conference you asked about, I attended with Mr. Vic Toews 
who is the federal Conservative Justice critic and the Attorney 
General of North Dakota, in Winnipeg. And we had experts 
come from California to explain this is something that you guys 
don’t even know about but is eventually going to come this 
way. And so that’s the specific answer to that question. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you’ve 
announced a new facility for the community of Moosomin. 



3094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2005 

And, Mr. Minister, you’ve said hold onto your seat; 
something’s coming shortly. And I think we’re still waiting. 
 
And the reason I’m asking the question right now is I 
understand most recently the health district has asked the 
community to work with them to reduce the facility by I believe 
some 800-plus square metres. And it’s . . . The reason they’re 
asking for that is because the dollars that you basically have put 
in place, what they’ve been working at . . . as this gets put off 
further and further, the costs continue to escalate. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will sod-turning take place? When will a 
tender be let for the construction on this facility, so it doesn’t 
continue to lose the effect that it’s hopefully going to provide 
the services to the area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On this particular project, you are correct 
that they are working to get the right building for the 
community, using the resources that are there. It’s our hope that 
they will actually move into the construction phase this fall. 
And if it doesn’t start in the fall, it will be first thing in the 
spring. But the goal is to have it starting this fall. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I hope it isn’t just a hope because 
of . . . waiting till the fall because I think you understand the 
complexity of the materials. And as the materials escalate, what 
it does . . . unless you’re prepared to put more money into the 
project. So we’re looking forward to a real initiative and move 
forward because the community has been working hard to raise 
their share of the funds. 
 
Another area I’d like to address briefly . . . and I’d like to 
actually do it in more detail, but I know we’re in a brief process. 
I chatted with you, and I want to thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
giving me the opportunity to sit down and talk about dialysis 
and certainly a proposal from the Broadview community. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, just to mention, recently a unit was put into 
the community of Moose Jaw, and I believe the story at that 
time indicated to address the needs of 12 individuals who are 
receiving dialysis or they had dialysis needs. 
 
The last I understood, for the Broadview area people coming 
from that broad area, there’s over 17 individuals. And, Mr. 
Minister, from our discussion you are aware of the fact that 
First Nations communities all along the area have offered their 
support, been involved. And when we look at the broad picture 
of dialysis . . . and I think you can appreciate the costs that 
individuals face as they go to larger centres. Certainly it’s not 
just the matter of receiving the service, but it’s the travel. It’s 
the cost of meals. And people with . . . as diabetics certainly 
have to have meals at a fairly . . . a time that’s appropriate. And 
they can’t be waiting two or three extra hours, say over the 
noon or breakfast or whatever. 
 
And I would to know, Mr. Minister, if your department is 
giving any thought to regional centres, say like in an area like 
Broadview. And what I’m going to do this morning as well is 
present you with another list of petitions that have come from 
the community and surrounding area in support of this project, 
and asking, Mr. Minister, as you look at the need for dialysis, 
recognizing the First Nations community and the needs the First 
Nations community faces, the support for this project. Will your 

department consider communities like the centre in Broadview 
to, as you expand, to meet the needs of dialysis in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that comment. And as we 
discussed before, this is something where you have to look at 
what the nephrologists say is safe, the staffing that you have 
available. And what is happening right now is the dialysis, renal 
dialysis committee for the whole province is looking at another 
three- to five-year plan because the things that we have done 
over the last while have been part of their last plan. And they’re 
gathering more information. 
 
The information that comes from Broadview will obviously be 
included in that, and then their goal will be to set out a plan that 
we could then look at as we move forward with budgets over 
the next few years. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask that we rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Deputy House Leader has asked to 
report progress. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the government . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Deputy 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It being now past 1 p.m., this House 
stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. Monday. Have a pleasant 
weekend. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:14.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3063 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................3063 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3063 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................3063 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3063 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3063 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3063 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................3064 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3064 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3064 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3064 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant ........................................................................................................................................................................3064 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................3064 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3065 
 Bill No. 99 — The Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................3065 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3065 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3065 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................3066 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3066 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................3066 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................3066 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................3066 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3083 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Loon Lake Graduating Class Chooses to be Smoke Free 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
 Fundraising Events in Eastend and Maple Creek 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
 Recognition of Centenarians in Saskatchewan Rivers Constituency 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................3068 
 World Lupus Day 2005 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3068 
 Aboriginal Playwrights Festival 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3068 
 Raymore Centennial Art Project 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3069 
 Aboriginal Head Start Anniversary 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................3069 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Waiting Times for Surgery 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................3069 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3070 
 Nursing Resources 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................3070 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3070 
 Children’s Hospital in Saskatchewan 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3071 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3072 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3072 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................3073 
  



 

 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3073 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................3073 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3074 
 Bill No. 109 — The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3075 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3076 
 Bill No. 100 — The Police Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3077 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3078 
 Bill No. 119 — The Election Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3078 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3078 
 Bill No. 120 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3078 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................3079 
 Bill No. 125 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3079 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................3081 
 Bill No. 121 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3081 
  Wartman (referral to committee) ..........................................................................................................................................3082 
 Bill No. 123 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................3082 
 Bill No. 124 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2005 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3083 
  Sonntag (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................3084 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3084 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................3084 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3091 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3092 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3093 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




