















































Hansard: April 28, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 101A  THURSDAY, APRIL 28, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2725 
 April 28, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition today signed by a number of people from the Saskatoon 
area addressing the contract of former CEO [chief executive 
officer] Jim Fergusson of the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today with 
a petition from people concerned about the contract of CEO Jim 
Fergusson. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 

 
The people that have signed this contract are from Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the former CEO Jim Fergusson, receiving 
monthly payments of $13,000. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of my constituents and some from a few other 
ridings, actually, of individuals concerned about the deficiency 
in residential support for people who have long-term 
disabilities. Here’s the prayer of their petition: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Vanguard, Ponteix, Waldeck, Swift Current, and the great town 
of Wymark, Canada. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the contract that was offered to Jim Fergusson at 
$13,000 a month. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon 
and Warman. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I, too, 
have a petition to present on behalf of those concerned about 
the contract of Jim Fergusson, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
for citizens that are concerned with the exorbitant money that 
was spent to pay for consulting from Mr. Jim Fergusson, and 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the health care facilities 
in our area, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Radville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
residents of Saskatoon who are outraged at the obscene 
consulting contract of former Saskatoon Health Region CEO, 
Jim Fergusson. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 

The petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a petition from citizens that are very upset about the contract of 
Jim Fergusson. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
where citizens are calling on this government to resurface 
Highway 15 from the junction of Highway 11 east to the 
junction of Highway No. 2: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired or resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by good citizens from Hanley, Regina, Sedley, some 
residents from Alberta, Kenaston, Imperial, and Warman. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Vanscoy and Delisle and area. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today as well regarding the 
outrageous contract of Jim Fergusson. I would like to read from 
the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by good citizens from a 
variety of constituencies in Saskatoon, all of whom identify 
themselves as former NDP [New Democratic Party] supporters, 
Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would like to bring to the 
attention of the member from Saskatoon Southeast the rule 
14(3): 
 

On the presentation of a petition no debate on or in 
relation to the same shall be allowed. 

 
I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to stand 
in the Assembly today and put forth a petition on behalf of 
citizens of west-central Saskatchewan concerned with the 
rerouting of Highway No. 51 to bypass the town Kerrobert. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 51 is rebuilt to 
go through the town of Kerrobert so that local businesses 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

may be given the opportunity to promote themselves to, 
and gain business from, patrons passing through 
Kerrobert. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a large pile of these petitions, but today 
these ones are signed by citizens of both Kerrobert and 
Kindersley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of the people that are 
against the forced amalgamation of schools. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Love, Saskatchewan. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning the consulting contract of Jim 
Fergusson — that’s sessional paper no. 800; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 97, 639, 640, and 798. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 106 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: for the year 
of 2005, how many staff members in SaskPower were 
working on the issue of the Kyoto accord and its impact on 
the province of Saskatchewan? If these employees were 
not employed strictly for this purpose, what percentage of 
their time was spent on developing a plan to help 
Saskatchewan meet its Kyoto objectives? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year of 2004, 
2003, and 2002. And, Mr. Speaker, I also have a similar set of 
questions for the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 106 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in the long absence of a 
representative from Kindersley on the Heartland Health 
Region, when will a representative from this community 
be appointed to the board? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 106 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Plan pension liability is currently 
unfunded, and what portion of the pension liability is 
currently funded? 
 

Mr. Minister, I have a great deal of questions similar in nature 
around pension liability. And I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly — actually 
somebody that needs no introduction — former member of this 
Assembly who was with us at the CPA [Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association] dinner last night. In your gallery, 
Walter Jess, and accompanied by his wife Ellen Woods, who 
was a classmate of mine at St. Andrew’s College. 
 
Walter, as many may well know, is a farmer, raises cattle and 
we’re glad to have some time with him last night. But he 
reported to me something that I was quite concerned about and I 
probably should be informing the rest of my colleagues about 
this. That he did report that this past while he had a case of 
angry cow on his farm. And it was such an angry cow that they 
couldn’t — when they were taking it to market — they couldn’t 
even get it out of the trailer. They had to finish the cow right 
there in the trailer. But I think it’s probably the only case of 
angry cow we’ve got here, and Walter is doing a great job in 
keeping a lid on that. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to introduce him 
and I ask all members to welcome him here. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and to all members of the Assembly two people sitting in the 
east gallery. One of them is Dorothee Neibuhr, a German 
exchange student from Rheinbach, Germany. She is 16 years 
old and is currently attending Luther College. She will graduate 
this June. She studied her first semester in Quebec and is now in 
Regina to try and improve her English language skills. She is 
the youngest of three children. Her mother is a teacher and, 
unfortunately, her father is a lawyer — something that I can 
relate to, Mr. Speaker. And she is accompanied today by Elaine 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

Courchene, who is a resident of Regina. Elaine is my CA’s 
[constituency assistant] sister; my CA is Rita Flaman Jarrett. 
 
And I would like to ask all members to welcome Elaine and 
Dorothee to the House today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I am so honoured to 
introduce to you and all of the people in the Assembly here 20 
exceptionally good-looking young people from La Ronge, 
Churchill School. They’re in grade 9 and they’re sitting in the 
west gallery. And they’re accompanied by their teacher, 
Christine Ravenis, and also chaperones, Susan Greene, and 
Frank Clinton. And I might also point out, Keewetin Trottier, 
who is one of the best cross-country skiers in Saskatchewan — 
for sure in the North. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to have everybody join me in 
welcoming the students to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this House, 
16 beautiful students from the Three Lakes School at Middle 
Lake, Saskatchewan which happens to be the school that I 
attended. 
 
So they’re being led today by Michelle Daubenfeld their 
teacher. And chaperones are Shirley Ann Hauser, Murray 
Hauser. Murray in his younger days, him and I spent a lot of 
time on the road with show cattle so I know him well — good 
to see you here — Colette Hauser and Irene Giesbrecht. So if 
you’d all welcome them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery this afternoon are 38 grade 7 students from St. 
Philip School in the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. These 
grade 7 students are joined by their teachers, Ms. Prins and Ms. 
Levesque, along with their principal, Mr. Jelinski. In addition 
they are joined by two teaching assistants, Ms. Trager and Ms. 
Bender. They also have accompanying them today, because it is 
a large group of students, three chaperones. I’d like to welcome 
Randy Epp, Amy Layton and Bev Shivack to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the students enjoy their time here and I will 
be meeting with them directly after question period for 
refreshments and pictures. 

So I’d ask all my colleagues to welcome these students and 
their chaperones, teachers, and principal to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the Assembly I would like to introduce two people that 
are sitting in your gallery, Joan Corneil, who is the economic 
development coordinator from the North Battleford area, and 
Joseph Esquirol, a small-business person from the same area. 
 
We had a very interesting meeting this morning talking about 
the proposed High Gate dam in the North Battleford area and it 
was a very interesting discussion we had with them and the 
other members of the committee. So please join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join my opposition colleague in introducing and 
welcoming Joe Esquirol, the president of Empire Welding and 
Machining in North Battleford, and Joan Corneil, who is the 
economic development director for the city of North Battleford. 
 
Members on this side this morning also had a very interesting 
and enjoyable presentation on the dam project in the Battlefords 
area. We were very pleased with the information that we 
received and the effort that they made to come and talk to us. 
 
So I join my opposition colleague and ask all members to join 
me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure to introduce three 
exchange students who are here today, and they are good 
friends of one of our Pages, Shanna Schulhauser. The exchange 
students are Daniela Cedillo, who is an exchange student from 
Mexico, and she is studying marketing; Sandra Ruiz, who is 
also an exchange student from Mexico, and she is studying 
journalism here in Regina. And they are also accompanied by 
Verena Osieck, who’s an exchange student at the University of 
Regina, and she is from Germany. 
 
So I welcome these students to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job  

 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, 17 years ago Saskatchewan 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

became the first jurisdiction in all of Canada to make today, 
April 28, a statutory day of mourning for people who were 
killed or injured on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say it was my colleague, the 
member for Moose Jaw North who, at the request of Nadine 
Hunt, then the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour, introduced the private member’s Bill proposing this 
very legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that this 
Assembly passed the Bill unanimously. Now the day of 
mourning is recognized all across the entire nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was on April 28 that Canada’s first workers’ 
compensation Act was passed. It has now become a day to 
share the grief of those who have lost a loved one, and it is also 
time to renew our commitment to ensuring the safety of 
workers. 
 
It saddens me to note that in the last 12 months 21 people have 
lost their lives to a work-related injury or illness here in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of every one 
involved in the workplace to identify and control health and 
safety hazards on the job. It is our responsibility as members of 
this Assembly to support workers’ rights and safety with the 
legislative tools at our disposal. 
 
This is a sad and special day, Mr. Speaker. I ask this Assembly 
to recommit to keeping our occupational health and safety 
legislation strong and all laws that regulate conditions in the 
workplace. I ask this Assembly to recommit to ensuring the 
health and safety of all Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today on behalf of the official opposition to acknowledge the 
National Day of Mourning and to remember and pay tribute to 
the workers who died on the job or were injured in any manner. 
 
Last year in Saskatchewan 26 people died on the job. One life 
lost is one too many. Although every job has its risks, it’s 
important for us as legislators to do everything possible to 
provide safe and healthy workplaces. 
 
Education and training is key, particularly for young employees 
who are perhaps enthusiastic about a first job but not that 
knowledgeable about the risks and safety precautions. It’s 
important to educate both employers and employees about 
workplace hazards and it is important to practice safety first. 
 
As legislators we must not only set good examples as 
community leaders, but we must encourage safe workplaces 
through legislation. We must make efforts to improve health 
and safety standards. And we must take steps to ensure that the 
workers’ compensation system is working for employees when 
they need it most. 
 
Today is an appropriate time to renew our commitment to 
safety in the workplace. It is important that this Assembly pay 
tribute to Saskatchewan workers who lost their lives this past 

year, and to the families, friends, and loved ones that they left 
behind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Women of Today Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was honoured to 
attend the seventh annual Women of Today Awards luncheon at 
the Beefeater Plaza in Estevan. 
 
These awards are sponsored by SaskPower and Quota 
International of Estevan with funds raised through this luncheon 
supporting the violence intervention program and also the 
placement of sound field FM [frequency modulation] systems 
within Estevan schools. These systems amplify the teachers’ 
voices through speakers to allow children to hear more clearly 
and consistently. 
 
Winners of the 2005 awards were: the Ida Petterson Memorial 
Award for outstanding entrepreneur, Lorna LaChambre; the 
SaskPower Award for Outstanding Contribution to the 
Workplace, Lori Carr. And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, the 
recipient of that category in 2004 was Margaret Duncan, who 
later on this afternoon will receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal. 
 
The Shirley Orsted Memorial Award for Young Woman of 
Today went to Kayla Seipp, and the SaskTel Award for 
Outstanding Contribution to the Community went to Tressa 
Friess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
recipients and nominees. They are truly women of today. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

La Ronge and District Citizen of the Year 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know, 
Saskatchewan’s volunteers are an integral part of the health and 
vibrancy of our communities. Every day people from across the 
province generously donate their time and skills to ensuring that 
we all live in a better place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of these people is Lynnette Merriman from 
my constituency of Cumberland, who was recently named La 
Ronge and district’s Citizen of the Year, sponsored by the 
Kikinahk Friendship Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Merriman has been the driving force behind 
several community and parent groups in La Ronge. She is the 
president of the La Ronge Figure Skating Club, head of the 
parent committee for the La Ronge Air Cadets, and is involved 
with Precam and Churchill parent councils. On top of all this, 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Merriman is currently operating a 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

home-based business and co-parenting five children, who are 
equally as active and community minded as she is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in her nomination Ms. Merriman was described as 
a dedicated, hard-working, reliable, fun, creative, and gracious 
woman. And although she is humble about receiving her award, 
she is a worthy recipient and an excellent role model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating Lynnette Merriman and the other two nominees, 
Flora Roberts and Mary Anne Baxter, on their achievements, 
and in thanking them for the important work they do in 
strengthening their communities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatchewan Population Statistics 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we regularly hear from 
government members who are very quick to point out any 
favourable bond rating or other positive statistic. Most of these 
things happen in spite of — and not because of — the NDP 
government. 
 
I’ve got some very sorry statistics that I would like to point out 
today to see whether the NDP are going to take the blame for. 
Statistics Canada reports Saskatoon and Regina top the list of 
Canadian cities for brain drain. Regina lost 1,300 students or 7 
per cent more of its 2001 grads than it gained in return. 
Saskatoon lost 1,400 students or 6 per cent more than it gained 
in 2001. 
 
Sask Learning has responded by saying that the data is dated 
and the real situation is improving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate reality is that our population is flat 
or in a decline. The most recent Statistics Canada information 
shows that between October 2004 and January 2005 this 
province has lost nearly 1,000 people, or point one per cent of 
its population. Only Nova Scotia has done worse than 
Saskatchewan. Manitoba’s population is now almost 20 per cent 
higher than Saskatchewan’s. This NDP government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I just ask members to allow the statements to be 
read, and I remind members also that these statements are not 
debatable. They are statements that are standing on their own 
and ought not to be responded to. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should go and start 
again from the beginning, but I’ll pass on that. Manitoba’s 
population is now almost 20 per cent higher than that of 
Saskatchewan. This NDP government has become a group of 
old, tired CCFers [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation]. In 
Saskatchewan, NDP unfortunately now stands for either 
never-ending departing people or never-ending decline of 
population, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Corner Gas Wins Screenwriting Award 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — The Toronto Star has hailed it as sheer 
genius. The Halifax Daily News called it absolutely, 
gut-wrenchingly funny. It was labelled a comedy coup by the 
Winnipeg Free Press, and wickedly funny by the Leader-Post. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m talking of course about the television hit 
series Corner Gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this widely acclaimed sitcom recently won a 
Writers Guild of Canada award for best screenwriting. Brent 
Butt, Mark Farrell, and Paul Mather won the award at the 2005 
Canadian Screenwriting Awards for a Corner Gas episode they 
wrote called Comedy Night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since its premiere in 2004, Corner Gas continues 
to rank among the top most watched television series in Canada. 
Every week about 1.3 million viewers tune into the sitcom, 
starring Gemini nominee and renowned comedian Brett Butt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Corner Gas is entirely filmed in Saskatchewan — 
specifically in Rouleau — and at the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Production Studios in Regina, and it’s just one example of the 
province’s vibrant, competitive, and flourishing film industry. 
The sound stage has proven to be a good investment and has 
contributed significantly to the growth experienced in the film 
industry in the past year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating everyone involved in the making of Corner Gas 
and particularly the recipients of the Canadian Screenwriting 
Award. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Meeting 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night was 
the annual meeting and report of the CPA. This is a very special 
occasion for elected members, former members, and the 
legislative staff. Of special interest was a presentation of the 
Centennial Medal to Mr. Bernard Korchinski, a former member 
of the Assembly from Redberry. Mr. Korchinski was born in 
the year this province, Saskatchewan, became a province — 
1905. And it was a pleasure to see that former politicians do not 
lose their ability when a podium and microphone are placed in 
front of them. Well done, Mr. Korchinski. 
 
Mr. Speaker’s report on the Ukrainian election was also very 
interesting. It shows that each of us can play a role in bringing a 
functioning democracy to nations around the world. 
 
The pièce de résistance, however, of the evening was the 
Hansard report. I’m sure a number of members in this 
Assembly resemble the depictions in the Hansard report. The 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

role of government should not be to interfere, but rather to 
assist and help out in a time of need or crisis. To this end, Mr. 
Speaker, I offer the following to Hansard for use as needed 
during any verb drought: rate, select, implant, elect, typify, butt, 
vanish, ban, furbish, participate, theorize, venerate, eject, abate, 
cling, cleave, sicken, meander, and the one I’m about to use 
now, Mr. Speaker, sit. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Treatments for Drug Addictions 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as the opposition Saskatchewan 
Party, we’ve always said we’ll congratulate the government 
when they do something right. Today the NDP government has 
finally followed up on what we’ve been saying for the last year 
about crystal meth and other addictions, including targeting 
education programs in our schools, public awareness 
campaigns, voluntary meth watch program, and a helpline for 
families. 
 
We also understand that the minister again is directing his 
officials to improve in-patient services for young people with 
addictions, as he did in the budget. Can the minister tell us 
today where the services will be provided and how quickly will 
they be provided? What is the specific plan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
all members of the community, especially the businesses that 
are involved with the meth watch program; the member who is 
the Legislative Secretary, who is looking at this; members 
opposite; all the people who have contributed various ideas to 
things that we’re doing. 
 
The specific question here relates to treatment beds, and we 
specifically are expanding the mental health treatment beds for 
young people at the refurbishment or renewing of the 
Hantelman Building in Saskatoon. That will deal with the 
multiple diagnosis where there’s addictions and mental health. 
 
We also have probably about another 12 beds that we’re now 
looking at where they should be across the province. We 
anticipate some of those will be in Regina. They may be in 
some other communities as we proceed to do our analysis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That really wasn’t a 
specific plan. It’s still looking at a lot of things, and we don’t 
have anything . . . we don’t have the question when answered. 
Another thing we have not heard this government talk about 
today is help for families whose children are already addicted. 
 

On Monday we heard a grandmother who was pleading with 
this government to give her the tools to get her granddaughter 
back. Mary, her granddaughter, has been living with a known 
drug trafficker for almost a year, and that family has no 
recourse to get her into treatment. 
 
Yesterday I introduced a Bill that will help fix this problem and 
will help many families get their Marys back. Will the 
government allow this Bill to proceed to second reading today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I think it has been 
contention of the member opposite that the government should 
set aside politics and allow this Bill to go forward. I would have 
to say that I would be irresponsible if I did not look thoroughly 
at the content of the Bill, its implications for both the children, 
their responsibilities and freedoms, as well as the parents’ rights 
and freedoms. 
 
And we do have a section 18 of The Child and Family Services 
Act which I am currently testing in regards to its ability to 
fulfill this objective. And I think we need to be careful as we 
proceed with legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that section of that Bill is 
something that I want to talk about today. Mary’s grandmother 
has written us a letter about her meeting with the minister and 
the government officials on Monday. And here is what she had 
to say: 
 

We explained our situation and after my husband (Ken) 
broke into tears, the Minister of Community Resources 
and Employment indicated to us that she was in favour of 
moving towards the apprehension of our granddaughter, at 
which point Marilyn Hedlund [an official] . . . basically 
squashed the ability for this to happen. [The question is] 
. . . who runs this show? 
 

Mr. Speaker, if the minister doesn’t have the power to act then, 
we need different legislation. Again, when will the government 
allow this Bill to go to second reading? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I do 
believe . . . And I don’t want to be too contentious because I am 
very sympathetic to the plight of families who stand by and 
attempt to intervene and have very little control over what’s 
happening with their children. 
 
Now for children under 16, the law is quite specific; they can be 
apprehended. For children over the age of 16, they’re 
considered to have more adult rights, and they are asked 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

voluntarily to make decisions. 
 
We now are looking at — through this strategy that was 
announced earlier today through our Legislative Secretary and 
through the work of my department — we’re looking at 
whether that is sufficient and what other measures legally need 
to be taken. And I can assure you I take this most seriously. 
And if the member opposite had been sincere in her efforts to 
move this forward, she might have provided me with some 
discussion of this Bill at an earlier time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena.  
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about sincerity. Mr. 
Speaker, Dr. Richard Rosen is a researcher at the UCLA 
[University of California, Los Angeles], and he is the leading 
expert on forced treatment programs. This morning at CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio he said that 
involuntary treatment is necessary. He said, and I quote: 
 

At the time they are using, it may not be really possible for 
them to make a voluntary decision to enter treatment. 
However, once they are put in treatment and they don’t 
have any choice, the treatment process can often take hold 
and motivation can emerge where it hasn’t before.  
 

He adds: 
 

The research literature is very clear that people will 
respond to treatment if coerced into treatment at the same 
rate that they will if they enter intro treatment voluntarily.  

 
In fact this morning he told the CBC radio that involuntary 
treatment can sometimes work better.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the experts have talked about it. We don’t have to 
look at this any longer. We have to act. There are families that 
are demanding help right now from this government. When will 
this government do something for the children in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ignore that 
highly offensive comment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please members. I 
would ask members, including the member for Regina 
Rosemont, to make an effort not to have any comments tossed 
across the way that may be personal. Let’s stick to the issues, 
members. The Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment.  
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I am working in all 
sincerity with the family. And I have to say I find this 
misrepresentation of the Alberta Bill, which will not come into 
effect until July 2006 which suggests that even when you are in 
fast-forward, you have to carefully consider the number of 

children you are locking up under what circumstances and to 
what end. 
 
So I will say that we are considering this . . . [inaudible] . . . I 
have huge sympathy with the parents and grandparents. No 
parent could help but. And I will do everything I can to assist 
them in their efforts to bring their daughter back into their fold. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Behaviour of Health Official 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, six 
weeks ago the Minister of Health promised to look into 
allegations regarding his department and officials, that they 
made insulting comments to a woman who was seeking 
reimbursement for an out-of-province MRI [magnetic resonance 
imaging]. 
 
Brenda Goulet of Moose Jaw called the manager of medical 
support, Mr. Jim O’Carroll, to ask about coverage. What she 
received was nothing more than a deplorable response. She was 
asked as to whether she smoked, whether she was 
premenopausal, whether her mother was laying in a hospital 
somewhere. That’s the response she received. Brenda said Mr. 
O’Carroll told her that if she threw in a few tears, maybe they 
would review her file. After that, she decided not even to send 
in her claim because she was intimidated. 
 
To the minister: has he conducted the investigation to these 
deplorable comments made by Mr. Jim O’Carroll? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the directions were given to 
the deputy minister to deal with this matter in the department. 
It’s a personnel matter, and they are working at it. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has been six 
weeks and his department has been looking at it. Brenda 
Goulet, to this date, has heard nothing from the government — 
not a letter, not a phone call, not a word in six weeks. And the 
minister stands there and says, his department is working on it. 
That absolutely is unacceptable. 
 
Mrs. Goulet is afraid to put in her claim because she feels this 
minister probably supports the disrespectful behaviour put 
forward by Jim O’Carroll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s a quote from the minister when we brought 
this up the last time: 
 

Every citizen of Saskatchewan deserves . . . [the] respect 
in the care that . . . is provided. 

 
Six weeks later, Mrs. Goulet hasn’t heard a word from his 
department or from this government, Mr. Speaker. Does this 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

minister stand up and support the conduct that the Department 
of Health has shown Ms. Goulet? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I will stand on my reputation 
as a person who cares about people and works with people, and 
I am offended when a member of this House casts aspersion on 
my reputation. 
 
And so what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that this legislature is 
not the place where you attack civil servants, which we hear on 
a regular basis. Mr. Speaker, they are people who are doing 
some very difficult jobs, and they are not always doing things 
that we would condone. But, Mr. Speaker, we have appropriate 
procedures within the department to deal with this particular 
issue, and, Mr. Speaker, they are working on this particular 
matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the member and all of those people across 
the way to just remember how they treat our very good, 
professional, civil servants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Brenda Goulet 
would like to file her claim to Sask Health, but she doesn’t 
believe she’ll get fair treatment both because of the disparaging 
remarks made by Mr. O’Carroll and the fact that she’s gone 
public. That’s what people that access this system, that run up 
against the health system and don’t feel they’ve had proper 
treatment . . . That’s what people feel after listening to this 
minister, that they’ll get unfair treatment, Mr. Speaker. Is that 
what he wants people to think of him and his health care 
system? 
 
After six weeks, I think it would be the very least that he would 
instruct his department to at least get in touch with Mrs. Goulet 
and show her that they have listened to what she had to say and 
are going to act on it, Mr. Speaker. And once they do act on it, 
I’d be very interested to know what he plans on doing if the 
allegations are true with Mr. O’Carroll, because this isn’t the 
first time his judgment has come into question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that member knows 
that I respond to these particular concerns in very appropriate 
ways, using the procedures that we have to deal with 
disciplining of these people. And, Mr. Speaker, that information 
and those challenges will be dealt with. 
 
I also reject the perspective that people are afraid to send in 
their applications. Those things should go forward. And we 
actually do have procedures whereby matters are appealed or 
dealt with at other levels, and that’s entirely appropriate as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what I would say is, I encourage that member to temper 
his criticism of our civil servants and watch how he describes 

these people who provide services across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
[14:15] 
 

SaskTel’s Investments 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government, through SaskTel, has made five major 
out-of-province investments in the past few years: Navigata, 
Craig Wireless, and Soft Tracks in BC [British Columbia]; 
tappedinto.com in Nashville; and Retx.com in Atlanta, Georgia. 
An interesting aside on Retx, Mr. Speaker — the name was 
recently changed to Nokomis Holdings. And I doubt very much 
that the government consulted with the folks up at Nokomis 
about this because I’m pretty sure that they would not want to 
have their community’s name attached to this stinker. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, the total invested in these three 
companies is $103.5 million — 103.5 million Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, invested in BC, Nashville, and 
Atlanta. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the minister could please 
advise this House what these five companies are worth today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we reported this in the 
tabling of the annual reports to the end of 2004. Mr. Speaker, 
the external investments, the amount of money invested was, I 
believe, the exact number was $152 million. The estimated 
value of those companies right now, Mr. Speaker, is estimated 
at between 255 and $300 million, an appreciated value of about 
$100 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s figures are 
somewhat different than what I read in the report. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the net worth of Navigata, in which the NDP has 
invested $56 million, is now worth $13 million. Tappedinto, the 
NDP invested $7 million, and it’s now worth $300,000. Soft 
Tracks, the NDP invested 5.2 million, and it’s now worth 
15,000. Craig Wireless, the NDP invested $10 million. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s bankrupt. Zilch. 
 
And Retx in Atlanta, Georgia, is also bankrupt. The NDP 
invested 24.6 million, and if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
now worth less than nothing. They lost their entire investment, 
and they still owe $100,000 in legal fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means the NDP’s $103 million investment 
portfolio is now worth $13.5 million. That’s a loss of $90 
million, Mr. Speaker. Why has the NDP lost 90 million 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars in BC, Nashville, and Atlanta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again the 
opposition Conservatives say one thing, and the facts say 
another thing. Here’s the difference, Mr. Speaker. Here is the 
difference. I read the whole report, as did the people of 
Saskatchewan. I read the whole report, not the items that that 
member is referring to, Mr. Speaker. Again you can look at this 
any way you want, and the opposition Conservatives can look at 
it the way they want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me try and describe it at least for the people of 
Saskatchewan, with the facts, if the opposition doesn’t want to 
listen. You can look at this as an investment, a basket of 
investments like a mutual fund, if you will. Not every single 
investment always makes money. At the end of the day, what 
you want to be concerned about and what you want to be sure 
of is that you make a profit at the end of the year. 
 
I assure, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan, the 
external investments that SaskTel has made — $152 million — 
is now worth estimated 255 to roughly $300 million, good 
investments for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions, Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister were about these five stinkers. And I 
would ask him to stand in this House and to tell this House that 
Retx is worth more than zero, that it’s worth $24.6 million that 
this government has invested in Retx. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
worth less than nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s lost $90 million on bad 
investments. That would hire roughly 1,500 nurses right here in 
Saskatchewan. It could mean that 215,000 low-income earners 
would pay less income tax, and 70,000 low-income earners 
would pay no tax, or that $90 million could go a long ways to 
fully funding the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program or help struggling farm families right 
here in Saskatchewan. But that’s not going to happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want somebody from that side to stand in their 
place and tell me why they can justify losing hard-earned 
profits from our Crown corporations that would be better spent 
right here on services and programs right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll 
review Hansard, but I think I heard that member say, don’t tell 

me the whole story. I don’t want to hear the whole story. I think 
that’s what he said. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost laughable. 
That’s what has been going on with those opposition 
Conservatives for the last quite a few years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I say that you can compare this to a mutual 
fund, I think it’s an excellent comparison with this one noted 
exception. Mutual funds — their sole purpose is bottom line, 
Mr. Speaker. SaskTel goes beyond that, Mr. Speaker. Their 
service, their additional item that they need to provide, Mr. 
Speaker, is they also want to provide service. Like every other 
company, and I note here as an example, Mr. Speaker, a recent 
article, “Shaw Communications enters the phone market.” As it 
relates to Navigata, that was an item they just referred to, 
they’re entered into voice over Internet protocol, like many 
other companies across North America and across the world, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s important that we let SaskTel do the work so 
they can provide service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Agreement Between Federal Liberals and Federal 
New Democrats 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week 
when the Prime Minister of the country went on national 
television, he was followed by the Leader of the Opposition, 
and then by the leader of the current provincial governing party 
here, Mr. Layton. Mr. Layton, even on that occasion, began to 
at least intimate that he would be interested in a deal to prop up 
the federal Liberal government. We know over the weekend 
that there were media reports saying he was going to negotiate 
such a deal. He was going to offer to prop up the federal Liberal 
government down in Ottawa. 
 
The question to the Premier is simple: did the Premier call his 
federal counterpart then on the weekend or late last week while 
this agreement was being negotiated, and did he let Mr. Layton 
know about the priorities of the province of Saskatchewan? Did 
he specifically request that Mr. Layton make Saskatchewan 
priorities a part of this deal to prop up the federal Liberal 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
question, the answer is yes. I spoke to the Leader of the federal 
New Democratic Party as he went into a negotiation with the 
Prime Minister about Saskatchewan’s priorities and about 
Canadians’ priorities. And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the 
federal Leader of the New Democratic Party has achieved for 
Canadians what the Leader of the Conservative Party failed to 
achieve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you see, Mr. Speaker, they say one thing, but here’s the 
fact of the matter. We have a situation in the nation’s capital 
today where the Leader of the Conservative Party is willing to 
climb together with the separatists of Canada to force an 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

election, where they are willing to join the separatists, these 
Conservatives, willing to join the separatists. For what reason, 
Mr. Speaker? For one reason only — political opportunism, 
political expediency. The Leader of the New Democratic Party 
has forged an arrangement with the Prime Minister of Canada 
for the good of Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question to the 
Premier: did he then ensure that more assistance, more 
agriculture assistance for Saskatchewan producers and an 
energy accord for our province were part of that deal Mr. 
Layton made with Mr. Martin? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again the opposition is 
saying one thing, but here are the facts of the matter. His 
colleagues in Ottawa, the Conservative colleagues of that leader 
and that party in Ottawa, had an opportunity when the budget 
was presented to the House of Commons to speak on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people — to speak and act on behalf of the 
farming people of Saskatchewan, the producers of 
Saskatchewan. And what did those Conservatives in Ottawa do 
when they had the opportunity? They sat on their hands. I ask 
the Leader of the Opposition, has he been in contact with his 
leader? Has he talked to the leader of the Conservative Party in 
Ottawa to ask why they are not supporting the producers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — So we know then that the Premier of the province 
of Saskatchewan phoned his federal leader, Mr. Layton, while 
Mr. Layton was going into the back rooms of Ottawa with Buzz 
Hargrove to negotiate a deal with Paul Martin to prop his 
government up. 
 
We also then know, we also know, however, that that deal 
includes nothing for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. It 
includes no energy accord, no long-term agreement for a better 
equalization deal, Mr. Speaker, which leaves us with the sad 
spectre that the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan not 
only has no influence with the leader of the Liberal Party. He 
apparently has no influence with the leader of his own federal 
party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If he raised these concerns with Mr. Layton, why are they 
nowhere in this deal with the devil to prop up the federal 
Liberals? Where is the support for producers in Saskatchewan? 
Where is an energy accord for our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In terms of an energy accord for the 
province of Saskatchewan, real progress is being made in real 
substantive ways — real progress that doesn’t require rhetoric 
or the political opportunism that’s being expressed by the 
Leader of the Opposition today in this House, the same kind of 
political opportunism that characterizes Conservatives in this 
country no matter where they sit, whether they sit in 
Saskatchewan or they sit in Ottawa. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, a political party, the Conservative Party 
of Canada, willing to align itself with the separatists — with the 
separatists. For what reason, Mr. Speaker? For what reason? 
Simply because they enjoy a small bump in the polls, they’re 
willing to sign up with the separatists for their political 
advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Jack Layton, leader of the New Democratic 
Party, went to the Prime Minister of Canada and worked a deal 
for the people of Canada. This deal will mean, this deal will 
ensure that the continuation of the monies for Saskatchewan 
producers will be on. This will ensure new resources for the 
municipalities of Saskatchewan. It will ensure new child care 
funding and new resources for the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier talks about 
political opportunism. If the question to the Saskatchewan Party 
is, would we take every single opportunity to fight for better 
and improved aid and assistance for farmers in a time of crisis, 
the answer is, yes. If the question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — If the question is, would we take every political 
opportunity we could to fight for an energy accord and for a 
better equalization deal for Saskatchewan, the answer is yes, 
Mr. Speaker. Imagine this. We have this Premier, the leader of 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry. Order, please. Let’s just allow the 
question to be put in a manner that’s befitting of this Assembly. 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, imagine the spectre of this 
Premier’s national leader propping up a government that is 
sagging under the weight of the biggest political scandal in the 
country’s history — under corruption, Mr. Speaker. We know 
that the Premier of this province actually phones Mr. Layton 
and presumably makes the case for Saskatchewan, but it’s 
nowhere in this deal with the devil, Mr. Speaker. It’s nowhere 
in this deal to prop up the federal government. Why doesn’t he 
have any influence even with his own national leader, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition knows full well that in conjunction with the federal 
New Democratic Party we have stood on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people and the people of Canada. The question 
today, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan is, what exactly is the 
position of the leader of the Saskatchewan Conservative party? 
The question today is, has he phoned the leader . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. And now the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the question is, has the leader of the 
Conservative party in Saskatchewan phoned the leader of the 
Conservative Party in Canada? Does he support this unholy 
alliance between the Conservative Party of Canada and the 
separatists of Canada for their political advantage? Has he 
talked to the leader? Does he support that position? 
 
And let me say this, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you why he’s asking 
this kind of question today — because he is a leader and they 
are a party who cannot stand good news. You know, you’d 
think they’d be up on their feet today talking about the GDP 
[gross domestic product] results for the people of 
Saskatchewan. The results that say, Saskatchewan real GDP, 
third highest in the country. The result that says, personal 
income growth, second highest in the country. The result that 
says, nominal GDP growth, first in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s funny they don’t want to talk about good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 

National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or 
Injured on the Job 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today is the National Day of Mourning For Workers 
Killed Or Injured On The Job. On average almost four workers 
are killed every working day here in Canada; hundreds of 
thousands more are injured, some permanently. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Last year 21 workers from Saskatchewan died as a result of 
injury or illness suffered on the job and more than 14,000 others 
were injured seriously enough to need time off work. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, since 1999 more 160 Saskatchewan men and 
women have died on the job and over 86,000 have been injured. 
The toll of these deaths and injuries has been staggering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is indeed a day of mourning. We mourn the 
working men and women who have lost their lives building our 
province and our country. With the families left behind we 
grieve the loss of mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters, sons, and 
daughters. And on this day our heartfelt sympathy and prayers 
go out to all who suffer the pain every day of knowing a loved 
one will never return home again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is also a day of renewed commitment, a day 

to renew commitment to ending workplace deaths and injuries, 
a renewed commitment to work for the day when all workers 
will return home safe every evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this evening there will be memorial ceremonies 
across the province, and I would ask that everyone take time to 
honour the memory of the 21 Saskatchewan workers who have 
died as a result of job-related injuries or illness in the last year. 
And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my comments I would ask that 
we observe a moment of silence in this Assembly. 
 
But first, Mr. Speaker, it is my duty to read aloud the names of 
those Saskatchewan workers who have died over the last year 
as a result of job-related injury and illness to put their names on 
the permanent record of our Legislative Assembly and this 
province and for us all to commit to renew our efforts toward 
safe work places. 
 
Daniel Shalley, Wesley Wheeler, Kade Anderson, Denis April, 
Lonny Renas, Jeffrey McAleer, Albert Parker, Robert Ripka, 
Blake Vance, Leslie Stratton, John Hennessey, David 
Bannerman, Richard Marx, Robert Campbell, Susan Hoffart, 
David Williams, Robert Shackleton, Robert McKay, Daniel 
Sidloski, Neil Fraser, and Donald Poisson. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly would all members 
please rise for a moment of silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — I thank all members. Please be seated. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 118, The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill 118, The Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Premier. 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — On behalf of all members, to welcome to 
your galley, a number of the family of the late Gordon 
MacMurchy. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Gordon’s daughter, 
Joyce MacMurchy of Regina, his son, Mark MacMurchy of 
Regina and his wife Caroline, who many of us know from her 
work here in the building and MacMurchy’s grandson, Todd 
MacMurchy of Minot, North Dakota. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome the family members who 
are here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions 1,016 through 1,021 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,016 to 1,021 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today at the 
close of my remarks, I will make a formal motion of 
condolence to note the passing of Mr. Gordon Samuel 
MacMurchy. The motion will be seconded, I believe, by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Before making the formal motion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
make just a few personal comments. As all members in this 
House know, we mourn the loss this week of Gordon 
MacMurchy, long-time member of this legislature and 
long-time servant of the people of Saskatchewan and his own 
community and family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at services that were held this past week for Mr. 
MacMurchy, his friend and his colleague, former premier Allan 
Blakeney called Gordon, quote; “a true son of the soil”. The 
Leader-Post story, Mr. Speaker, that ran on the weekend hailed 
Gordon MacMurchy as a champion, “a champion for rural 

Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a school board trustee, as an MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly], as a member of cabinet, as the 
mayor of Semans, as Chair of the Living Sky Health District, 
and in many other roles, Gordon MacMurchy spent 40 years — 
40 years in public service. 
 
The athlete that we knew in Gordon was a self-described black 
and white politician. Few shades of grey in Gordon’s opinions. 
His decisiveness was legendary. The same decisiveness that 
was behind home plate when he was umping a ball game. The 
same decisiveness, toughness, and determination that was 
honed in the hockey arena characterized his work in public 
service and his work in this legislature. 
 
His contributions and accomplishments resonate right across 
our province. 
 
During his term in Education, Gordon MacMurchy was an 
innovator. His legacy in Education includes introduction of 
physical education to the core curriculum, publicly supported 
rural kindergartens, teacher collective bargaining, and the 
community college system. All of which, all of those initiatives 
still serving well the people of Saskatchewan and those 
involved in learning. 
 
In Municipal Affairs and Housing Gordon made lasting 
contributions, establishing the municipal revenue sharing and 
community capital funds. He was extremely instrumental — 
and I well remember this — in expanding senior citizens 
low-rental housing. 
 
But perhaps above all, in terms of Gordon’s service in this 
legislature, he is remembered as minister of Agriculture. And 
his impact on agriculture and rural Saskatchewan was indeed 
profound. He was instrumental in a number of important 
initiatives: the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, the Beef 
Stabilization Board, the farm lab program shared between 
farmers and the University of Saskatchewan. He had a deep 
devotion to the farming community of Saskatchewan and to the 
agricultural base of this province. 
 
Now I have to say, Mr. Speaker, on a personal note that Gordon 
also played a very active role in the United Church of Canada. 
He found much time to serve in his own local congregation in 
Semans United Church. I know that Gordon presided over 
many services of worship as a lay leader and a lay preacher I 
know he spent years teaching Sunday school and leading youth 
groups. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had the honoured pleasure to have a few 
words with Gordon on the telephone just days and hours before 
he passed away. And I so deeply appreciated that conversation. 
His vibrant interest yet in public affairs and political affairs in 
the province. But I am told by members of his family that after 
that conversation, Gordon appreciated that I had called. But not 
that a politician had called, not that a premier had called, but in 
fact that a United Church minister had called, because he was 
keeping tally. And his hunch was the more United Church 
ministers that would phone in that last week, the better chances 
he had in getting past the Pearly Gates. 
 



2738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

I was pleased to phone Gordon as one who deeply, deeply 
admired the individual; deeply, deeply admired his conviction, 
his determination, his decisiveness; deeply admire the 
contribution that he made to the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And so, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Gordon Samuel MacMurchy, who passed away on April 
20, 2005, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 
from 1971 until 1982. He represented the constituencies of 
Last Mountain and Last Mountain-Touchwood for the 
New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy was born on July 4, 1926 in Semans. He 
received his early education at Alexandra School and later 
graduated from the Semans High School. Mr. MacMurchy 
married Jean Neff on September 7, 1949, and together 
they raised three children. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy volunteered his time with a variety of 
local organizations, ranging from community boards to his 
church. He was a prominent supporter and participant in 
amateur sports such as hockey and baseball. He was 
inducted into the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame in 
1989, and awarded their Special Merit Award in 
recognition of his years as an athlete, coach, and referee. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy’s concern for the well-being of the 
communities in which he lived was evident in his lengthy 
record of public service. He was first chosen to represent 
his community as a trustee on the Govan School Board. 
Later, Mr. MacMurchy served as mayor of Semans for 15 
years and as chairman of the Living Sky Health District 
board from 1982 until 2002. In his private life, Mr. 
MacMurchy was a farmer. This background led him in 
1982 to set up the Family Farm Foundation, which 
encouraged research and public education on family 
farming issues. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy’s dedication to a life of public service 
was recognized by his investiture into the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit in 1999. He was also awarded a lifetime 
membership in the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy was first elected to this Assembly in 
1971, and successfully retained his seat in the following 
two elections. He served in the cabinet of Premier 
Blakeney throughout his tenure in this House. He was 
responsible for a number of portfolios, including 
Education, Continuing Education, Municipal Affairs, and 
Agriculture. Mr. MacMurchy’s interest in politics 
extended beyond elected office. He was active in the New 
Democratic Party and served in several capacities, 
including director and president of the party. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion of condolence with respect to Gordon MacMurchy, 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier, 
seconded by the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the 
Opposition. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf of 
Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition to offer our sincerest 
condolences to Gordon MacMurchy’s family, friends, and 
former colleagues. 
 
I did not have the opportunity to know Mr. MacMurchy 
personally. It’s clear though that he was a very dedicated and 
hard-working MLA, community leader. He was well respected 
by all of his constituents, I am told, in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, including those who didn’t vote for him 
necessarily. And that is an achievement, to be sure. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy’s community reaped the benefits of his 
persistence as a politician, volunteer, and community leader. A 
few of his outstanding achievements in provincial politics 
include the passage of mandatory seat belt legislation, which 
has saved thousands of lives over the years; the founding of the 
community college education system; and the founding of the 
Family Farm Foundation, as the Premier has just alluded to, 
which encouraged research in public education on farming 
issues. He was dedicated to agriculture and was a strong 
advocate for producers and for agriculture issues. 
 
As the members of this Assembly know, public life isn’t 
necessarily easy. It can be rewarding, but it’s not necessarily 
easy. It takes a tenacious and dedicated individual to serve his 
constituents for one term, let alone three — 11 years in the case 
of Mr. MacMurchy as the MLA for Last Mountain-Touchwood 
from 1971 to 1982. Our province is a better place for his efforts. 
And that is a claim I think that all of us here in this Assembly 
and frankly anyone from across the province would like to be 
able to make. 
 
Outside of politics, I understand that Mr. MacMurchy was an 
avid sportsman, dedicated his time to hockey and baseball. Not 
only did he participate in amateur sports, but he coached and 
officiated. His involvement in sports over the years resulted in 
his induction in the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame in 
1999. 
 
We thank him for his commitment to his community and to this 
province that we love. His achievements will no doubt long be 
remembered, and not only by his family and friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, Saskatchewan 
Party, and all the members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s a 
pleasure to second the motion just put forward by the Premier 
and to express our sincerest condolences to Gordon 
MacMurchy’s family and friends. 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2739 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real honour for 
me to stand today and to recognize just a terrific politician, a 
terrific person, a person that I first became aware of in about 
1970. Those were exciting times. 
 
Before I go into those exciting times I do want to say it’s a bit 
intimidating to have some of Gord’s family — who I welcome 
here, welcome their presence here — but it’s intimidating to 
speak of such a great man in front of family, knowing that we 
want to say all of the appropriate and truthful things about 
Gord, and we want to say them to the best of our ability. It’s 
also a bit extra intimidating because I worked with Caroline 
directly for 13 months, and those were 13 happy months from 
my perspective. And I want to share that I went canvassing with 
Mark MacMurchy in my constituency, and I was darned glad he 
wasn’t running against me because I’m not sure that I would 
come out on top of that. But he was a great person to have on 
my side, with me, and working. 
 
The ’70s were just a tremendously exciting time. The Premier 
has talked of, spoken of some of the accomplishments of that 
era and of Gord MacMurchy. So has the Leader of the 
Opposition. And as we stand here today on this April 28, the 
National Day of Mourning for injured workers, I can’t help but 
be appreciative that Gord MacMurchy was part of the group 
that brought occupational health and safety legislation here to 
Saskatchewan. He brought Bob Sass here. And many of us will 
remember Bob Sass going around the province saying, workers 
have the right to know, workers have the right to refuse 
dangerous work. And of course they still have that right. 
 
Gord MacMurchy . . . I have not heard anyone mention land 
bank yet, and I know that Gord would have been proud of his 
part in introducing land bank for Saskatchewan farmers. It’s a 
program, I think, it’s indicative to me of the Gord MacMurchy 
that I will always remember. And that is the Gord MacMurchy 
that was part of a large group, a government caucus, that 
discussed issues and then took a stand. And Gord MacMurchy 
was always . . . You could count on Gord MacMurchy to be 
front and centre supporting whatever the decision was. And it’s 
truly the mark of the man, a mark of that time, if I can describe 
it that way. 
 
I also know him on a bit of a personal level in that the very first 
time I ran, Gord MacMurchy ran for this very legislature. I was 
a little more fortunate than Gord was in that 1986 election in 
that I was elected, and he was rejected at that time. I think the 
province would have been better had the decision been made a 
little different, but that’s history. 
 
I know that Gord MacMurchy respected all people, and he 
respected people of all political stripes. I know that he respected 
people that took a stand, even a stand that he didn’t agree with. 
But for Gord, many things were black and white. And he 
enjoyed the vigour of the debate, and he enjoyed reaching 
conclusions that were usually for the betterment of all of our 
province and all of the people. 
 
I know that he respected action. And I also know that he had a 
very deep and long-standing sense of duty, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

clear from Gordon MacMurchy’s record of service that 
certainly started in his community long before he was elected to 
this Chamber and continued in his community. Just by way of 
one quick example, he was the mayor of Semans for 15 years 
from 1982 to 1997. And that’s a real tribute to the people of 
Semans for recognizing his tremendous abilities and his desire 
to serve and be an integral part of his community. 
 
I know that he had a huge commitment to his family because 
for 11 years while Gordon MacMurchy was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly, he would get up in the morning in 
Semans, drive to Regina, complete his daily task, and drive 
back to Semans, where he spent virtually every night in 
Semans, as opposed to . . . I know the easy way would be to just 
find an apartment or take a motel room in Regina on the busy 
days, but my understanding was that Gord cared deeply about 
the community and family and the sense of belonging and his 
commitment there. 
 
I also know that he had very, very strong co-operative ideals, 
believed very, very strongly in the co-operative movement. In 
that I think it’s fairly safe for me to say that the MacMurchys 
and the Trews, if I can draw that parallel, are fairly kindred 
spirits. 
 
Make no mistake — Gordon MacMurchy knew he was a New 
Democrat and never waivered, never vacillated from that 
position. And he had a deep commitment to his family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was more than 500 people gathered out at 
Semans the other day. My regret . . . I’ll start with my joy. My 
happiness was when they had a Gordon MacMurchy 
appreciation event some years ago when it was clear that he was 
not going to be seeking re-election into this Chamber. I drove 
out to Semans and it was just amazing to be with a huge crowd 
of well-wishers and people that clearly respected, liked, 
admired, and wanted to say thank you, faithful servant, for 
doing your job so well. That’s a happy memory. 
 
A less happy memory for me is our inability to attend the 
funeral which was on Wednesday, a day when this session is on 
and simply the numbers in the Chamber are too tight to allow 
all of us who would have wished to be at the funeral to be there. 
But such is life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to express my condolences to Gordon 
junior and Carol, to Mark and Caroline, Joyce, and 
grandchildren Todd and Kari, Tyler, and as well as Gordon’s 
sister, Margaret, and his special companion, special friend, 
Edna McPherson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been an honour to express my condolences to 
the family and friends and relatives of Gordon MacMurchy. I 
say to them, congratulations on being part of the support group 
that allowed Gordon MacMurchy to live such a full and 
complete and honourable life. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
certainly pleased to be able to rise in this Assembly and pay 
tribute to a former member of this Assembly, Gordon 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

MacMurchy, who represented the constituency that I now 
represent, that being Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The Premier and the Leader of the Opposition and the member 
from Regina that just spoke about Gordon had mentioned some 
of Gordon’s attributes as a sports person and as a political 
person. And I guess my first remembrance of Gordon 
MacMurchy and the first time or one of the first times that I met 
him was when he represented the constituency that I live in and 
now represent. Marlene and myself and our young family were 
just starting farming in the mid-’70s. And I remember one 
sunny afternoon, a hot afternoon in July, and a car drives into 
the yard — and I was busy hauling malt barley that day — and 
this individual gets out of the car and walks over to the bin and 
it was where I was loading this grain, and here it was Gordon 
MacMurchy. I mean that was the first elected official that ever 
drove on to our yard, and so I took . . . you know if he took the 
time to drive out to our farm I thought it would only be 
respectful and proper for me to stop what I was doing and stand 
and discuss the issues that he came to talk to me about. 
 
The issues that we talked about that day were issues relevant to 
agriculture. At that period of time in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
we had problems of getting our product from the farm to the 
ports. There was a shortage of rail capacity to deliver our 
products. We had customers willing to buy our products at the 
ports and pay good prices for our products but the railroads, for 
whatever reason . . . part of the reason was the structure of the 
freight rate and perhaps it was some of the . . . part of the reason 
was their inability to make initial investments. And so therefore 
we had that bottleneck. And that was of great concern to many 
young farmers such as myself as to the viability of our farming 
operations. 
 
So I discussed this matter with Gordon. I believe he was the 
minister of either transportation or Agriculture at that time, I’m 
not sure. But he certainly had a keen interest in those problems. 
So we discussed it at length. And I urged his government to get 
involved in solving this problem. At that time the federal 
government had decided as a solution to that problem was to 
make an investment in buying some hopper cars. And I believe 
Alberta, the province of Alberta, was either considering it or 
had done that. So I suggested that the Government of 
Saskatchewan do that. Well some time after that the province 
did buy 1,000 hopper cars. Now I’m not sure and I certainly 
wouldn’t stand in this House and take credit for any of that, but 
I remember that was an issue that we discussed. 
 
And what I remember is that Gordon MacMurchy listened 
intently. The reputation that he had as an MLA in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood is that Gordon MacMurchy would listen 
to the constituents’ concerns and take them forward and see if 
they could be solved. And that was the reputation that followed 
him throughout his political career and to this day. As a matter 
of fact, I spoke to one or two community leaders after Gordon 
had . . . that we got word that Gordon had passed away, and that 
invariably was the message . . . well basically two messages. 
Gordon MacMurchy was very concerned about rural 
Saskatchewan and he was a good MLA for his constituents. 
And this, Mr. Speaker, came from constituents who didn’t 
necessarily vote for him. And I think that’s a tribute that each 
one of us would like to have paid us when we’re done with our 
time here in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

[15:00] 
 
And I think some of that came from Gordon’s great love and 
involvement in sports. He was known . . . I certainly am not an 
athlete and have very few athletic abilities, but I have many 
good friends and neighbours who were good athletes — 
baseball players, hockey players — and who, particularly in 
baseball, who participated in baseball when Gordon 
MacMurchy was officiating. And he was known as a tough but 
fair official in that sport, Mr. Speaker. And I think that speaks 
well of any individual. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say to the 
family that although many of us, including myself, disagreed 
with him politically and some of his political policies, I think 
we all respected him as an individual, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
that is a legacy that the family can take great comfort in. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very honoured to be able to rise and say a few words about 
Gordon MacMurchy. I had the great privilege of serving with 
Gordon in the Blakeney government from 1978 to 1982, and 
Gordon MacMurchy was a pillar of strength in the New 
Democratic Party cabinet and caucus as well as in the 
legislature. And he was a very good mentor for those of us who 
had just been elected, Mr. Speaker, in terms of displaying what 
a strong cabinet minister can accomplish. 
 
My colleagues have made reference to many of his 
accomplishments in government. When I think about Gordon’s 
record, I think of it first in terms of the very broad range of 
interests he has. The Premier has made reference to his 
contribution to the community college system. I think about his 
very strong interest in seeing improved health coverage for 
Saskatchewan residents, and of course those were the days 
where the Saskatchewan drug plan was expanded, the children’s 
dental plan was introduced. 
 
Gordon had a deep, deep knowledge of transportation issues, 
Mr. Speaker. He was the most knowledgeable member of the 
caucus on matters of transportation. And of course, as has been 
referenced here this afternoon, he played a very important role 
in the establishment of the Saskatchewan Grain Car 
Corporation and improving access to port for grain 
commodities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of Gordon I think of somebody who 
also had a very, very deep passion for the family farm and 
preserving the family farm and putting in place public policies 
that would ensure the long-term viability of the family farm in 
this province. And Gordon spent a lot of time thinking and 
working and consulting with others in terms of advancing this 
work in our province. 
 
Gordon MacMurchy, Mr. Speaker, had a very kind heart. He 
was an interesting combination of kindness and toughness — of 
the willingness to listen and also the desire at the end of the day 
to be decisive. And he brought a very special mixture of 
qualities to this legislature that served the people of this 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

province very well. 
 
My colleague, the member for Regina Coronation Park, has 
made reference to the fact that Gordon would travel each day 
back to Semans and he treasured the time with his family. He 
would often arrive of course home late at night. He also valued 
the driving time as time for thinking. And Gordon would 
compose some of his best speeches and conceptualize some of 
his best public policy while he was driving back and forwards 
on the road. And he valued that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think clearly today, Mr. Speaker, we’re honouring a great 
public figure in our province and I would say a great Canadian 
politician, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very, very glad to have had the 
opportunity to serve with him, and I want to join with others in 
expressing very sincere condolences to his family. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — It’s a great privilege to get up and talk about 
Gordon MacMurchy, for he was a constituent of mine. He 
became one in the election of 2003 when they changed the 
borders. I guess my only regret is that I didn’t get the time to sit 
down and talk to him because I think he’d have had a lot of 
stories from his time here, sitting here as a former MLA . . . 
which when I’ve talked to other former people that have served 
here, I found that quite interesting. In fact I was looking 
forward running into him when I campaigned in the town of 
Semans, but that day he wasn’t around that day. So I was sorry I 
missed him. 
 
But one thing I did find when I did campaign around the town 
of Semans was, you know, we talked about politics, and he was 
very respected, a very respected man in the community. They 
were very proud that he had come from there and proud of the 
work he had done, not only in his political life here, but also 
mayor of Semans. Being a mayor for 15 years goes to say that 
the people of that town respected and put their trust in. 
 
And also, I see he was also a school trustee, so he was a man 
that believed in public life, that dedicated his life to public life. 
And when, I think, each and every one of us leaves here, I think 
we would like the people of our hometown to talk about us in 
the same way that the people of Semans had talked about 
Gordon MacMurchy when I campaigned around there. And I 
think that’s what we are all striving for. And I know that each 
and everyone one of us is working towards that. It would be an 
honour that if they would talk about us as well as the things that 
I’d heard about Gordon when I campaigned around there. 
 
I won’t touch on too many of his accomplishments; they’ve 
been talked about here. They are many of them, looking at . . . 
But I will touch a little bit on the seatbelt legislation, for when 
that came on, I was a teenager then when that particular piece of 
legislation was . . . And it was talked about quite a bit by myself 
and peers. But I can see that he had the foresight to put it 
through because it was a bit of a contentious legislation at that 
particular time, you know, for mandatory seatbelt use. But that 
particular piece of legislation, like my colleague has mentioned 
here, you know, has saved thousands and thousands of lives 
along there. So that was one of the things that he can be, you 

know, remembered for. 
 
I will talk a little bit . . . I can see that he also received the 
centennial medal just before he passed away, and I believe that 
he rightly deserved that. I know that he will be remembered as a 
strong, dedicated humanitarian for the work he’s did and for the 
public life. So on behalf of the residents of Arm River-Watrous, 
I want to wish the family our deepest sympathy and our 
condolences. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too am honoured this afternoon to rise and just say a few things 
about my recollections and my association with Gordon 
MacMurchy. I had the opportunity to attend the funeral along 
with my colleague, Mr. Hart, and . . . or the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Speaker. And I listened carefully to 
some of the words that were mentioned during the eulogy and 
they described Gordon as a man who has left a long legacy. 
 
He was a true humanitarian. He constantly strove to improve 
people’s lives and to improve his community and to improve 
his province. And he was always a team player, a man of action, 
a doer, someone who had initiative, initiated ideas that would 
effect positive change in someone irrespective of what their 
political interest or affiliation was, as others have spoken of 
today. 
 
And Gordon wanted to enrich the lives of those with whom he 
came into contact. And he felt a sense of duty to his community 
and for sure to the province. And many described that today as 
how lasting it has been and many have described the many, 
many contributions that he has provided through 40 years of 
public service. 
 
And I came to know Gordon about 20 years ago, well before I 
had an opportunity to know much about what the activities of 
this Assembly were all about. And as we . . . as I came to work 
in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, along with the various different 
portfolios that I’ve had, I noted, as he did, that much of the 
work that he did in government are portfolios of which I as well 
carried. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that he has become my 
mentor. 
 
And on many occasions whether it was in the ministry of 
Agriculture, or in the ministry of Education, or that of 
Municipal Government, it would be Gordon from whom I could 
have a conversation with because he’d had first-hand 
experience in dealing with many of the issues that were 
unchanged as we dealt with them over the last 10 years. 
 
As we were working away on our farm Bill nationally, I had a 
conversation with Gordon about some of the positions that the 
province should be taking. And he said to me one day, you need 
to stay firm in your conviction. You need to get those dollars 
for Saskatchewan producers and farmers. And you could work 
hard in convincing your colleagues to do that, I know, he says. 
 
And he told the story that the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood touched on just briefly. Because when 
the farmers were needing to transport their grain because our 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

old wooden hopper cars weren’t working very well, Gordon 
went about to make his own decisions. And so what he did is he 
went out and bought a fleet of his own, a thousand hopper cars 
for Saskatchewan. And not only did he ensure that we had 
1,000 hopper cars for Saskatchewan, he at that time spoke with 
Hugh Horner, who was the Alberta deputy minister . . . or 
deputy premier of Agriculture and convinced the Alberta 
government that they should too buy hopper cars for their 
producers as well. And they did. 
 
They spent $55 million, bought a hopper car fleet for 
Saskatchewan and then went to their cabinets respectively and 
said, we’ve got a good deal for you boys and girls. And Gordon 
had a way of doing that. Now, I don’t suggest that that’s a good 
practice, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you that from time to time it 
works. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you from time to time it works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to speak with some of the 
family members. And we all know what a wonderful sports 
participant Gordon was, a competitive rival both on the baseball 
field and in hockey and our associations were similar in terms 
of who we supported. And the Toronto Maple Leafs of course 
are a wonderful, wonderful Canadian team of which Gordon 
had a strong affinity for, as did his family members — just a 
couple. 
 
Mark is a strong fan, wears the maple leaf proudly today, Mr. 
Speaker. His son Gordon and Mark’s brother, Gordon, is a 
Montreal Canadien fan. And so, it’s left now to Mark to carry 
the maple leaf tradition within the MacMurchy family. And 
from time to time he can call on me, if he chooses and I’ll help 
him support the cause once the Maple Leafs are back in the 
field again, or back on the ice again. 
 
My most vivid recollection of Gordon MacMurchy was in 
1990. I was at that time, Mr. Speaker, working in my office for 
a public agency in Yorkton called SIGN [Society for the 
Involvement of Good Neighbours]. It was about 9:30 at night 
and of course, in October, it gets dark earlier. And there’s this 
knock on the window. Of course, it’s quiet all over the place 
and there’s a knock on the window and it startled me, I have to 
say. Because as I turned around to look through the window, 
here’s this large face and hands peering into my window. And 
it’s Gordon MacMurchy saying to me, let me in, let me in. 
 
So I let Gordon into my office and we have a conversation. And 
he was there recruiting members for the New Democratic Party 
for the election campaign of 1991. And I have to say that I was 
so startled, Mr. Speaker, by his presence, I could not say no to 
run in that election campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it says something about who Gordon was. He continued his 
work in his community, as many have mentioned; continued his 
work for farm communities and farm families across the 
province; was a mentor to many of us in the work that we do in 
this Assembly; and continued to serve his own community in 
the capacity of the mayor’s work. And for sure, Mr. Speaker, 
had always worked hard to make sure that the work and 
tradition of the NDP was well recognized and ensured that his 
presence was visible. 
 
[15:15] 
 

In fact as I said to the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, when we were at the funeral on 
Thursday, or on Wednesday, that we should hold an election 
today in Semans because I think we would probably win today 
with a large majority if we held that election in Semans, 
Saskatchewan. There were many, many people there, Mr. 
Speaker, from all across Saskatchewan because they recognized 
the tremendous accomplishments and commitments that 
Gordon has made to our province. 
 
And so today I want to extend to the family of the MacMurchys 
my personal condolences, and to thank them for giving us your 
father and your grandfather for the period of time that you have, 
in making Saskatchewan a far better place to live and raise our 
families and work. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Wascana Regina Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to be able to enter into the tribute and the celebration of life 
of a great man who served Saskatchewan well through his 
position here in the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and 
New Democrat conventions are not going to be the same 
without Gordon MacMurchy at the mike. Anyone watching 
could hear, quietly at first, a very logical, thought-out debate. 
And as the mood went on and the tone raised, you could gather 
information from Gordon, and he could sway the crowd to his 
point of view through his debate and dialogue at those 
microphones. 
 
And when you wanted to know how to touch people and get 
them on your side or just to go out and reach others, you could 
follow Gordon MacMurchy and he would show you how to 
work a crowd, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For me it’s been a privilege and an honour also to have had 
some time to work with someone I’m very proud of, Gordon 
MacMurchy’s niece, Michelle Oussoren. Michelle’s mom, 
Marg, has been mentioned here earlier today in the debate, and 
her dad, John. Marg and John have always opened their home, 
which was once their cottage but now their home, at Crystal 
Lake to anyone who came near, and that’s myself included. 
 
And those times that I was able to get near the MacMurchy 
family in action it gave me a window to a warm and a loving 
family who were always in action. And, Mr. Speaker, when you 
had the chance to look through that window into the life, the 
family life of Gordon, you would also be able to see in evidence 
the pride he had in Caroline and Michelle and any of the family 
that he loved so well. 
 
Many, many years ago as a young woman aspiring to political 
life, Gordon in his quiet and loving way was a staunch 
supporter. People have mentioned mentor — he would offer 
that to anyone. But he was also very encouraging and very 
respectful of a young woman who wanted to enter public life. 
He always took the time when you came close to give you that 
hug. 
 
As my colleague and member from Regina Elphinstone and I 



April 28, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

were talking, he wanted someone to mention not only through 
the travels and the ball teams and the sports events, that Gordon 
took time and was always in close relationship with the File 
Hills and the Touchwood First Nations and the First Nations 
members that he visited with. The people who touched his life 
and he touched theirs had a high regard and respect for the work 
of Gordon MacMurchy. And I know that all members would 
want to know of his work in putting forward the issues and 
concerns of First Nations. 
 
Today I offer my words of condolence in honour of a wise, 
quick-witted, hard-working social democrat who touched the 
lives of so many, many people. I think as some of us have been 
honoured to be on our feet and speak for a few moments, others 
have in their minds been reminiscing about the life of Gordon 
and the way he touched their hearts as well. 
 
Today I also offer my love and prayers to all his family. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too want to offer my comments in support of my colleagues and 
Gordon’s colleagues in terms of a tribute to a great man. 
 
I have to tell you, Gordon MacMurchy is one of the first 
politicians I ever remember meeting. It was in about 1978 and 
he had come to Kindersley to support my father’s bid for a seat 
in this legislature. Now I have to say my father was 
unsuccessful in that campaign, and obviously could have 
learned a thing or two more from Gordon. But it was an unusual 
circumstance as a child for me to come into contact with 
political people. And one of the things I found remarkable about 
Gordon MacMurchy is just the physical presence of the man. 
He was such a strong, powerful, and as the member for 
Saskatoon has referenced, compassionate person. He was a 
unique combination in that regard. 
 
I have to say over the last week that I’ve had the opportunity to 
travel the province in my work as a member of this legislature, I 
have had much opportunity to talk to citizens of the province 
who have shared with me their remembrances of Gordon. And 
there were, I guess, depending on who it was you were talking 
to, each would speak to some important issue that he had 
addressed to them. 
 
I think about having dinner the other night with my mother and 
stepfather, and talking about Gordon’s passing. And my 
stepfather was reminding me that this was the Education 
minister who had brought in province-wide bargaining. I was a 
little concerned when he said, now that’s an Education minister. 
I suspect it was more of a testament to the impressive record of 
Gordon than a comment on his stepson’s current handling of the 
file. But nevertheless, it was one of those things that he 
reminded me that the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] 
council had come and filled this Chamber, to listen to the 
powerful words of Gordon MacMurchy in expressing why we 
needed province-wide bargaining for the STF. 
 
I had later an opportunity to speak with Wayne Steen, who is of 
course now the Chair of the Sask Rivers School Division. He 

reminded me of the time as a . . . involved in Birch Hills politics 
as they were trying to get a community centre built there. And 
they had decided they would come down and speak directly, 
speak directly to the minister of Municipal Affairs, Gordon 
MacMurchy, about this. 
 
He said they went in and Gordon had said, well this is a very 
interesting proposal you’ve got as to why you need a facility 
built. And I accept that and I appreciate that, but the onus is on 
you to go out and raise some money. Now you go out and raise 
that money and we’ll match you. Wayne says they did exactly 
that. They accepted that that was the case, went out, raised 
$160,000, came back down the next week and said, we’d like 
your matching cheque. Well Gordon said, okay, of course, that 
was what the commitment was that he had given and yes, he 
would make good on that. And I think the program ended later 
that day. 
 
But he was a man who kept his word. He was a powerful force 
in Saskatchewan politics. I very much have appreciated 
knowing Mr. MacMurchy in his time here. He was always very 
generous with his advice, very kind in his comments, and very 
sensitive in making sure that his criticisms were expressed to 
my chief of staff, Caroline, as opposed to me. 
 
He always had a love and an interest in this province. And I 
share the regret that many of us in this Assembly did, that we 
were unable to attend the service in Semans the other day. But I 
think Gordon would have understood and I think appreciated 
the fact that we were here in this legislature that meant so much 
to him, continuing with the work years after he left active 
politics for causes he still so much believed in. 
 
He was a man who changed Saskatchewan. He was a man who 
represented his constituency, who loved his family, and really is 
someone that I think we all aspire to be more like. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to join members of this Assembly in paying tribute today 
to Gordon MacMurchy. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I want to add just a 
very few words to this tribute. I had the honour and the pleasure 
to have many conversations with Mr. MacMurchy, but these 
words are for my brother, Ralph. 
 
He phoned me yesterday, or on Tuesday actually, the day of the 
funeral, and said that he wanted me to convey to the 
MacMurchy family and the people of Saskatchewan from his 
new role as vice-president of Acadia University in Wolfville, 
Nova Scotia. 
 
When Ralph started teaching, effectively, social geography and 
the whole area at the University of Regina, one of the people 
who was extremely supportive of what he did was Gordon 
MacMurchy, after he had left politics but was involved in rural 
Saskatchewan life. And they worked on many different things 
together related to the Family Farm Foundation. But one project 
that they did on behalf of the, actually it was the Saskatchewan 
Parks and Recreation Association, The Saskatchewan Synod of 
the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Canada, and the Family 
Farm Foundation, was a study called volunteers in rural 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2005 

Saskatchewan. And this was published in January 1991 after 
quite a number of years of work. 
 
And I know that Ralph wanted to thank his family and him for 
that kind of leadership around this particular issue, which 
continues to become an area of concern for all of us in 
Saskatchewan. So my condolences to the family and my respect 
for a great man. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion of condolence with respect to Gordon MacMurchy 
moved by the Premier, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 
Swift Current. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Coronation Park: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly that the resolution just 
passed, together with a transcript of oral tributes to the 
memory of the deceased, be communicated to the 
bereaved family on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords, seconded by the member for Regina Coronation 
Park: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to make way 
for a very special occasion, I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:29.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2725 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2725 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2725 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2725 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2725 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2725 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2725 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2726 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2726 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2726 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2726 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2726 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2726 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2726 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2727 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2727 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2727 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2727 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2727 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2727 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2728 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2728 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2728 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2728 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2728 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2728 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2737 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job  
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2728 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2729 
 Women of Today Awards 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2729 
 La Ronge and District Citizen of the Year 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2729 
 Saskatchewan Population Statistics  
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2730 
 Corner Gas Wins Screenwriting Award 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2730 
 Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Meeting  
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2730 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Treatments for Drug Addictions 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2731 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2731 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2731 
 Behaviour of Health Official 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2732 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2732 
 SaskTel’s Investments 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2733 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2733 
 Agreement Between Federal Liberals and Federal New Democrats  
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2734 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2734 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2736 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2736 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2737 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2737 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
CONDOLENCES 
 MacMurchy, Gordon Samuel 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2737 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2738 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2739 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2739 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2740 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2741 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2741 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2742 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2743 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2743 
 Transmittal Motion 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2744 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




