

















































Hansard: May 16, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 113A  MONDAY, MAY 16, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3095 
 May 16, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition today on 
behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills as well as many other 
communities around the province and other provinces. People 
who return home for the centennial are going to be vastly 
disappointed by the condition of Highway 32. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, petitioners today come from the communities of 
Leader; Redcliff, Alberta; Liebenthal; Strathmore, Alberta; 
Leader, Lancer, Swift Current, Calgary, Medicine Hat, 
Kindersley, Prelate, Burstall, Eatonia, Gull Lake, Kerrobert, and 
many more, Mr. Speaker — too many to mention. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I have 
another petition on behalf of the staff, participants, and families 
of the Wheatland Regional Centre Inc. and other like centres 
across the province that provide services for individuals with 
disabilities. And, Mr. Speaker, they are concerned that the 
human resources plan tabled with the Department of 
Community . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Just ask the 
member not to enter into debate. Keep it straightforward when 
presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This petition, 
this is regarding the human resources plan provided to 
provincial cabinet. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly will please consider implementing the 
minimum compensation recommendations for staff 
members who support people with disabilities as outlined 
in SARC’s human resources plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition are from 
the communities of Biggar, North Battleford, and Handel. And 
I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about the drug 
crystal meth. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 

People who have signed this petition are all from the area of 
Guernsey. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine 
who are very concerned about the assistance to autism-affected 
families. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to improve access to resources for 
families who desperately need help for their autistic 
children. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
as well with citizens that are concerned about the inaction 
against the problem of crystal meth within our students and 
children. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal meth — I’m really stumbling with this — 
meth education, prevention, enforcement, and treatment. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Guernsey, my home town. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of 600 children and their 
parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency regarding 
a much needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of 
Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



3096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2005 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Peters Cove, Guenter Crescent, 
and Kenderdine Road in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services at 
Davidson, Imperial health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson, Imperial 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service at a minimum of 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctor services available as well as lab, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to users from 
the Davidson and Imperial areas and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition is signed by the good citizens from Davidson and 
Bladworth. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas 
Asquith natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Asquith and Grandora and area. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition that the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government has failed to recognize the growing problems 
surrounding youth drug addiction. The current legislation does 
not provide adequate protection for the most vulnerable in our 
society. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary action to pass a law that will give 
Saskatchewan parents the ability to place their children 
into involuntary drug treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
rise in the Assembly today and present concerns of citizens of 
west central Saskatchewan opposed to the rerouting of Highway 
51. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 51 is rebuilt to 
go through the town of Kerrobert so that local businesses 
may be given the opportunity to promote themselves to 
and gain business from patrons passing through Kerrobert. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of both 
Kerrobert, Unity, and Tramping Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens who 
are very concerned with the lack of funding to SARC 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres]. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly will please consider implementing the 
recommendations as outlined in SARC’s human resources 
plan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Ituna and Goodeve. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 97, 638, 640, 666, 670, 716, 798, 800, and 
814. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I give notice I shall on day no. 118 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Rural Development: how many 
recommendations has the government implemented from 



May 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3097 

the first ACRE report and which recommendations have 
not been acted upon? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I 
shall on day no. 118 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: what is the province’s policy on 
inter-country adoption of children that are not sibling 
pairings? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 118 ask the government the following 
question: 

 
To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: how many dollars will the Family Place in 
Weyburn receive for their Mini-Go school under the early 
learning and care initiative and when will the Family Place 
receive the dollars allocated from the above program? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon in your gallery 
are a number of the committee members who participated in the 
preparation of the second phase ACRE report. They will later 
this day be making a presentation to the policy committee. And 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce the 
members very quickly. And if they might just stand and just 
give a short wave. 
 
The Co-Chair is Mrs. Audrey Horkoff who is the past president 
of the Agribition and from Kamsack. Linda Pipke is the 
Vice-Chair business development subcommittee, executive 
director Saskatchewan Council for Community Development 
from Davidson. Mr. Everett Bear is the past chief of the 
Muskoday First Nations of Birch Hills, and Wanda Wolf who is 
the Saskatchewan Herb and Spice Association. 
 
Dr. Red Williams is the Co-Chair of the Crown land 
subcommittee. Phil Reeves is the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association. Mr. Dick DeRyk who is the 
Chair, entrepreneur from Yorkton. Loren Katzenberger who is 
the Co-Chair or Vice-Chair, Prairie Implement Manufacturing 
Association of Saskatoon, Danea Armstrong Knittig who was 
with the Saskatoon REDA [regional economic development 
authority] is now with . . . works for Coverall. Dr. Ernie Barber, 
dean of the College of Agriculture, and Clay Dowling, past 
president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 
Saskatoon, and Mr. Neal Hardy who’s the president of SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. 
 
And we have as well, three of our staff, Dr. Louise Greenberg 

who is the executive director or the director of Rural 
Development — sorry, sorry, it’s my department — Dr. 
Greenberg; Mr. Al Syhlonyk, who’s the director of policy and 
planning; and Leann Minogue, who is the policy analyst. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to welcome members of the 
ACRE committee to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to join 
with the deputy minister in welcoming Audrey Horkoff and her 
committee members. 
 
I was at the presentation of ACRE, and I’ll also be looking 
forward to when they’re going to be making the presentation to 
the Intergovernmental committee and looking forward to asking 
them some questions I know which they’ll be able to provide 
very capable answers. 
 
I would also like to welcome one of my constituents, Linda 
Pipke from Davidson. And I’m looking forward to asking her 
some questions today on that later today. And with that I know 
all members will want to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the members of this House, I’d like to take a 
moment to introduce a very special group of students visiting 
here from E.D. Feehan High School in Saskatoon in my riding; 
21 students from grades 9 to 12 in the ESL, English as a second 
language program. And they’re here with their teachers, Mrs. 
Esther Molina, Mr. Godoybaca, and Mrs. Hitchings. 
 
And so I’d ask all members to give them a warm welcome to 
our legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome to you and through you, 21 grade 9 to 12 English as a 
second language students from St. Joseph High School in 
Saskatoon. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Larraine 
Ratzlaff and Mrs. Sheena Wing. 
 
I just want to give you some background, Mr. Speaker, on 
English as a second language. For over 25 years, Saskatoon 
Catholic schools have provided an opportunity for students 
from around the world to share our culture. This sharing has 
become a foundation for global learning, harmony, and true 
international understanding among people of many nations. 
 
All students are provided the opportunity to learn in a safe and 



3098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2005 

caring environment of faith. High school students are offered a 
full range of classes in math, sciences, humanities, arts, along 
with honours programs in the academic disciplines. A French 
bilingual program is offered as well as advance placement in 
English. Graduates are recognized at universities across Canada 
and around the world. 
 
I look forward to joining with the students for pictures, 
refreshments, and a visit after question period. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the English as a 
second language students from St. Joseph collegiate in the heart 
of Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the House, a gentleman sitting 
up in your gallery, Mr. Ali Doust Waissi from Moose Jaw. And 
this is his first visit to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Waissi lives in Moose Jaw where he works in the meat 
processing industry. And Mr. Waissi arrived in Moose Jaw in 
2001 from Iraq as a Kurdish refugee. And this summer Mr. 
Waissi will be writing his citizenship exam, actually next 
month, and he hopes to be a Canadian citizen by the end of this 
summer. 
 
Mr. Waissi came to have a meeting with our Minister of 
Immigration and offered some pointers and helpful hints for 
keeping refugees into smaller centres in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s a pleasure. I hope all my colleagues will welcome him 
here, welcome him to Saskatchewan especially, and hope all 
goes well with your citizenship in the summer. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Shine Woman of Influence Award 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend the 
2005 Shine Conference was held in Regina. Every year the 
Shine Conference brings together women from across southern 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba to celebrate the achievements of 
women. To honour the contribution that women make in the 
community, Shine presents a Woman of Influence Award. 
 
I am very proud to say that this year’s recipient of the 2005 
Shine Woman of Influence Award is the Saskatchewan Party 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. She was recognized for her 
outstanding contribution and leadership in public and 

community service. The member’s activities to raise awareness 
of the dangers of crystal meth are well known in this legislature 
and across Saskatchewan. Recently she put forward a private 
member’s Bill to provide parents with the necessary tools to 
protect children suffering from addictions. 
 
Through her work with parents, law enforcement officials, 
health care workers, and community advocates, and together 
with the assistance of the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena has led the fight against crystal 
meth and the lobby for better treatment services and more beds 
for those afflicted with this terrible addiction. 
 
For these efforts and the member’s ongoing work with 
Saskatchewan’s First Nations communities, she was recognized 
as this year’s Shine Woman of Influence. I would ask all 
members to join me in congratulating her on this achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Aircraft Maintenance Orientation Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m so pleased to stand in 
the Assembly today and say a few words about a group of 
students from Churchill Community High School in La Ronge 
who are the first Saskatchewan graduates of the aircraft 
maintenance orientation program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program was developed by the Canadian 
Aviation Maintenance Council to provide high school students 
with information about career opportunities in the aviation 
industry. The course includes 130 hours of theoretical training 
and additional 40 hours of hands-on learning. Successful 
completion of the course takes dedication and hard work. 
 
Last week I was very proud to be part of the ceremony 
honouring 10 northern students who completed the course. The 
students include Christina Ericson, Amanda Miner, Virginia 
Mayotte, Kenny Beavin, Nathan Catte, Grayson Dubnick, Colin 
Jackson, Darren L’Heureux, Kyle Menz, and Josh Skopyk. 
 
I also want to recognize industrial art teachers Mel Menz, 
Shaune Lapworth, J.C. Fafard, Regan Chell, and Troy 
Patterson, all northern air operations aircraft maintenance 
engineers who provided technical and teaching assistance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize also the support of the 
local aviation industry: Transwest, northern air operations, and 
Northern Central Helicopter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is based on the partnership of many 
different groups and speaks directly to the strength of 
Saskatchewan as we begin our next 100 years together. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 



May 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3099 

Weyburn Red Wings Win Royal Bank Cup 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, how about those 
Weyburn Red Wings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Weyburn Red Wings are the 2005 
winners of the Royal Bank national junior A championship, 
defeating Camrose Kodiaks 3 to 2 yesterday in Weyburn. 
 
This is truly a Cinderella story. Who would have believed when 
the Wings lost in the first round of the playoffs and then had to 
wait 55 days to play again in the Royal Bank Cup, that they 
would win the national championship? What a great tournament 
the Wings had, winning all but their first game; defeating the 
Hawkesbury Hawks in the semi-final on Saturday in triple 
overtime. And in Sunday’s final, the Wings led all the way until 
there were 35 seconds left when Camrose tied the game. And 
then unbelievably, with 17 seconds left, Rick Wood turned right 
around and scored for Weyburn and gave them the 
well-deserved title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the Weyburn Red Wings’ coach 
Dwight McMillan, who is a legend in Weyburn and who has 
now the distinction of being the coach who has won the most 
games in this national competition — 18 games in total. As 
Tiger Williams said at the awards banquet on Friday night, 
when McMillan was his coach . . . When he played in Weyburn, 
Dwight MacMillan was his coach and he came home 30 years 
later and Dwight MacMillan was still the coach at the Royal 
Bank Cup. 
 
Ryan Kuntz, the captain of the Red Wings, when interviewed 
after the final game said it best: “We didn’t look as good as 
Camrose on paper, but we fought hard and we won with heart.” 
 
Congratulations to Weyburn Red Wings and to the city of 
Weyburn for an outstanding event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
2005 Coloplast Canadian Wheelchair Rugby Championship 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, over the weekend, teams from 
all across Canada were in Saskatoon for the 2005 Coloplast 
Canadian wheelchair rugby championship. You remember, Mr. 
Speaker, Canada’s national team brought home the silver medal 
in wheelchair rugby from the 2004 Paralympics in Athens, 
Greece. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to bring greetings on behalf of the 
province, and along with some other Saskatoon MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and media personalities, 
including Rambling Dave from C95, we took part in a celebrity 
game following the opening ceremonies. 
 
We were able to experience first-hand what it’s like to play 
against some of the finest wheelchair rugby players in the 
world. They took it easy on us, Mr. Speaker. It was immediately 

clear that these athletes are agile and extremely skilled. The 
game is fast, intense, and very demanding. One look at the 
battered and scarred wheelchairs the players use lets you know 
what a hard-hitting game it is — so much that Rambling Dave 
lost a wheel, Mr. Speaker. I’m not surprised that before it was 
named wheelchair rugby, people called it murder ball. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the Saskatchewan Wheelchair Sports 
Association, the Saskatchewan Wheelchair Rugby Club, the 
North Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre, and all the 
volunteers for putting on this great event. And I want to 
congratulate all the competitors, in particular the team from 
Ontario who edged out the British Columbia team to become 
the 2005 Canadian wheelchair rugby champions. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Donna Beall Receives Centennial Medal 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was a privilege to present one of the first Centennial Medals to 
Mrs. Donna Elizabeth Louise Beall. Donna celebrated her 100th 
birthday on January 27 and lives in a care home in Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Donna Baker was raised in the Kinley-Perdue area. After high 
school Donna went on to nurses training from the Grey Nuns at 
St. Paul’s Hospital. She finished in 1926 and then nursed in 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Ontario. Donna married Dr. George 
Beall in 1939. Together the Bealls moved around Canada 
before finally settling in Saskatoon in 1953. Donna finished her 
nursing career at Royal University Hospital in 1972. Donna and 
George had one child, Vicki. Vicki married Jim McClements 
from Saskatoon and brought Donna three grandchildren. 
 
I found Donna to be spry and in good health. Our conversation 
was quite animated. After learning a bit about Donna’s life 
story living in several different provinces, I asked the question, 
and which province did you enjoy the most? I expected her to 
answer, Saskatchewan. However she piped up with Alberta, 
saying she had been there the longest, you see. It was a good, 
honest answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members of this Assembly to 
join me in honouring centenarian Donna Beall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

McDowell Foundation Projects 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, for the past 14 years the 
Stirling McDowell Foundation has been funding research for 
teachers in supporting a wide range of activities aimed at 
improving education and learning in Saskatchewan. 
 
This year the McDowell Foundation will be supporting an 
all-time high of 20 groups in no less than a dozen communities 



3100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2005 

throughout the province for projects that examine a variety of 
issues educators face in the classroom and in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of these worthwhile projects include 
research on how gay-straight alliances can work to create safe, 
supportive schools for all students regardless of sexual 
orientation. A program at Joe Duquette School in Saskatoon 
will tackle issues related to Aboriginal issues of levels of 
success in high school math and science. And a group of 
Assiniboia teachers will focus on language development as part 
of their commitment to a rural networking process that will 
include mentoring and assessment strategies. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, thanks to a generous $10,000 donation from 
the late Dorothy Rutherford Clarke, the McDowell Foundation 
was able to fund several projects this year that will examine 
reading at the primary school level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating the 2005 recipients of these grants and in 
thanking them for the important work they’re doing to improve 
learning here in Saskatchewan. I also want to acknowledge the 
McDowell Foundation for investing in teachers and in students 
and in strengthening our education in this province. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend the Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan held their 
AGM [annual general meeting] and spring conference in 
Saskatoon where winners of the Women Entrepreneurs awards 
were recognized. With over 150 people in attendance at the 
banquet, the following women entrepreneurs were recognized 
for the excellence in achievement. 
 
The Women Entrepreneur Member of the Year award went to 
Yvette Moore in Moose Jaw who won for a business that has 
been operating for more than three years. Yvette is the owner 
and operator of the Yvette Moore Gallery. What originally 
started as a home-based business now employs 12 employees in 
the gallery located in the former land titles building in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
The award for Best Emerging Woman Entrepreneur operating a 
business in operation for less than three years went to Theresa 
Lavis Springett. Theresa is the owner of Heart to Heart Home 
Services in Saskatoon whose six part-time and three one-quarter 
time employees provide seniors with home care, housekeeping, 
shopping, and transportation services. 
 
The Centennial Award went to Janet Ursu. Jan has been on the 
Women Entrepreneurs board for five years and chaired the 
board for three years. In addition to her work with Women 
Entrepreneurs, Jan is involved with the Regina Women’s 
Network, the Globe Theatre, the Regina Symphony, and the 
Regina Progress Club. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
each of these members. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Negotiations with Federal Government 
Regarding Energy Accord 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, our 
province seems to have the dubious distinction of having the 
only premier that was unable to make the deal that he wanted at 
Paul Martin’s going-out-of-business sale that we’ve been 
witnessing from Ottawa over the last number of months. 
 
The Premier left last week. He said he had an energy accord. He 
said he would come back with an energy accord for the 
province of Saskatchewan. When the negotiations weren’t 
going very well he said no, he was going to stay in Ottawa until 
he brought home that deal. He said he had packed extra socks. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the Premier has come back 
only with dirty socks and a postdated cheque. Why has the 
Premier failed the people of this province to get the energy 
accord that he said he had a week ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to quote the Government 
Whip, well, well, well. You know what is good news for the 
people of Saskatchewan is bad news for the Conservatives 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now they say one thing, but here are the 
facts of the matter, Mr. Speaker. We went to Ottawa seeking to 
negotiate with the national government an energy accord, an 
economic development accord, and that we were not successful 
because I’m not going to sign a deal, any deal, that I don’t 
believe is good enough for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But, Mr. Speaker, while in Ottawa we 
were able to negotiate with the national government a 
commitment to the people of Saskatchewan worth $300 million. 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, I know that members opposite, that 
opposition last year when we came home $300-plus million, 
they said that’s table scraps, Mr. Speaker. But only in the mind 
of the Conservatives in Saskatchewan would $300 million be 
called table scraps. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



May 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3101 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the amazing part of what the 
Premier just answered, pointing to this $300 million that he got 
when he couldn’t get the energy accord, Mr. Speaker. This 
postdated cheque is actually 40 per cent old money that was 
already budgeted for in the federal budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the Premier went to Ottawa. He said there was an energy 
accord on the table. He said he was going to go sign it. He 
doesn’t sign an energy accord. Instead he goes there and gets 
money that was already sitting there for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, $180 million is all there is in new 
money in this arrangement compared to the billions of dollars 
that other provinces have got, compared to almost 500 million 
that the province of Alberta got, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, $180 million over five years, that’s 
not enough to cover one SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] loss per year. And this 
government is mounting up more than that every single year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, last week he said he was going to 
go sign an energy accord at the beginning of the negotiating 
process. As the week wears on, the deal evaporates. He comes 
back with a postdated cheque, only 180 million new dollars 
compared to other provinces. Why did the Premier fail the 
people of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they of course say one 
thing, and here are the facts. Here are the facts. Over the period 
of the last eight months, we have negotiated from the federal 
government for this province an equalization package last fall 
worth $467 million net — 467. We’ve negotiated a child care 
deal worth for the province of Saskatchewan $146 million over 
five years. We were able to negotiate, Mr. Speaker, new 
funding for health in this province and for all Canadians. In the 
Saskatchewan case, about $80 million a year over five years — 
that’s $400 million. Last week another $300 million. That’s 
well over a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the story is not concluded. We continue to 
negotiate and negotiate hard as again today in terms of an 
economic energy development accord for the province and 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, to the Premier, is 40 
per cent of this $300 million he touts — fully $120 million of 
those dollars — are they dollars that were already in the federal 
budget? Yes or no? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well the fact of the matter is I should 
acquaint, I should acquaint the Leader of the Opposition with 
how budgeting actually works. Every dollar that will come to 
the province of Saskatchewan will have to be in a federal 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And for those dollars to flow to the people 
of Saskatchewan — whether they be city dollars for the 
municipalities, whether they be child care, whether they be the 
dollars from this package — Mr. Speaker, they depend on a 
federal budget being passed. 
 
That’s why I implore this Conservative and Conservatives in 
Ottawa to pass the budget, pass the budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, and then let’s have an 
election in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with the kinds of answers 
we’ve seen from that Premier and with his ability to represent 
the province on the national stage, I think the people of this 
province want an election and want one very soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week when the Premier left, he 
said he was coming back with an energy accord. Here’s what he 
said. He said he was looking forward to the opportunity to 
conclude an energy accord. That left the impression with 
Saskatchewan people that there was an energy accord on the 
table for him to sign. 
 
If that was the case, Mr. Speaker, if that’s true, that means due 
to the Premier’s excellent negotiating skills he was able to 
promptly take that energy accord off the table and settle for a 
postdated cheque totalling 180 million new dollars when even 
Alberta, resource-rich Alberta, is getting $500 million. Why 
should the people of this province trust that Premier to negotiate 
anything on their behalf again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We hear the rhetoric. We hear the 
rhetoric from across the way. And here are the plain facts, and 
the people of Saskatchewan know it well. Over the last number 
of months, we’ve negotiated from the federal government for 
the people of Saskatchewan and their future over $1 billion in 
new benefit for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when we’re battling 
and fighting for Saskatchewan, we’re fighting in the Canadian 
context. We seek equity in the Canadian context. This 
agreement signed this week, this agreement that we brought 
home gives us very good equity with the deal that’s just been 
signed with the province of Ontario. 



3102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2005 

Now we’re aware that an energy accord, an economic 
development accord has been signed with Nova Scotia, 
Newfoundland, and the Atlantic accord, and we seek equity 
there. But, Mr. Speaker, not under pressure of the Leader of the 
Opposition or the Saskatchewan Party, not under any pressure 
will I sign a deal that I don’t believe is good for the people of 
Saskatchewan in the long run. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was that Premier who said 
he had a deal when he went down to Ottawa. So was that deal 
good enough for him to sign when he got on the plane and went 
to Ottawa or was it not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We know what the Atlantic provinces have received — Nova 
Scotia, Newfoundland — hundreds of millions of dollars per 
year. Not long ago the province of Ontario, $6 billion. Even 
Bombardier got $262 million for this current year from this 
same federal government last week. 
 
What did our Premier get? The Premier got a postdated cheque 
from a business that looks like it’s going out of business — the 
Government of Canada. And he got sucked into a photo op for 
the Liberal election campaign. Why has the Premier failed the 
people of this province on this file? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again here are the facts. 
Let’s put this, let’s put this debate in a little context. The Leader 
of the Opposition talks about the Nova Scotia energy accord 
worth $830 million. Now not a dollar of it has flowed because 
the Conservatives in Ottawa will not let the budget pass. That 
aside — $800 million for the province of Nova Scotia . . . I 
have just reviewed how in the last eight months we have 
achieved for the people of Saskatchewan benefits well over $1 
billion, Mr. Speaker, and we are not finished yet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I understand that one of 
the esteemed political reporters of the province was just in 
Disneyland, and I’m tempted to ask him if he ran into the 
Premier at Fantasyland last week, Mr. Speaker. Maybe he was 
at the exhibit, honey I shrunk the cheque, because if you 
listened to the Premier last week, he said there was an energy 
accord. Now he’s saying he was not going to sign a deal if it 
wasn’t good enough to sign. Mr. Speaker, which is it? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier last Monday said there 
was an energy accord for him to sign on the table. After a week 

of his very able negotiating, there is apparently no deal. He 
comes back with a postdated cheque for 180 million new 
dollars. That’s what this agreement is for. And he gets sucked 
into a photo op for a federal party seeking re-election. Can he 
detail for the people of the province how that is good 
negotiating on their behalf? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am very, very 
pleased to report to the people of Saskatchewan the benefits of 
this agreement. There is in this agreement $120 million for 
higher education, for students — $120 million, Mr. Speaker, 
over five years. That represents, that represents, Mr. Speaker, 
substantial new dollars to the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’d like that Leader of the Opposition to stand up and tell 
the students of Saskatchewan that these kinds of dollars — 
multi-million dollars, new dollars to the students of 
Saskatchewan — are table scraps. I’d like him to stand up and 
say that. 
 
I’d like him to stand up and say to the cities of Saskatchewan — 
for which we’ve earned another $25 million beyond the new 
cities deal — I’d like him to stand up and say to the mayors of 
Saskatchewan, well that’s just table scraps or some change he 
found in a coat pocket. Mr. Speaker, these are substantial 
dollars, and they will do good work for the people and the 
future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, not only did the Premier go 
down to Ottawa and blow a deal that he says was already on the 
table for an energy accord the likes of which Newfoundland and 
Nova Scotia have already negotiated, but then he proceeded in 
the national media to attack the — arguably on this file — the 
only friends he had in Ottawa at the time, the federal opposition 
who had moved a motion in support of this government and this 
opposition’s request for a better deal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Not just a few months ago, this Premier hosts a 
little video dance party at the legislature here. He invites all the 
politicians from Saskatchewan, federal and provincial. He 
commits to the federal MPs [Member of Parliament] that are 
there that he’ll work with them, that there will be a united front, 
and then he attacks them last week while he’s in Ottawa. How 
does he think that helps Saskatchewan’s case for a better deal 
considering the fact that it may be that particular caucus that sits 
on the government side after a federal election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 



May 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3103 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative 
blue that they’ve been trying to hide from is now becoming 
technicolor blue. The Conservative blue is here. Get this 
argument, Mr. Speaker — I heard the Leader of the Opposition 
using it publicly — get this argument. He says, now we should 
be careful because his Conservative Party may soon form 
government. 
 
Is the argument here, Mr. Speaker, is the argument that if there 
is a Conservative government in Canada, they will make their 
decisions based on politics? Is that the argument that’s being 
made here? And if that’s the argument being made by the 
Leader of the Opposition, he wants to explain how this 
Conservative Party of his, how his Conservative Party . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well my colleague says it’s fascinating. 
Well it is fascinating if the theory is that Saskatchewan should 
patsy and party itself to any political party in Ottawa to get 
deals for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Not this Premier. Not this government, Mr. Speaker. We make 
the case for Saskatchewan based on sound logic and determined 
principle, and not on a basis of who we need to please in the 
opposition benches here or in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — What did the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan just say? That if it’s a certain party that he 
doesn’t like that is prepared to work with him to get a deal for 
Saskatchewan, he won’t work with them? Is that what he’s 
saying? Because that’s not what he said in February when he 
invited us all to have a united front. 
 
It’s unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier would choose 
partisanship over the future of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Newfoundland and Nova Scotia are 
not as big as Saskatchewan in terms of seats we have in 
parliament. They made a deal with the Liberals during the last 
election — where arguably the Liberals were under less 
pressure than they are now — and yet they succeeded, where 
our Premier failed, Mr. Speaker. Where this Premier failed, the 
premiers of other provinces have succeeded. Mr. Speaker, what 
do the premiers of Newfoundland and Nova Scotia have that 
our Premier doesn’t? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I tell you what the premiers of Nova 
Scotia and Newfoundland don’t have today, Mr. Speaker, is a 
human development accord worth $300 million. That’s what 
they don’t have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not approaching this on the basis of trying 
to please any politician in Ottawa. We’re there fighting for the 

people of Saskatchewan. The argument being made by the 
Leader of the Opposition that somehow we need to please Mr. 
Harper and the Bloc Québécois, this unholy alliance that’s now 
existing in the House of Commons, to get a fair and an 
equitable deal for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s just not on. 
 
We don’t care much who is in the government in Ottawa. We’re 
fighting on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn’t answer the 
question. The question was, what do the premiers of 
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia have that our Premier doesn’t 
have? Well, Mr. Speaker, they have obviously some negotiating 
skills, and they have a deal on behalf of their people, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what they have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Our Premier’s failed to get it. This united front 
turned out to be more of a photo op as it turns out. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I remember another premier in this 
province. I didn’t agree with him all the time, but can you 
imagine Roy Romanow going down to Ottawa and ruining a 
deal that was already on the table and arguably embarrassing 
his province? I don’t remember even Premier Romanow ever 
doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bottom line is this. This Premier got sucked in by a federal 
government that is under significant duress. There apparently 
was no deal on the table or if there was, he ruined it. So will the 
Premier promise this: the next time he hears there’s an energy 
accord on the table in Ottawa, will he just send his officials, and 
will he stay home so we can actually sign the deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me report to this 
legislature the kind of conversations I’ve had over the course of 
the last 24 and 36 hours, conversations with students, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t take this kind of line that the Conservative 
Party here in Saskatchewan takes — negative doom and gloom. 
I’ll tell you the students of Saskatchewan that I talked to this 
weekend are very excited about the accomplishment that we 
achieved in Ottawa this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are people waiting for housing in this 
province. We’ve enhanced that opportunity by another $25 
million. There’s $90 million here, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
labour market development that will speak in many cases to 
helping our immigrant population and our newcomers to the 
province move into the labour force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everywhere in Saskatchewan, except in this 
legislature, this is seen as good news — good news, Mr. 



3104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2005 

Speaker. And let me repeat, in terms of building an energy 
economic development accord, this story is not concluded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier seems to be living in a 
little bubble because apparently he’s not aware of what other 
provinces have signed. The provinces of Nova Scotia, 
Newfoundland . . . even the province of Alberta, sitting on 
billions in surplus, signed a deal also on the weekend. Mr. 
Speaker, the province of Ontario signed a better deal per capita 
than our province. The province of Bombardier got $260 
million from this federal government. Only this Premier seems 
to think that trailing every other province in Canada is 
somehow succeeding. 
 
To the Premier again: will he explain to the people of this 
province why in the world they should want him or ask him to 
represent them at any negotiations again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me again, let me again 
review the record. Last fall — this is in eight months, Mr. 
Speaker — last fall we negotiated a deal around equalization in 
justice that earned this province $487 million — $487 million. 
The opposition called it table scraps. 
 
We negotiated a deal for the province of Saskatchewan that has 
added about $80 million per annum to our health budget to meet 
some of the real challenges we have in health care — over five 
years, $400 million. 
 
We’ve just signed a deal for $146 million to provide early 
childhood learning and child care in our province. We 
negotiated in this year, Mr. Speaker, an $80 million 
equalization payment on top of last year’s and this past week, 
$300 million. 
 
I add that up, Mr. Speaker, it’s in the neighbourhood of $1.4 
billion, new dollars for the people of Saskatchewan from the 
national government. I’ll stand on that record any day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as everyone in the province knows by now, the 
Premier spent all last week in Ottawa, and he wasn’t coming 
back unless he had an energy accord. So I can only presume 
they closed all the hotels in Ottawa because he’s back and no 

energy accord, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know what’s even worse, Mr. Speaker, not one word 
from that Premier when he went to Ottawa about agriculture. 
Not one word about the shape our farmers are in, the trouble 
they’re having putting this crop in. Not one word, Mr. Speaker. 
Will the Premier explain, when he had the ear of the Finance 
minister, why he couldn’t have mentioned agriculture just once? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, not 
just days ago we gathered as western premiers in the city of 
Lloydminster. And, Mr. Speaker, at that meeting of western 
premiers I moved the question of federal funding for national 
agriculture programs to the front of the agenda and, Mr. 
Speaker, achieved, if I may say, achieved for the first time 
agreement among all Western provinces and territories that the 
60/40 split in that national funding and provincial funding for 
national programs is inappropriate. For the first time, we moved 
agriculture to the front of the agenda at the western premiers, 
and we are approaching this now as a western unit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that somewhat 
amazing because it’s not the western premiers that are going to 
help farmers in Saskatchewan. It’s going to have to be Ottawa 
and that Premier doesn’t see fit to even mention it when he’s 
got their ear and he’s down there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found it amazing in the Leader-Post on 
Saturday, and I quote from the Premier: 
 

“On this front, $300 million is not a bad week’s work in 
my view,” he said. 
 

Well we go to find out that’s not $300 million to start with; 120 
million of that was already announced in the federal budget 
earlier. It’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, when Premier McGuinty can 
get 5.7 billion for Ontario, Atlantic premiers can get all that 
money for Atlantic Canada, and our Premier goes down there, 
creates high expectations and come back with almost nothing, 
Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what’s more amazing, Mr. Speaker, is the federal 
government right now don’t seem to be able to find enough 
people to give their money to. Why, Mr. Goodale says, and I 
quote. He said: my critics are wrong; I’ve only given away 
between 9 and 10 . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Would the member go to the question please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Goodale, and I quote him 
out of the Leader-Post, said that: my critics are wrong. I’ve 
only given away between 9 and $10 billion. I have more 
flexibility. I actually have 28 billion to give away. 
 



May 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3105 

The Speaker: — Would the member put his question please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I’m getting to it, Mr. Speaker. When that 
kind of money, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier 
explain when the federal government has $28 billion, why 
Saskatchewan farmers can’t get one red cent now out of the 
federal government after this Premier went to Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again we have the 
circumstance they say one thing, but here are the facts of the 
matter. 
 
Due to the — if I may say — significant efforts of the Minister 
of Agriculture from Saskatchewan, joined by his western 
colleagues, we pressed the federal government this spring, and 
they produced a payment of $1 billion. That represents in the 
neighbourhood of $280 million. 
 
Now of course they said then to the Western provinces, well 
now we want you to ante up 40 per cent. And every western 
province and every territory, in fact every province in Canada 
said the provinces of Canada are not in a position, not in a 
position to join in that. And hence we have the kind of 
agreement that we have with the western premiers to make 
change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member changes his facts and figures 
every time he’s on his feet. Now we have an Ontario deal, and I 
think he just described is worth 7 billion. The fact of the matter 
is it’s worth 5. Take out the immigration piece in the Ontario 
deal, and you will find a very close parallel, much equity with 
the deal we signed in Ottawa last week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier wants to talk about his Ag minister. Let’s 
talk about his Ag minister. Press release today: provincial Ag 
minister meets with lenders in Saskatchewan. And I want to 
quote from that press release: 
 

Wartman emphasized, the provincial government is 
committed to providing effective programming that meets 
the needs of producers across the province. 
 

Well let’s see how they’re meeting the needs, Mr. Speaker. One 
thing they’re doing is they’re not funding CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization], wouldn’t fund it last year till 
December, haven’t funded it to this point this year. Won’t even 
think about addressing the cash injection that APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] asked 

for. 
 
That Ag minister, Mr. Speaker, has been a total failure as well 
as the Premier, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to sticking up for 
farm families and ranchers in Saskatchewan. When will the 
Premier make farm families a priority in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Once again that member is so far off the facts that it’s 
unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Agriculture minister has been there fighting 
for the farmers of this province all through the time that I have 
been minister to try and get a better deal for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we pressed the federal government for more 
funding for farmers, so they would be able to plant this spring. 
Mr. Speaker, they came through. They came through with a 
payment of $1 billion, of which we received 280 million, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we pressed the federal government to try 
and make some changes in the CAIS program, Mr. Speaker. 
They gave support for the other chapters of the APF 
[agricultural policy framework], Mr. Speaker, to help us out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to deal with affordability at our July 
meeting, should we be able to get there. And we will be 
effective in getting a change that will support the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 

Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today in this Assembly the Action Committee on the 
Rural Economy will present to government its phase 2 report on 
the rural economy. This report encompasses 35 new 
recommendations to government to grow our rural economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group of outstanding individuals from all 
walks of rural life and from all corners of the province have 
dedicated themselves to advancing Saskatchewan’s rural 
economy. They have weathered criticism even the most 
seasoned politician would find difficult to experience. They’ve 
been able to do this, Mr. Speaker, despite the controversy, 
based on their love and enthusiasm for our province and for the 
shared common goal of a better Saskatchewan for all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ACRE has been engaged in an extensive 
consultation with citizens of our province. When citizens had 
concerns, I observed the ACRE committee members make 
every effort to communicate with those individuals and address 
their issues. 



3106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, the 43 men and women of ACRE are employed in 
all sectors of our economy and bring with them an assortment 
of skilled backgrounds to the work table. ACRE as a 
non-partisan group has worked diligently to remove the politics 
from their discussions in order to focus solely on solutions. 
 
In phase 1 of ACRE’s work, Mr. Speaker, a substantial amount 
of consultation with rural Saskatchewan residents resulted in 
185 recommendations to government on ways to improve rural 
Saskatchewan. To date I’m proud to say that this government 
has addressed almost all of those recommendations. And we 
continue to work with ACRE’s committee to monitor the status 
of those recommendations and we will be reporting further this 
fall on the progress. 
 
These recommendations have been wide in scope and have 
addressed all areas of the Saskatchewan economy. These 
include an introduction of lower royalty tax structures for oil 
and gas sector, the reduction of corporate capital tax, the 
expansion of livestock loan guarantee program, the 
development of the greenprint on ethanol and the plan to 
stimulate investment in ethanol, and the expanded high-speed 
Internet and cellular telephone coverage in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, ACRE’s recommendations have been 
instrumental in building a rural economy for our youth. 
ACRE’s recommendations regarding tax incentives for 
graduates to stay in this province has resulted in a yearly 
increase in graduated tax credits. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has created the youth advisory council, which 
was one of the recommendations of the ACRE youth 
subcommittee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in phase 2 of the ACRE work, six consultations 
meetings were held across the province where rural residents 
gave feedback on ACRE’s ideas, and ACRE executive 
members also made themselves available for countless other 
phone calls, letters, and meetings with stakeholders. These 
consultations have resulted in 35 new recommendations in the 
areas of Crown lands, business development, employment, and 
rural infrastructure. 
 
These new recommendations build on the extensive work of 
ACRE’s first series. Training for our First Nations people, 
expanding immigration opportunities, promotion of careers in 
the trades and other skilled professionals, and the renewal of the 
business tax rates in Saskatchewan have all been recommended 
by ACRE. In fact ACRE will be making a presentation of their 
tax recommendations to the business tax review committee in 
June. I am pleased to report that my department will work with 
ACRE and other government departments on all of these 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ACRE committee has served the people of 
Saskatchewan very well over the last five years. Their 
dedication and enthusiasm for a province and its future is truly 
commendable and I’m happy to have served as ACRE’s 
Co-Chair and work with these devoted individuals. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a better place to 
live, to work, and to raise our families because of the work of 
this committee. Our rural economy grows more green and 
prosperous every day because of your efforts. Thank you very 

much to the members of the ACRE committee and thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to make a 
statement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to join the 
deputy minister to make a few comments on the ACRE report 
and the committee. I also want to congratulate the work they 
did on it. I know a couple of members on there personally and I 
know the hard work and dedication they poured into filling this 
committee on this particular report and the report on the first 
ACRE. I think this time they had 45 members that were 
working on this particular one and I know each and every one 
of them has worked very hard. I attended a meeting and many 
of my colleagues have attended the many meetings that they 
had throughout the province, and there was a very good turnout 
at all the meetings of the people that wanted the input out there. 
 
When I look at many of the recommendations that are brought 
forward there I notice a lot of them are very similar to what’s in 
our pamphlet, the Saskatchewan 100 Ideas — the elimination of 
corporate capital tax, reducing taxes to ensure that 
Saskatchewan businesses can stay competitive with those in 
other provinces, and increase in immigration. And the minister 
also talks about the recommendations from the first ACRE 
report on that. 
 
He also talked about cellular telephone coverage in rural 
Saskatchewan. Well I’ve been around since ’99 and I know in 
my area and that, that I still can’t get cell coverage in the same 
spots in ’99 and I still can’t get them now. So I don’t know 
where he’s been expanding that, Mr. Speaker. I hope he’s 
continuing to work in that particular end of it. 
 
But I look forward later in the House today to discussing the 35 
recommendations that this committee has and asking them 
some questions in that. And I hope that this government can 
implement the recommendations in a timely fashion because 
rural Saskatchewan out there needs to grow. It needs to start to 
expand because it hasn’t for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, 
and things aren’t that good out there in rural Saskatchewan. If 
you go out there where I have been from community to 
community, they all . . . and they want one thing. They want 
this province to grow and they want to be part of this growing 
economy with the province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the committee 
members for the work, the hard work that they do and I look 
forward to the work that needs to be carried on in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



May 16, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3107 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 118 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
50-page Bill brought to us very late in the session concerns me 
with just the time factor alone. 
 
It says it will protect water quality and quantity. Yet I see things 
like at Grandora and Asquith there’s a freshwater aquifer and 
they’re pumping it at the rate of 1,200 gallons a minute for two 
years. And they’re using this water to flush out the saltwater 
caverns for natural gas. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some experts that say that the next 
gold on the Prairies, and in fact all over the world, is going to 
be fresh water. So here we are flushing a cavern with some of 
the soon to be very rare and expensive fresh water. I have a lot 
of questions of the rationale of that use of fresh water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our small communities water is also a problem. 
In order to meet water standards, small towns have to do more 
and more water testing and we’ve reached the point in these 
small communities that they can’t afford their own water. I have 
towns in my constituency that they’re stepping out of the water 
testing program because they can’t afford the equipment. Mr. 
Speaker, they can’t afford the digital testers. 
 
Some of the communities have decided to join with the new 
water pipeline projects. And now after several years, they find 
that their bills are higher than what the water bills are in Regina. 
Mr. Speaker, communities cannot afford their water. We all 
take it for granted but something has to be done to level the 
playing field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also understand this Bill also talks about spring 
flooding. This is a very touchy situation no matter which side of 
the debate you’re looking at. Environmentally we must be very 
careful — very careful. 
 
From the landowners’ side we must be very careful and look at 
the big picture and be sure we are on the right track for future 
generations. Mr. Speaker, there should be direct consultation 
with landowners and municipalities to be sure we are doing the 
right thing before we move ahead on this Bill. 
 
Therefore at this time I would like to adjourn debate on this 
Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Batoche 
that debate on second reading of Bill 118 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 123 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 123 — The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 123, An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, the Act protects 3.4 million acres or 
1.4 million hectares of upland and wetlands in Saskatchewan. 
And the minister has stated there’ll be a swapping of land from 
one private owner to another included in this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has recommended taking 2,223 
hectares out of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, and it’s 
interesting to see that the government has no net loss policy 
regarding protecting of wildlife land. And this Bill basically, 
Mr. Speaker, shows that the NDP government is breaking their 
own protection policy, and the minister himself has said that 
losing 2,223 hectares of land from the Act is really a net loss. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the whole point of the Act is to protect 
wildlife land. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister said that his department is 
committed to placing new land under the protection in the 
future, but some questions arise out of there. Are there plans to 
bring in new land under the Act to replace the amount that’s 
being taken out? And the minister has said that there’s 9 per 
cent of the province’s area as we proceed to a 12 per cent goal 
established under the biodiversity action plan. Mr. Speaker, 
why should we and why should the people of Saskatchewan 
believe the government is going to replace the protected lands 
taken out of the Bill when they aren’t meeting other protected 
land commitments? 
 
So there’s a number of questions around what’s happening in 
this Act. The Act was introduced very late in the session and, 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly have a number of questions that 
concern the land that’s being taken, that is in and out of the 
Acts being protected, or taken out from the protection that this 
Act gives. And we’d like to know what process that is in place 
to determine how more land will be incorporated under the Act 
at a later date. And we’d just like to know why people of 
Saskatchewan should really trust the NDP government when it 
comes to commitments in the past where they are taking land 
out from under the protection of the Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the NDP likes to claim 
that they are green. But when you’re taking land out of . . . 
protected land out of protection, this is pretty hard to keep the 
commitment that the NDP government likes to make about how 
green that their government is. 
 
And a number of questions also arise out of compensation for 
current landowners. The whole treaty land entitlement process, 
is this part of this Bill and what provisions within the Bill 



3108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2005 

include this process? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, since this Bill was introduced very late, we 
certainly wanted to speak to the stakeholders in the province 
and get more feedback and information concerning the 
implementation of this Bill and the effect and the impact of 
taking land out from under protection that the wildlife habitat 
Act gives the wildlife land. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 123 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Deputy Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In order to expedite the work of the 
two policy field committees, the Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure Committee and the Economy Committee, I would 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3095 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................3095 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3095 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3095 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................3095 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3095 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3096 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3096 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3096 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3096 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3096 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................3096 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3096 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3097 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................3097 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................3097 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3097 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................3097 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3097 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3098 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Shine Woman of Influence Award 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3098 
 Aircraft Maintenance Orientation Program 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................3098 
 Weyburn Red Wings Win Royal Bank Cup 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................3098 
 2005 Coloplast Canadian Wheelchair Rugby Championship 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................3099 
 Donna Beall Receives Centennial Medal 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3099 
 McDowell Foundation Projects 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................3099 
 Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan Awards 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3100 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Negotiations with Federal Government Regarding Energy Accord 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3100 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................3100 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3104 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................3104 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................3105 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................3105 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3106 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................3107 
 Bill No. 123 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3107 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




