






















































Hansard: November 17, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 8A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 259 
 November 17, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of the people who are concerned 
about the marina at Barrier Lake: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to develop a long-term lease to 
Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout for access to the 
marina, a place for boat trailers to be stored, and that seven 
seasonal camping spots be maintained to ensure the safety 
of this area continues. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Tisdale, 
Archerwill, Naicam, and Bjorkdale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to citizens opposed to the closure of the SaskPower office in 
Davidson: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the SaskPower office in 
Davidson remains open at its current level of customer 
service available to all SaskPower customers in the 
Davidson and surrounding service area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 22, 7, and 12. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Premier: to date for the Raise a Flag for Fairness 

equalization advertising campaign, how many people have 
subscribed to the website to receive updates? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 13 I shall ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: to date for the Raise a Flag for Fairness 
equalization advertising campaign, how many people have 
signed the online petition? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: to date for the Raise a Flag for Fairness 
equalization advertising campaign, how many people have 
responded to the online poll? 
 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: to date for the Raise a Flag for Fairness 
equalization advertising campaign, how many requests for 
Saskatchewan energy accord flags has the government 
received? 
 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 13 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Premier: to date for the Raise a Flag for Fairness 
equalization advertising campaign, how many people have 
emailed federal Finance minister Ralph Goodale via the 
campaign website? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased this morning to introduce to you and through 
you to all members of the House two very special guests that 
are seated, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery. They are in the very 
back pew of your gallery I notice. Mr. Speaker, we are 
welcoming to the legislature this morning Mr. David 
Sutherland, formerly of my home town of Moose Jaw who is 
today currently the president and the CEO [chief executive 
officer] of IPSCO here in Regina and of course across the 
United States. And with David this morning is John Tulloch 
who is the executive vice president of steel and the chief 
commercial officer at IPSCO. 
 
This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I will have the privilege of 
accompanying these gentlemen to a very important sod-turning 
ceremony at IPSCO, and I would certainly want to invite all 
members of the House to join us there later this day. We 
celebrate the success of IPSCO, now one of North America’s 
largest steel producers. We celebrate the role that IPSCO plays 
in this community and in our province, and we look forward to 
that celebration and to the very important sod-turning that will 
happen this afternoon. 
 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

This morning, Mr. Speaker, we welcome these two individuals 
to the legislature. This afternoon they will welcome us to 
IPSCO. I’d invite all members to greet these two gentlemen this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition it’s my pleasure to also 
welcome the officials from IPSCO, and I look forward to 
joining the Premier for that very important sod-turning 
ceremony this afternoon. 
 
I don’t always agree with the Premier on all issues, but I 
certainly agree that IPSCO is extremely important to this city 
and this province as a whole, so I look forward to participating 
this afternoon and welcome to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, you might notice in your 
gallery a whole group of people in front of the other two 
visitors that are with us today. These folks are the Canadian 
Public Arts Funders comprised of the Chair and executive 
directors of Canada’s federal, provincial, and territorial public 
arts funders. The group is in Regina for its annual meeting, and 
they’re participating in Arts Week at various activities 
including this evening’s 2005 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts 
Award. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome them to the legislature 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
loyal opposition, I too would like to welcome the Public Arts 
Funders into Saskatchewan. I’m looking forward to spending 
the evening with you tonight in the Lieutenant Governor’s Arts 
Awards. And I’m sure we’ll all be well entertained. Thank you 
for coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand 
today to introduce to you and through you to the legislature four 
students who are articling with the Department of Justice. Jane 
Chapco, Jennifer Robertson, Lua Young-Chartier, and Max 
Bilson are observing today’s proceedings from the Speaker’s 
gallery. They are joined by Elizabeth Smith, executive assistant 
to the deputy minister of Justice. 

Jennifer and Lua are the graduates of the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Law. Jane, who grew up in Regina, is 
a graduate of the University of British Columbia Faculty of 
Law. Max completed his law degree at McGill University in 
1998 and, as well as being an articling student, he is a policy 
analyst in the Department of Justice. 
 
These students began their articles in June 2005 and are being 
exposed to a diverse and challenging articling experience with 
Saskatchewan Justice. I am pleased that these individuals are 
interested in public service and have chosen to article with the 
department. I’m sure they’ll find their time with us will equip 
them with practical knowledge of the justice system and how it 
operates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that members join me in welcoming 
Jane, Jennifer, Lua, Max, and Elizabeth to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the 
House would like to join with the government members in 
welcoming the articling students to the legislature. 
 
We certainly want to wish them well in their articles, in their 
legal careers. I’ve been a lawyer for well in excess of 25 years, 
and I know full well what it’s like to be the butt of all jokes and 
want to wish them well and hope that they can rise above that. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

National Children’s Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today is National Children’s Day, 
the day that marks the adoption of the Convention of the Rights 
of the Child by the United Nations and the day set aside to 
recognize and promote awareness of these rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most important and the most profound 
of these rights is the right to play. For young children 
especially, play and learning go hand in hand. They may not 
know it, but as they play, children are developing lifelong 
learning behaviours and it’s all part of the fun. 
 
This year, National Children’s Day celebrates the right and the 
need to play. This will also be one of the core features of 
Saskatchewan’s new system for early learning and child care. 
Earlier this year Saskatchewan signed an agreement in principle 
with Ottawa for $146 million over five years to invest in this 
system. As was mentioned in the Throne Speech, the plan will 
feature an expansion of high-quality, accessible child care 
throughout the province and a voluntary pre-kindergarten 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

program for four-year-olds. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan places a special priority on 
ensuring that all of our province’s young children and their 
families have the support and encouragement they need to 
thrive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our children are our ambassadors to the future, 
and they are unquestionably our greatest treasure. It’s up to all 
of us to ensure our province is a place that our children are 
happy and proud to call their home, now and in the future. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Help for Drug-Addicted Children 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this Sunday is Universal 
Children’s Day and the 46th anniversary of the UN’s [United 
Nations] Declaration of the Rights of the Child. 
 
Canada is a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child which says parties should: 
 

. . . take all appropriate measures, including legislative, 
administrative, social and educational measures, to protect 
children from the illicit use of narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances as defined in the relevant 
international treaties, and to prevent the use of children in 
the illicit production and trafficking of such substances. 

 
Last session the official opposition . . . Several families came to 
the legislature and made a very compelling argument in favour 
of such legislation. This session I reintroduced a private 
member’s Bill entitled The Protection of Children Abusing 
Drugs Act. The Minister Responsible for Community 
Resources and Employment said she would study the issue of 
involuntary treatment and report back this fall. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are still waiting. Parents need help. 
Their drug-addicted children need help, and we have a 
responsibility to our children. 
 
When he was in opposition, the Premier called for action on 
youth addiction rather than studying the problem. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

The time for delay is long past. The time for action is now. 
We cannot rest while a whole generation is lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, drug-addicted children and their families are 
waiting for this government to give real hope — not hype — to 
the drug problem in Saskatchewan. We cannot rest while a 
whole generation is lost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

St. Bernadette School Innovates to Combat Bullying 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
days ago I had the pleasure to visit St. Bernadette School in my 
constituency of Regina Walsh Acres for the proclamation of 
Bullying Awareness Week 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize how destructive bullying can be. But 
we also know that the problem exists in different ways in 
different communities. That’s why, when we put the 
anti-bullying strategy in place last February, we made sure local 
schools and local school boards had full authority to make their 
own programs. That meant individual schools with the 
involvement of students, teachers, parents, and the community 
could develop and implement their own anti-bullying 
initiatives, tailor-made to address their own set of unique 
circumstances. 
 
[10:15] 
 
And I’m pleased to say that there has been some really 
innovative things going on in schools across the province to 
combat bullying, and St. Bernadette School is no exception. Mr. 
Speaker, the students and teachers at St. Bernadette School 
work hard to foster a safe environment for all students. This 
week they became members of the League of Peaceful Schools. 
 
I want to congratulate the students and teachers of St. 
Bernadette School for their commitment to creating and 
maintaining a safe and respectful learning environment. I think 
they really exemplify what we can accomplish together when 
we stop bullying . . . I mean what we can accomplish to stop 
bullying when we all work at it together. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Results of Recent Polls 
 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an interesting poll on the 
CKOM and CJME websites this morning. The question is, how 
should the province be using its extra $873 million? And what’s 
the number one answer? Cut taxes. Cut taxes, Mr. Speaker; 41 
per cent in Regina and 56 per cent in Saskatoon are saying, cut 
taxes. 
 
Now of course that’s exactly what the Saskatchewan Party has 
been saying. That’s clearly what the Saskatchewan people are 
saying. But did the NDP [New Democratic Party] listen? No, 
Mr. Speaker, 873 million extra dollars and not one dime for tax 
reduction. 
 
It just shows how out of touch this NDP government has 
become, which probably explains the results of another poll I 
happened to notice online. The national polling firm Environics 
recently did a poll of voter preference in Saskatchewan. And 
according to their poll, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
at 51 per cent, up 5 points since the summer. And sad to say, the 
NDP has dropped to 29 per cent, down a full 10 points since the 
summer. 
 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, the government has a lot of extra money but not 
one dime for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s time for this 
Premier to climb down from his stack of money and start 
listening to the real priorities of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Filming and Broadcast of the Saskatchewan 
Centennial Canoe Quest 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan people have been celebrating our centennial in 
many imaginative ways, but one of the most arduous 
celebrations was the Saskatchewan Centennial Canoe Quest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those who took part in the 1,100-kilometre 
journey, the Canoe Quest was an opportunity to challenge 
themselves personally and to travel through some of the 
historical lands of our great North. For the 20 northern host 
communities along the route, it was an opportunity to showcase 
their hospitality and way of life. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, thanks to a film about the race created 
by Juxtapose Productions and broadcast by SCN [Saskatchewan 
Communications Network], Saskatchewan people have the 
opportunity to witness the event for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the film is appropriately called Saskatchewan 
Centennial Canoe Quest. It’s not only beautifully shot but it 
also provides a unique opportunity for people to learn more 
about the history and the culture of the North. I think that might 
be the most important element of this film, Mr. Speaker. We get 
the richness and we get the vibrancy of life in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all the Canoe Quest racers 
and the host communities for showing off northern hospitality 
at its finest. And I particularly want to congratulate the people 
of Juxtapose Productions and SCN for capturing and displaying 
so well this historical centennial event. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Arts Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is the provincial Arts Week in Saskatchewan. Artists and 
cultural workers play a pivotal role in our province — tell our 
stories, enrich our culture, and showcase the best Saskatchewan 
has to offer. 
 
Saskatchewan is a vibrant and diverse culture that is expressed 
through the traditions, artistic endeavours, and heritage of our 
citizens. Cultural organizations across the province provide the 
citizens, particularly Saskatchewan youth, with the opportunity 
to pursue their dreams and realize their full potential. 
 
Continued support for cultural and recreational activities in this 

province, increased access to cultural opportunities for youth, 
and recognition of the importance of First Nation and Métis 
languages, culture, and traditions in the province is a priority of 
the Saskatchewan Party and vital to the future of our 
communities and our province. The Saskatchewan Party and I 
are proud to support this provincially designated week of 
festivities that provides the people of Saskatchewan with 
opportunities to acknowledge and celebrate the arts in their 
communities. 
 
The highlight of this year’s Arts Week is tonight’s Lieutenant 
Governor’s awards where we will celebrate the 
accomplishments of Saskatchewan artists. We congratulate the 
Saskatchewan Arts Alliance and the Saskatchewan art boards 
who worked tirelessly to plan the many exciting events of this 
week, as well the OSAC [Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 
Councils] and all the cultural organizations ongoing 
contribution to our province as members of Sask culture which 
helped to enrich the lives of our citizens in this province and in 
this country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Realizing Vision through Education 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Throne Speech gives our vision for Saskatchewan as we move 
into our new century. This vision, Mr. Speaker, is of a province 
where no one is left behind on the road to opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is a key component to ensuring our 
vision becomes a reality so that all Saskatchewan people benefit 
from the prosperity being created by our growing economy and 
labour markets. To that end, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech 
contains several key initiatives aimed at providing the best 
possible educational opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
This includes establishing a pre-kindergarten program for 
four-year-olds and working to expand high-quality and 
accessible child care throughout the province. 
 
In the coming months we’ll be building on the 
recommendations of the external review of the training and 
apprenticeship system in Saskatchewan to expand training and 
employment opportunities for young people in this province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will work to improve educational 
achievements and literacy rates through our new school 
divisions and newly established Literacy Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is about creating a future for 
all people in this province, a future free from poverty, violence, 
and discrimination, with education as the key, with education 
providing that opportunity. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

Response to Written Questions 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last spring the Premier increased the size of his own 
office by half a million dollars. On May 25 he told this House 
that he needed extra staff to help the government answer written 
questions. Mr. Speaker, do you know how many written 
questions the NDP has answered so far this session? Zero, Mr. 
Speaker, zero. 
 
Yesterday they refused to answer 169 written questions and 
converted them to orders for return. Mr. Speaker, what that 
means is that they don’t have to answer those questions for 180 
days. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why is this government 
refusing to answer the opposition’s written questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. And 
thank you very much to the member opposite for raising this 
issue this morning. 
 
It is an interesting dilemma that the opposition poses for 
government, Mr. Speaker, because the cost of answering more 
than 400 questions in a couple of days, Mr. Speaker, is an 
incredible challenge to not only this government but to any 
legislative jurisdiction within North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a practice that we support, written 
questions. To ensure that there are proper answers provided, the 
government takes answering of these questions very seriously. 
We believe in the practice. We will continue to answer the 
questions. It just takes some time when the opposition decides 
to disrespect the process in the way in which they have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, five days notice, five working 
days notice for 169 questions. And I want to quote the 
Premier’s words on May 25, from page 3181 of Hansard. And 
it says this: 
 

Those questions are co-ordinated through the Department 
of the Executive Council, as has been the case I believe for 
many, many years. 
 
That is one aspect of the need for greater staffing resources 
in Executive Council, to provide accurate, timely 
responses to the written questions . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, the questions that we asked deal with fraud. 
They’re pretty basic. They say, does the department have 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to 
help prevent or detect fraud? Mr. Speaker, we just want to know 
what this government is doing to prevent fraud. It shouldn’t 
take 180 days to answer that question. 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government refusing to answer our 
questions about fraud? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
of course we’re happy to discuss House business during House 
business meetings at any time the opposition wants to discuss 
these matters. For the public record though, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it should be very clear that our record on this side of this 
House in this session on answering questions posed by the 
opposition is better than anything that this province has ever 
seen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s over 400 questions asked in one day — 
questions that require very specific answers; questions that we 
on this side of the House take very seriously. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we will answer these questions — that’s what ordering means 
— but we will do so in a manner in which the public are well 
served by the answers that are being provided. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, spending an additional half a 
million dollars, increasing your budget by over 33 per cent to 
provide accurate and timely questions to the people of 
Saskatchewan in 180 days, isn’t an example of responding to 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are the kinds of questions that a board of directors may 
be asked to answer at an annual shareholders meeting. What 
controls are in place to prevent fraud? How are these controls 
monitored? What has been found as a result of these controls? 
Has there been any fraud within the department? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is responsible for billions of 
dollars of taxpayers’ money. Taxpayers deserve to know what 
the government is doing to safeguard their money. Mr. Speaker, 
why is the NDP refusing to answer these questions? What are 
they hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I hope the public recognizes the difference between the 
opposition and the government. The opposition says we refuse 
to answer the questions. The government says we are answering 
the questions. 
 
The proof is in the pudding, Mr. Speaker. In the last session the 
opposition asked 1,304 questions in 79 days. We answered 
every single one of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the reality is this government 
has been hit with a number of fraud cases in the past year or so. 
There are allegations of fraud in the Department of the 
Environment. There are allegations of fraud in Community 
Resources. There are allegations of fraud in Liquor and 
Gaming. So all we want to know is, are there fraud problems 
anywhere else in government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the government doing to prevent fraud? 
These are pretty basic questions. I think Saskatchewan people 
deserve answers to these questions. And the NDP refuses to 
answer. Why, Mr. Speaker? Why? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t know how many times we can repeat. We are answering 
the question. We will answer the question. We will provide 
information that will ensure that the Saskatchewan people are 
well informed about what this government is doing. 
 
The opposition also has other means at their disposal and they 
are using them, Mr. Speaker, to ask questions along these lines. 
The government is also working with the Provincial Auditor on 
these matters. And every time an issue as such has been raised 
either through the media or publicly, government has responded 
through the normal and usual channels, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
very pleased with the way in which the process has been 
working from our side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We’re very 
disappointed at the way things are being presented from the 
other side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will answer these questions. We will ensure that the public 
is well informed on these matters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

SaskEnergy 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
next questions are for the minister responsible for CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. Mr. Speaker, a 
couple of years ago CIC did an investigation of benefits 
received by the former president and several other senior 
officials in SaskEnergy. That president was subsequently fired 
and the other officials were asked to repay several thousand 
dollars in unauthorized vacation pay. Mr. Speaker, since that 
time, has CIC done any other investigations of SaskEnergy? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Not that I’m aware of. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the CIC minister again. 
Has the CIC department, agency, conducted any further 
investigations of SaskEnergy? And if so, what are the results of 
that investigation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said to the member 
not that I am aware of, but I certainly will take notice of the 
question. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Wait Times for Surgery and Diagnostic Services 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Monday the Reynolds family braved extremely icy roads and 
slippery streets to come to this legislature from Foam Lake to 
tell the Health minister about the case of their mother, Jean 
Reynolds. Jean has been on the waiting list for urgent hip 
surgery and she’s being told that that surgery may not be done 
for as long as eight months from now, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely 
unacceptable. 
 
The minister on Monday said, I need more information; can you 
get me more information on the case? That was provided. Can 
the minister now tell us what actions have been taken to ensure 
that Jean Reynolds gets timely hip surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that 
the officials in the Saskatoon Health Authority have been 
talking with this family. I know that some people in my office 
have also been talking with these people and they are working, 
together with the GP [general practitioner] and the surgeons, to 
make sure that the proper assessments are there to have this 
matter dealt with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we end up having to rely on the professional 
advice from the doctors that are involved and, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re working on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to the Reynolds 
family and the Reynolds family told me they did get contacted 
by this minister’s office. And what they were told is to start 
back on square one. She has already been graded as urgent hip 
surgery. She’s had her pain medication tripled since August. 
She’s got absolutely no quality of life, and she’s been sent back 
to square one. They told her to get in touch with a quality care 
coordinator, which they had already done and described as 
futile. The quality care coordinator told them to write another 
letter to the surgeon. They’ve done that, Mr. Speaker. 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

Mr. Speaker, this family has jumped through every hoop this 
minister has put in front of them, and they’re still looking at an 
eight-month wait for urgent hip surgery. Is that the type of 
medicare that we have in our province? Urgent hip surgery; 
someone languishing in pain at her home in Foam Lake waiting 
eight months for surgery — is that the system that he’s 
overseeing? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a situation 
where a patient is concerned about their status generally across 
the province and how they’re assessed for surgery, and they 
ultimately end up disagreeing with the professional advice that 
they get or the information that they have in the process, there is 
a method of going back and getting another opinion, working, 
making sure that the doctor has all the most recent information 
about that. And, Mr. Speaker, there are often situations where 
that particular process needs to continue to make sure that 
people can go forward with particular cases. 
 
It’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that the patient involved 
here has been talking with her professional advisers, the doctors 
that are involved. And it’s their job to make sure that, using the 
appropriate procedures, this person will get the surgery she 
requires. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said on Monday, it is not 
easy for a family to go public with their health concerns, with 
their health issues. But they are desperate, and they need help. 
They contacted the minister’s office, and they got absolutely 
nowhere — a big fat zero from that Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear day after day this minister tout his 
surgical registry. Well his surgical registry says that this 
operation should take place within three to four weeks, not six 
to eight months — three to four weeks. In fact orthopedic 
surgery, the average is 7.4 weeks in this province. 
 
Is this an anomaly that it’s taking six to eight months for this 
one person that has been graded as urgent through his health 
care system? Is that an anomaly, or is his surgical care registry 
absolutely bogus? It has absolutely no connection with reality. 
Eight months is far too long. 
 
Which is more accurate? This lady’s eight-month wait for 
surgery or his health care registry that says it should be done in 
three to four weeks? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that 
the patient involved has been talking with the officials at the 
Saskatoon Health Authority last night and as recent as 45 
minutes ago, working on sorting out this particular issue, 
working with the professionals that are involved. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the appropriate way to deal with this particular 
matter and all particular issues that relate to patients. 

Mr. Speaker, what we are doing in this province is making sure 
we have the appropriate information about how our surgical 
system works. We now have evidence here which every other 
province in Canada is copying because it gives us the ability to 
take our resources that we have and make sure that we get the 
physicians, that we get the facilities, that we get the staff that 
we need to make sure that we can provide good services for 
people. We’re going to continue to do that in a very careful and 
dedicated manner, using the best evidence possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me publicly warn 
other provinces that are coming to Saskatchewan to take 
numbers off of our surgical care registry. When it’s saying three 
to four weeks for surgery and people are waiting six to eight 
months, obviously the information on our registry is not 
accurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue. Yesterday several patients were 
scheduled for cancer diagnostic treatment at the Regina General 
Hospital, but they were turned away and told to come back in 
five months — told to come back in April. What was the reason 
for them being turned away? Well the reason for them being 
turned away was that the emergency room was full to 
overflowing — overflowing into the endoscope unit, Mr. 
Speaker — and why? Well when the minister was asked why 
this would take place, why there was such a backlog, his answer 
was, because of slippery roads or bad weather. 
 
Now that the minister’s had 12 to 15 hours to think about that 
answer, or 24 hours to think about that excuse, does he have a 
better answer as to why there’d be such a backlog in the 
emergency rooms at the Regina General Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again we see an 
example of organized disinformation provided by the members 
opposite around how this particular situation works. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, what I indicated was that one factor involved the 
recent weather. But what we have in Regina is many medical 
patients that end up using the beds in the hospital. They are 
managing this, and they responded by adding 45 beds which 
they’re hoping to . . . well they’re planning to implement on 
December 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an issue that the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Authority is working on, and, Mr. Speaker, it relates to many, 
many complex factors. But added into that is of course the 
recent weather, accidents, other things like that which create 
emergency cases. But that’s not the only reason, and that’s not 
what I said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he said that’s not what 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

he said yesterday. But he just finished saying it again today — 
that that is a factor as to why there is such a backlog in the 
emergency room. It is a factor such as slippery roads and bad 
weather that’s caused a backlog. 
 
Could the minister then explain to us what were the factors in 
October. Because there was a similar backlog in October, and I 
don’t think it was driving conditions. 
 
In October, Charlotte Henshaw of Southey spent eight days as 
an emergency patient. Because she was there for so long, she 
was moved over into the endoscope unit which was the 
makeshift overflow for the O.R. [operating room]. She said the 
patients who actually needed treatment or needed diagnostics, 
such as an endoscope, were thrown into chaos. These are her 
words in a letter that we received. 
 
She also goes on to say that several nurses who had to work two 
12-hour shifts consecutively because of short staffing were 
asked to work a third 12-hour shift. Mr. Speaker, the road 
conditions, from what I remember of October, were ideal. What 
are his excuses for a backlog in October? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the announcement that was 
made about two weeks ago by the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Authority around expanding the number of beds in the facility 
relates directly to the load on the Regina Qu’Appelle 
emergency and all of the various procedures within the hospital, 
whether it’s the internal medicine specialists or it’s the surgical 
side. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when beds are filled, certain procedures are 
rated and cut back on to deal with the beds that are filled. And 
that’s a process that’s been there for a long time. It’s dealt with 
by the medical chief of staff and others that work with these 
particular doctors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have recommended — and we’re working to 
make sure that this happens — that there be 45 more beds to 
deal exactly with the kind of questions that the member’s 
raising. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Utility Rates 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has posted its 
third-quarter financial report this week and profits have hit 114 
million in the first nine months of this year, which is up by 68 
million from last year. The net income for 2005 is now forecast 
at 129 million, which is up 63 million from the previous year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my question would be this: with all of these 
increased profits, why on earth are Saskatchewan families being 
asked to pay more for their electricity? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, while we’re discussing 
the weather, the members of the legislature may have noticed 
that this was an unprecedented year for rain. It was an 
unprecedented year for hydro generation in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. More electricity was produced by hydro, which is a 
relatively cheap form of electricity once the dams were filled 
this year, than for many years in the past, Mr. Speaker. This 
reduced the reliance on very expensive natural gas, Mr. 
Speaker, and decreased the cost of providing electricity in the 
province. 
 
Because of that, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower delayed the rate 
application — because that rate application was not needed in 
this year of high hydroelectric production, Mr. Speaker — and 
went to a rate review panel which has made a recommendation 
that that rate increase be implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad the minister 
recognizes that they’re seeing unusual profits again, which is 
our point exactly. SaskPower’s export sales are up by $3 
million. Sales to Saskatchewan-based customers are up. Profits, 
Mr. Speaker, are up. Yet after a 5 per cent rate hike last year, 
this government is considering a further increase of almost 5 
per cent again. Mr. Speaker, what’s the point of owning a utility 
if the Saskatchewan people don’t benefit from owning that 
utility? 
 
The Minister Responsible for SaskPower is just as bad as the 
Minister of Finance. They’re anxious to hang on to any money 
that they can stuff into an election slush fund, but they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I would ask 
members to allow the question to be put so we can hear the 
entire question. The member may proceed. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
know why the minister is just like the Minister of Finance, 
where they want to put whatever profits they can into an 
election slush fund instead of helping the actual people of 
Saskatchewan by cutting taxes and holding the line on electrical 
costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t this government share this windfall 
with the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
seems to be confusing water with money. I mean an 
unprecedented amount of water behind a dam does not mean 
unprecedented profits. And the income of SaskPower is 
approximately what was forecast with the increase. The 
increase wasn’t necessary in this year, Mr. Speaker, because of 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

the unprecedented hydro generation this year. 
 
This government is sharing the prosperity from natural gas 
prices with the people of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker — 
today — by reducing the cost of natural gas. They don’t have to 
wait for a tax cut. The poor people of this province, the 
low-income people of this province don’t have to wait for a tax 
cut, oh, some way down the road. Today their natural gas bills 
are lower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just do a little review of 
the history on this particular issue. In July, in July when 
SaskPower was aware that the reservoirs were full, SaskPower 
applied for a rate increase of 4.9 per cent. In September that rate 
increase is retracted. Now why, Mr. Speaker? Because maybe 
the government was feeling the heat at that time over a 
SaskEnergy rate increase. That’s highly suspicious, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Could it be, could it be that the minister was more interested in 
playing silly political games with SaskPower than they were in 
actually running the corporation like a business? Could that 
possibly be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does politics always, every time, come first 
for this Premier and that government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, another term, another 
term of the members opposite in government, after their terms 
in the ’80s, and there wouldn’t have been a SaskPower to buy 
electricity in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard 
a lot about tax cuts and what tax cuts people might get after the 
end of this tax year if we adopted the opposition proposals how 
to deal with this money that’s presently been provided through 
natural gas prices and oil prices to this Government of 
Saskatchewan. And none of that money would have been 
available until the end of this tax year, the end of the filing of 
this tax year. 
 
This money is being made available to Saskatchewan citizens 
on their natural gas bill. It’s being made available today 
throughout this cold winter, Mr. Speaker, to every citizen — 
whether they pay taxes or not — to heat their homes. They’re 
getting the benefit of this money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Assembly will come to 
order. 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, The Boiler and Pressure 
Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 21, The Boiler and 
Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, The 
Forestry Professions Act, 2005 be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 22, The Forestry Professions Act be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
23, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 23, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2005 (No. 2) be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Southeast, that Bill 
No. 202, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act (Set Election Dates) be now read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that Bill 202, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2005 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased once again on behalf of the government to 
stand and order questions 170 through 434 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 170 to 434 inclusive 

have been ordered. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. 
Harper.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very 
pleased today to enter the debate on the Throne Speech. And 
before I begin, I’d like to congratulate the member from Regina 
Wascana on her new position as Deputy Speaker and I hope she 
enjoys that position. 
 
I’m very pleased to enter this debate on behalf of the 
constituents from Humboldt. And I want to thank those 
constituents for putting their trust on me to represent them and 
their issues here in this legislature. 
 
I also want to take a moment or two to thank my family — my 
three daughters and my husband, Larry. It was interesting. I was 
thinking, when I was first elected, those young girls were ages 
10, 13, and 15. And now the 15-year old recently turned 22; the 
13-year old will be 20 next week; and my 10-year old will be 17 
in less than a month. So time does fly. 
 
I’m going to begin, Mr. Speaker, with a quote, and the quote is 
this: 
 

The needs of the farm families of Saskatchewan, the needs 
of rural Saskatchewan are well-known in this House. We 
have a rural Saskatchewan on the brink of economic 
collapse. We have quotas on our universities, young 
people being denied access to education. We have long 
outstanding matters of injustice involving our native and 
Metis people. We have increasing demands upon our 
health care system. We have roads that have gone to pot, 
Mr. Speaker. We have small businesses that are simply 
trying to survive month . . . [after] month. We have 
municipal governments struggling to keep afloat, 
unaddressed needs from every corner of our province. 

 
That quote, Mr. Speaker, very aptly describes the province 
today. But it’s not a quote from the last year. In fact it’s not 
even a quote from the last five years. It’s a quote from 
December 11, 1991, and it’s a quote from our Premier. 
 
So considering that he recognized all of those issues and 
concerns 14 years ago, let’s just see if he’s addressed any of 
them in the 14 years that his government has been in power. 
And I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, — or shouldn’t say I 
would like to say — it’s sad to say in the last 14 years none of 
those issues have been addressed, and many of them have 
deteriorated quite considerably. 
 
I’m going to begin, Mr. Speaker, by talking about agriculture. I 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

didn’t join the agriculture debate, although there can be no 
question agriculture has always been very near and dear to my 
heart. So I would like to address that first in my Speech to 
Throne. 
 
The producers of the province are realizing the third year of 
negative margins. And there was a time when negative margins 
were unheard of. If a producer had negative margin, it was 
because something catastrophic had happened on his farm or he 
was a really, really bad manager. Now it’s just common. 
Negative margins are common. And the talk is just how 
negative, negative can be. 
 
And we have producers, Mr. Speaker, that are more innovative 
than they have ever been. They’re working harder than they 
have ever, ever worked. They’re better managers than they have 
ever, ever been. They’re better managers than they have ever 
been, and yet they’re realizing negative margins, and they don’t 
have a clue where to turn. 
 
On April 6, 1988, the Premier said this: 
 

Mr. Speaker, maybe these members opposite have 
forgotten, or perhaps they never knew, perhaps they never 
knew what it’s like to farm with old machinery, and just to 
go from repair to repair . . . Perhaps they’ve forgotten [or] 
perhaps they’ve never known what it’s like to find work 
off farm, any kind of work, just to hold the farm together. 
 

Well my question has to be, did the Premier ever know? Did he 
know what he was talking about in 1988 when he said that? 
Because we know more farmers and their wives have off-farm 
income than ever before, than in ever the history of the 
province. We know that the farmers, the producers of this 
province, they’re farming their equity. They’re farming their 
equity. They are not replacing their machinery. They’re going 
from repair to repair. 
 
If he was so understanding in 1988 of the desperation on the 
farms of this province, why can he not understand it today? 
What happened in those 14 years? What has he forgotten? 
 
The best he can do in his Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is to 
promise that he would not hold the producers hostage this year, 
and he’s going to live up to a commitment, a commitment of 
which he’s a signatory, and he’s going to fund CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization]. 
 
We have an Agriculture minister and a Deputy Premier that 
have said on record on a few occasions, CAIS and crop 
insurance will address all these needs. It’s going to look after it. 
That’s what we have, and it will see that the farmers will be 
okay. But we know that CAIS isn’t working. We know it’s 
inadequate. We know it’s a program that’s allowing too many 
producers to fall through the cracks, and we know that it takes 
too long for the producers to get their money through CAIS. 
And we know that CAIS is not bankable. 
 
We know the federal government is responsible for looking 
after changes to CAIS, although what can this government, 
what can this provincial government do to help the producers? 
Well they can negotiate on the committee that’s reviewing 
CAIS. What changes are they asking for? What are they asking 

for to make it a better program? And we’ve never heard this 
minister once say, this is what needs to be changed. 
 
We know that this government could address crop insurance. 
They have decimated the coverage. They have increased the 
premium. They’ve made it ridiculously unaffordable. We know 
that they could do that. But they’re not willing to do that. 
 
[11:00] 
 
We know that they could look after the property taxes— the 
property tax rate of this province. We have the highest property 
taxes in the nation. They control that, but they choose to 
absolutely ignore it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard on many occasions different members 
from the government side talk about a canoe trip on Churchill 
River, and it sounded very exciting, and I am sure it was 
absolutely beautiful and a great event. And they also talk about 
how no one was left behind. Well I would like to say that there 
can be no question that Saskatchewan people are kind. They’re 
generous. They have great sportsmanship. They’re 
compassionate. They’re caring. But how can you take this and 
compare it to issues that are affecting their livelihood? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if my farm — heaven forbid — goes into 
receivership, I don’t want to take my neighbour with me. I don’t 
want to take my neighbour with me into receivership. I want 
him to succeed. I want him to succeed to help keep my 
community going even if I can’t. So to compare it to the 
livelihood and the issues that are facing the people of the 
province is a little silly, and it’s belittling the importance of the 
issues of the province. 
 
And I would also like to say that if the producers of this 
province lashed themselves together, we have an Agriculture 
minister that’d be cutting those lashes so quick and letting them 
drift because he doesn’t want these programs to be all that great 
because they’re going to have to come up with money to fund 
them, and they seem to have a lot of difficulty coming up with 
money to fund any of the programs. There’s always excuses. 
We have to money. We have no money. 
 
The Premier talks in his Throne Speech that no one’s left 
behind. Well the producers of this province are left behind. 
They’re left behind other people in the province, but they’re 
also left behind other producers in the nation because we are 
realizing the lowest incomes in the entire country. 
 
Let’s take a minute, Mr. Speaker, and talk about health care. It 
didn’t surprise me in the least that in the Throne Speech there 
was yet another mention of the Humboldt hospital. I actually 
would have been surprised if it wasn’t there. Building a new 
hospital in Humboldt has been, you know, a great political lever 
for this Premier and his minister. It’s actually offered the 
Premier and his Heath minister more photo ops than Britney 
Spears on a really good day. 
 
So I don’t know the count of how many times the Humboldt 
hospital has been announced, but I guarantee that it’s going to 
be three to four times in the election year and once or twice in 
between. And yet after all the times it’s been announced, the 
sod has never been turned. It’s never actually happened. And 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

they’ve announced it so many times that in Humboldt and the 
surrounding community it’s become a joke. When they hear 
that the Premier and his minister is coming, it’s like oh yes, he’s 
going to announce the hospital again; I wonder. And I’m sure 
they’ll hang on to this until the next election because they’re 
going to want to use it again. 
 
But what else did they have to say about health care? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask members, I would 
invite members to take their side conversations to behind the 
bar. That’s what these places are provided for so that the 
member from Humboldt can speak unimpeded. Recognize the 
member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One last comment 
on the Humboldt hospital. If they built one floor for every time 
they announced it, it would be the highest building in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It would be the highest building in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what else does the Premier have to say about health care in 
his Speech from the Throne? Well he re-announces new 
services for midwifery. He re-announces the children’s hospital 
in Saskatoon, which was a great Sask Party idea. He 
re-announces an academic health sciences centre at the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan], which was another great Sask 
Party idea. And he re-announces that he’s going to shorten the 
surgical waiting list, which he said a number of times. But 
there’s no action behind the words because we still have the 
longest waiting list in the nation. 
 
And finally he re-announces the Premier’s Project Hope, the 
substance abuse plan that he was forced into — he was literally 
forced into — by the Saskatchewan Party, a plan that has no 
money for treatment beds but it does have money for a new 
ministry and all the expenses that that involves. 
 
In March 1993 the Premier said this, and I quote: 
 

. . . the motives of this government are very clear and that 
is to provide . . . the people of Saskatchewan, including the 
young people of Saskatchewan, the best addictions 
treatment that we can provide given the fiscal 
circumstance that we’re in. 

 
Well we just found out from the Finance minister that we’re in 
the best fiscal circumstances that we’ve been in for a very long 
time. So what happens to the Premier’s words now? They’re 
obviously quite meaningless because there is no treatment being 
offered. There’s a new ministry. There’s all the expenses with 
the new ministry. But there is nothing in the Throne Speech that 
suggests there’s going to be treatment beds for another two 
years. 
 
So who’s being left behind, Mr. Speaker? Kids with addictions 
are being left behind, Mr. Speaker. They’re being left behind. 
They’re in those canoes. They are incapacitated. They do not 
even know how to use the paddle. They’re heading for some 
deadly rapids. They’re heading for some deadly rapids. And is 
that government going to help them out? Is it going to lash on to 
them and help them out? I don’t think so. They’re saying too 
bad; just keep floating down that river. You are being left 

behind. The children of our province are being left behind. 
 
So let’s go to education. What about education? In the first 
quote that I used when I started speaking, Mr. Speaker, was . . . 
the Premier said, “young people are being denied access to 
education.” So there’s been 14 years. In 14 years what’s 
happened in that area? It’s gotten worse. 
 
The waiting list to get into many of our education programs, 
such as the medical laboratory technologist program, is up to 10 
years. That’s unheard of, that’s unheard of, Mr. Speaker. The 
pharmacist program has been 80 to 90 seats, and yet up to 600, 
in fact more than 600 students apply for that program each year. 
We have students who obviously want to train in these medical 
areas and also in other programs, and they’re being denied 
access to the education system that we have here in the 
province. 
 
Where was the Premier’s vision in this Throne Speech for 
improvement on that? We have the students who want to. 
They’re willing. They want to train. We’re saying there’s 
shortages in a lot of areas. And yet we have no plan on how 
we’re going to address this. So who’s left behind, Mr. Speaker? 
The students are left behind. The students are left behind, or 
they leave to train elsewhere which happens only too often. 
They leave the province because they are accepted in other 
provinces into the programs that they want to take. 
 
Let’s take a minute and talk about small business. Fourteen 
years ago the Premier said this, “We have small businesses that 
are simply trying to survive month . . . [after] month.” So 
what’s improved in the last 14 years? Well the last statistics that 
I could find out were from 2003. And at that time there were 
1,900 fewer businesses in our province then in 1991 when the 
Premier recognized there was a problem. He said there was a 
problem. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Once again we’re 
into a situation where we’ve got a couple of side debates going 
on. And I would ask members to respect the right of the 
member who’s been given the floor to speak unimpeded. Thank 
you. The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 
previously, we have over 1,900 fewer businesses in our 
province then we did in 1991 when the Premier said those 
words. So what has he done? What has he done in 14 years to 
improve? He hasn’t. It’s got worse. It’s got worse. 
 
And the impact of having 1,900 or more fewer businesses in our 
province is huge. It explains why Saskatchewan job creation 
rate was just over 2 per cent between 1998 and 2003, which is 
way behind the national average. The national average was 11 
per cent. 
 
It explains why private sector employment grew by only point 
three per cent; that’s it, last year in Saskatchewan. It explains 
why in the month of October, 6,000 jobs were lost. It explains 
why between 1992 and 2003, Saskatchewan lost 60,000 people 
to net out-migration and 40,000 of those people, Mr. Speaker, 
were between the ages of 15 and 29. They were looking for 
opportunity; they were looking for jobs, and they didn’t find it 
here because we keep losing the businesses that create jobs. 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

It explains why, Mr. Speaker, in March 2004, over 23,000 
people visited food banks in the province which is an increase 
of 37 per cent from March 2003. That’s shameful. That is 
absolutely shameful in a province that is so rich with resources. 
 
But people need jobs. They need opportunity. They need those. 
And under this Premier and his NDP government, we’re 
bleeding the businesses from our province. We’re bleeding 
young people from our province, and we’re bleeding the 
working people from our province. 
 
Who’s left behind? Who’s left behind — the workers, the 
workers, the workers who want a good opportunity. We have 
low-end jobs. What about the high-end jobs? What about 
keeping the businesses in our province that provides those 
high-end jobs? 
 
So in 14 years, Mr. Speaker, what has this government 
accomplished? I touched on agriculture, and we’re failing. 
Health care, we’re failing. Education, we’re failing. The 
economy, we’re failing. What have we done? What have they 
done in 14 years since the Premier made the comment that I 
quoted at the beginning of my speech? 
 
In May 1991 the Premier also said this, he said: 
 

. . . maybe it’s a disease of old governments that you can 
grow so completely out of touch with where people are at. 
Maybe it’s a disease of old governments that you become 
sort of like an island of arrogance here in the marble 
palace of the legislature so that they [can] sit there in this 
island of arrogance and they won’t listen. 
 

Our Premier and his government have caught that disease. 
They’ve caught the disease that he recognized 14 years ago. 
Now he has it. And one of the symptoms is the culture of 
entitlement. 
 
It’s interesting that the Premier has no problem approving huge 
increases to the communication budget so that they can keep 
re-announcing their old ideas. It’s interesting that the Premier 
has no problem to approve huge increases to the travel budget. 
The Premier has no problem approving money for new 
ministries. He has no problem approving money for extra pay 
for all of the ministers, except for the one that we identified 
that’s been left behind. He has no problem approving money for 
a new airport for himself and his cabinet. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it in the past; I don’t have a 
long political history and background. I can’t quote who said 
what over the history of politics because I wasn’t a follower. 
I’ve never read anything, quite frankly, on Tommy Douglas. 
But I did hear a commentary of his on the radio one time where 
he had this little comical story of black cats and white cats and 
sometimes the black cats were in government and sometimes 
the white cats were in government. And I can’t remember 
which cat was supposed to be which because I’m not that 
familiar with the story. But I can almost say right now that even 
Tommy Douglas would know we have fat cats in government 
right now. That’s who’s in government right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech to the Throne is completely lacking in 
any kind of vision. It’s completely lacking in any innovative 

new ideas, and it will do nothing to help the real people of this 
province. I cannot support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand before the Assembly today and enter into the 
throne debate. I want to be perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker; I will 
not be supporting the Throne Speech. I believe it lacks vision, 
and I believe it’s time that the government give a vision of 
where this province is going, especially in a year when the 
government has so much and the citizens of Saskatchewan have 
so least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to thank . . . the appointment of 
the member from Regina Wascana Plains on her appointment. I 
believe it’ll be the first time that a woman has taken that 
position and I congratulate her. 
 
I also want to thank the citizens of the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, all the constituents who have given me a 
vote of support in representing them here in this legislature. 
And I am proud to represent them. 
 
I also want to thank my wife Sheila for her support. I also want 
to thank my family, my sons Micky, Deny, Newton, and his 
wife Tanya, and of course my two grandchildren, Courtney and 
Shaylynn, who, as most grandparents will say, they are the love 
of our lives. 
 
[11:15] 
 
I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about the celebration on 
November 11 which was Remembrance Day. I was at the 
Remembrance Day service, and I was intrigued in some of the 
comments made by some of the veterans there. 
 
As you know, this year is the Year of the Veteran. The veteran 
in this province give this province what it is. I’m also reminded 
of the fact of this year being our centennial celebration — 100 
years. And we look at what has passed in the last 100 years and 
what will before us in the next 100 years. 
 
And I’m reminded, Mr. Speaker, of a remark made by one of 
the veterans there who said his grandfather went to war to fight 
for this country, to fight for democracy, to fight for freedom. I 
wonder today if he was living and he sees what this government 
has accumulated in revenue and what they are doing with that 
today . . . And I’m speaking about farming and agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, because this veteran was a farmer. In fact most of the 
veterans that were veterans that went to war in early ages were 
off the farm. 
 
In a year when we are celebrating the veterans who are most of 
them farmers, we look at the money this government has taken 
in and then we look what this government has given agriculture. 
 
In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, agriculture was hardly 
mentioned. They say we are going to fund the CAIS program. 
Well that should be a given. They signed it, Mr. Speaker. 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

There’s nothing else in this Throne Speech that talks about 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the crisis on the farm . . . and I hear it every day 
because five of my seven brothers are farmers. My constituency 
is basically agriculture. My constituency is also business, and 
it’s a known fact, Mr. Speaker, that when agriculture is not 
booming, neither is business. One reflects on the other. 
 
I’ve often said in my speeches the two driving wheels of our 
economy is first and foremost agriculture and secondly 
business, whether it’s big or small. Well they’re both hurting. 
And this government with the windfall money they have today 
still does not reflect on the problem that we need to do 
something with ag and our business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in agriculture . . . I have a gentleman that come up 
to me from Canwood area, and he said, you know something, 
Mr. MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]? If you ever 
have a chance for the Sask Party to become government — I 
want to welcome the Deputy Speaker to her Chair — if we as a 
Sask Party have a chance to become government, you as 
farmers, you must do something for the farmers. 
 
So I asked this gentleman, what is the number one thing that 
you wish to see us change to help the farmers? And do you 
know what he said, Madam Speaker? I think he said this as a 
joke. He said, I want you to change the marital laws. And I 
thought I should never go down this road. So I said to him, why 
do you want the marital laws changed? And he said, I have a 
wife but I need two more wives. I need three wives. And I said, 
look sir, you can’t look after the one you have at home; why 
would you want two more wives? And he said, that’s my 
problem. The one that I have that should be at home working is 
off the farm working, and I need two more wives out working 
to keep this darn farm going. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, that is a joke, but there’s a lot of truth to 
what he said. Every farm today has one or both spouses 
working off the farm to keep the darn farm going. 
 
So it brings me to a point, Madam Speaker. On Monday the 
Throne Speech was delivered last week. On Tuesday we on this 
side of the House thought that was a good time to have an 
agricultural debate. But the member from North Battleford 
stood in his place and said no. Now I wonder if the farmers 
around North Battleford got to him, because this week we again 
decided to have an emergency debate on agriculture, and he 
said yes, and I thank him for that. And I thank the NDP caucus 
for allowing that to happen. 
 
We all took our turns talking about agriculture. There was a lot 
of good speeches — a lot of good speeches from this side, 
Madam Speaker, because a lot of us are from the agriculture 
sector. We still farm. I still have a farm. We know what trouble 
it is on the farm. We’ve had years after year after year of 
trouble on the farm, and I’ll tell you, Madam Speaker, it is 
crucial that our government of today, with the windfall money 
they have, start addressing the farm problems. Otherwise 
there’s going to be no farms left. 
 
Madam Speaker, there was many of us that took our turns 
speaking about agriculture in the agriculture debate. But I was 

somewhat surprised and I was thoroughly appalled when the 
Deputy Premier stood and took his place to talk about 
agriculture. Now, Madam Speaker, at one time he was the Ag 
minister. And I can say that a lot of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan that are from ag-related areas would say to that 
member from Yorkton, that he’s one of the few on that side that 
has any clue about farming. And yet, Madam Speaker, he took 
his turn in the debate and went on a political rant about the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party. He mentioned very little 
about the problems relating to agriculture and the problems 
relating to his constituency of Yorkton. 
 
Now I can guarantee, Madam Speaker, the members that are 
farmers in that area will send him a strong message in the next 
election when that election comes, and I hope it’s soon. He 
won’t be here to represent that area. It will be represented by 
some member from this side. 
 
If there ever was a chance, Madam Speaker, for a person that 
knows ag from that side of the House to deliver a speech to say 
what plight we have in Saskatchewan with our farming 
situation, that was the time, Madam Speaker — not to play 
political politics in this House. When he had a chance to tell the 
people what was going on, he chose not to. And time will tell 
him and the members at Yorkton — the constituents at Yorkton 
— exactly what kind of a spokesperson we have for an industry 
in this province that’s in desperate need of help. 
 
Madam Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about in the 
Throne Speech about the northern roads and the commitment by 
this government to start looking at building northern roads. We 
have mentioned that over and over that we need to do 
something with the North. If we’re going to look at industry and 
economic development in the North, we need infrastructure. 
You start with infrastructure by building some roads. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, I was listening to the member from 
Humboldt in talking about the hospital. I believe it’s six times 
now that hospital has been announced. So I’m wondering, 
Madam Speaker, in regards to northern roads, am I going to live 
long enough to see any work done in the North as far as roads? 
They talk, they talk, they talk. We’re going to, going to, going 
to. Maybe it’s time for them to do something and that is what 
the northern people are asking. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the members to respect the 
debater, the member who’s on his feet. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as 
northern roads, Madam Speaker, I don’t think that they are 
going to do anything for years to come as far as northern roads. 
It will be this side of the House, it will be the Saskatchewan 
Party, that has a vision for this province and has vision to 
include the North, to do something as far as building roads and 
getting the North going. 
 
Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about the plight that’s in the 
city of Prince Albert with Weyerhaeuser and the closing of the 
mill. I was also somewhat appalled by the speech delivered by 
the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote in regards to 
Weyerhaeuser’s plight and the city of Prince Albert. 
 
As he said, it’s not just the 700 jobs that’s going to be affected; 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

it’s the spinoff from that, Madam Speaker. There are countless 
of jobs out there that will lost. But it’s a little too late for the 
government to stand in its place and say that, we have to help, 
when they could have helped before. 
 
One thing comes to mind, Madam Speaker, that I believe this 
government should have addressed, and that was the capital tax. 
We on this side of the House are going to address that. But I 
believe it’s time that the government of the day, the NDP 
government, addressed the capital tax issue. That is number one 
of the things that they could have done to help the situation in 
Prince Albert and Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Number two, Madam Speaker, is property tax, the education 
portion of property tax. Now I don’t know, Madam Speaker, 
how much Weyerhaeuser pays as far as tax; I don’t. But I’m 
going to guess that it’s probably in the million, or millions. But 
it’s a large amount. Now if they would address the issue of 
property tax, would have that helped Weyerhaeuser stay in this 
province and keep the mill going? You bet it would have. 
 
The third one, Madam Speaker, is the cogen project that 
Weyerhaeuser proposed. Now, Mr. Speaker, I know because I 
live in a constituency close to the forest fringe and affiliated 
with forestry and Weyerhaeuser that people from time to time 
have condemned Weyerhaeuser for leaving too much wood and 
product in the bush. Had they been allowed to bring that out and 
use this in this cogen operation, they could have facilitated the 
power for their whole project in Prince Albert. They also could 
have produced enough power to facilitate the city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
But what did this government say to Weyerhaeuser when they 
were asked to look at this? They said, no. They said, no, you 
cannot do that. Now I know for a fact, talking to the 
spokesperson for Weyerhaeuser Wayne Roznowsky, had these 
three issues been addressed by this government, Weyerhaeuser 
could have been here today yet. 
 
Now I’m wondering, Madam Speaker, if the Premier in his 
wisdom, when he decides to enlarge his cabinet and take the 
member from P.A. Northcote and put him into cabinet with the 
history that that member has and with the situation that we have 
in Prince Albert with Weyerhaeuser, I’m wondering what the 
member from P.A. Northcote is planning to do. Because I 
believe he is head of that board. 
 
And many people have phoned me, many constituents have 
phoned and said, why are we doing this? First of all, why is that 
member in cabinet? Why is he allowed to take this portfolio? 
Maybe, Madam Speaker, maybe there’s a hidden agenda and 
maybe the government plans to buy the mill. Is that the case? I 
ask this question: is the government planning to buy the mill? 
 
Madam Speaker, we have a situation in Meadow Lake right 
now with the mill there. It’s a white elephant. Taxpayer dollars 
go into that mill every day, and yet we haven’t learned from this 
situation? This government hasn’t learned from that? So that 
begs the question again, Madam Speaker: is the government 
looking at buying the P.A. mill? I hope not, Madam Speaker. 
We’ve learned from one; we don’t need a second one. 
 
Madam Speaker, I have another incident in my constituency 

and that is regarding highways. I’ve asked the member from 
Meadow Lake, who was the Highways minister, in regards to 
the bridge at Petrofka regarding the guardrail. 
 
And it comes to light, Madam Speaker, because last session 
when I posed this question to him again for the second time . . . 
and I remember his comment was, if we have funding we will 
seriously look at it. Because from a safety perspective, Madam 
Speaker, it needs to be addressed. 
 
Well I believe with the amount of revenue that have come to the 
province now, I believe it’s time that we can look at it, look at it 
from a safety perspective. But I guarantee, Madam Speaker, that 
it’ll be left on the agenda until we form government and we 
look at those safety issues. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Madam Speaker, I also have another problem in the 
constituency and that is with STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company]. Now the member from Meadow 
Lake was also the minister for STC. And we have a problem 
dealing with STC with busing from Prince Albert through to 
Meadow Lake. And now the new STC minister is the member 
from P.A. Northcote. So I hope the two ministers, the former 
and the one now, can get together and try and rectify the 
problem that we have. 
 
The main issue, Madam Speaker, is the fact that the operator of 
the bus service from P.A. through Shellbrook, through 
Spiritwood, Big River, and up to Meadow Lake is a private 
owner. Is that why we have problems? Maybe it’s because this 
government doesn’t like private ownership. Is that a problem? 
This issue has been going on for five years. And nothing’s been 
done. 
 
I have a letter, I have a letter from the town of Spiritwood. And 
I won’t read the whole letter, Madam Speaker, because I don’t 
have enough time. But I just want to read an insert, Madam 
Speaker, that and I quote: 
 

The Council of [the] Town of Spiritwood would like to 
inquire as to why there is no bus service to the Town of 
Spiritwood [and surrounding area]. The Town of 
Spiritwood [and area] is currently the commercial hub of a 
large surrounding area yet we are not serviced by the 
provincially owned bus service network [to date]. 
 

Madam Speaker, I hope the ministers are listening because we 
need this problem addressed. If we want to see that part of my 
constituency prosper, we need a proper bus service. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, I want to address a 
problem and that’s with the Shellbrook hospital. The Shellbrook 
hospital has an issue regarding the building of a new hospital 
facility of some sort. They have been raising funds for years 
now. And I think they have raised a total of just over $1 million. 
 
And I want to personally thank the involvement of Richard 
Porter, who is a great volunteer from that area who has put forth 
time and effort to raise funds for this project — a well-needed 
project. 
 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

I want to ask the Minister of Health, where is that project sitting 
on a priority list? Is it going to be in the near future, the far 
future, or never? The members from Shellbrook constantly have 
raised questions to me and have constantly wrote letters to the 
Minister of Health asking where it sits. And I would hope, 
Madam Speaker, that the minister gets back to the people of 
Shellbrook, the town of Shellbrook and surrounding area, to let 
them know where they sit on this project. 
 
Madam Speaker, in closing I would like to say that I will not be 
supporting the Throne Speech. I’m reminded of the fact that the 
letters CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] were 
changed to NDP. And I’m also reminded of the fact that NDP 
stands for New Democratic Party. I’m wondering, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, where “d” for democracy comes into their type 
of government. I look at this Throne Speech. I look at the vision 
that this Throne Speech does not give. And I look at the letters 
NDP, Madam Speaker, and I believe it relates to this Throne 
Speech because there’s no darn plan. Thank you, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m very pleased this morning to rise and speak on the 
Throne Speech. I want to first, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
congratulate you in your recent election to the Chair. We know, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is an unprecedented occasion for 
us in our province. And we very much, very much want to 
extend our congratulations to you because this Legislative 
Assembly will be even a better and stronger place given the 
leadership that you will provide in the Chair. 
 
I want to go on to congratulate the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview and the member from Regina Northeast in the 
delivery of the Throne Speech in the way in which they had 
delivered it because this really is a visionary document, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to recognize those who have made this Legislative 
Assembly work a little better. I want to recognize our colleague 
on this side of the House from Regina South and I want to 
recognize the member from Melfort who worked I think very 
diligently in bringing about some changes in this Legislative 
Assembly. They led in many ways to make this place a stronger 
facility, stronger place in terms of building policy and also in 
helping us to do our work outside of this legislature through the 
field committees. 
 
I want to also today, Madam Deputy Speaker, extend my 
appreciation on behalf of the government, as on other 
occasions, to the secretary of the centenary. And I’ve heard on 
many occasions on this side of the House and on that side of the 
House, speakers get up on a daily basis through the debate of 
the Throne Speech and talk about the wonderful event that we 
had in our province this year. 
 
And I want to recognize this morning, Madam Deputy Speaker, 

the tremendous work that the secretary from Moose Jaw North 
did in the work of getting our centenary to the level of which it 
was delivered in our province today. It was through his 
inspiration and hard work that has made Saskatchewan feel the 
way we do about this great province. And I want to extend our 
appreciation and congratulations to the member from Moose 
Jaw North for the tremendous work that he did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to also extend my appreciation . . . 
This is the first occasion that I’ve had in the last couple of years 
to speak in the Throne Speech . . . the second . . . this is just my 
first occasion that I’ve had the opportunity to speak. And I want 
to say that I want to extend my appreciation to my constituents 
of Yorkton and thank my constituents. 
 
This is a very vibrant part of the province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. We’ve seen tremendous growth in the east central part 
of Saskatchewan in my community, in the community of 
Yorkton. We’ve seen tremendous growth in the value-added, 
particularly in Harvest Meats, the Grain Millers who have 
expanded their operations in our part of Saskatchewan, who do 
international work today from our community of Yorkton; the 
tremendous growth in our retail sector over the last number of 
years. 
 
We have all of the services in our community, Madam Deputy 
Speaker — and to once more indicate that we are the third 
largest trading centre in the province, out of Yorkton. And to 
extend my appreciation to those who work in the chambers of 
commerce, the boards of trade, the business community, the 
retail community, the manufacturing community, because on 
the east side of the province in Yorkton this is a very, very 
vibrant region, and it has to do about working together 
collectively as a group of men and women to make a difference 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I’ve had the 
occasion to be in this Assembly now for the better part of 14 
years. And I want to say that I have never had the occasion of 
being a part of a Throne Speech that delivered such a 
significant, important message to the people of Saskatchewan as 
this Throne Speech has, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is the 
best Throne Speech that this Assembly has heard in the past 14 
years, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I want to cover some of 
those concepts as we go forward. 
 
Clearly, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech sets the 
direction of the province for our people for the next century, 
and it builds on those principles that . . . on this side of the 
House, we’re accustomed to understanding the social 
democracy, about how you build a strong social economy or 
social framework, which also talks about how you do that in a 
strong economic economy . . . is what this Throne Speech is all 
about. 
 
And I’ve listened for some days now to the speeches that are 
here in the Assembly, those from the members opposite, from 
our Conservative Saskatchewan Party, and how they have 
insulted the intelligence of our Saskatchewan people on many 
occasions. And it was done again today, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

I don’t understand why it is that the members opposite would 
get on their feet and talk about how it is that Saskatchewan 
people have made the wrong choices for 60 years because the 
Saskatchewan people have made the right choices for the last 
60 years. Saskatchewan people have said that they want to see a 
strong Saskatchewan economy with a social fabric that ensures 
that our people can live as neighbours and friends with each 
other and build an economy that is significantly recognized, not 
only in this province but across the country, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And Saskatchewan people, Madam Deputy Speaker, have 
elected New Democrats because they want fiscal accountability. 
They don’t want what we had in the ’80s of which time the 
members opposite, many of them, were a part of. And we hear 
them now citing and reciting and quoting from the 1980s. Of 
course they can recite from the 1980s, because who better 
knows the 1980s than those who were there today from the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party who were part of that 
process? 
 
And so they quote on a daily basis the Premier’s speeches of the 
1980s. Why? Because when we made the speeches in the 1980s 
we were talking about what we didn’t want to see in this 
province which we got for the 10 years of which we had 
Conservative government. And we’ll never go back there, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And this Throne Speech ensures that, 
as we build a stronger Saskatchewan economy, we won’t be 
back into the same period of time of the ’80s. 
 
We talked about Saskatchewan people want to protect and 
enhance the principles of public health care. Saskatchewan 
people aren’t interested in seeing a privatized agenda on health 
care as the Conservatives would have us believe and take us to. 
That’s why Saskatchewan people for 60 years have voted for an 
NDP-CCF administration. 
 
Saskatchewan people for 60 years have voted about growing the 
economy because of the four engines that we talk about, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, not only the private sector. We had an 
occasion in the 1980s where the members opposite in the 
Conservative government said we’ll drive an economy only by 
private sector. Nobody in Saskatchewan believes that you can 
drive an economy only on the private sector. And that’s why 
Saskatchewan people have voted and elected New Democratic 
governments over the last 60 years — because they believe that 
economy gets driven by the private sector, yes, but by the 
public sector as well and by private and public arrangements 
and by the co-ops, Madam Deputy Speaker. That’s why 
Saskatchewan people have elected New Democratic 
governments over the period of 60 years. 
 
And they want us to balance our expenditures as well as with 
the revenues of which we have, Madam Deputy Speaker, where 
you have debt repayment and where you have tax reduction and 
you have enhancements to services and programs. That’s why 
Saskatchewan people have voted for New Democratic 
governments over the period of the last 60 years. 
 
And Saskatchewan people have never witnessed over the last 60 
years a debt which was left for us and our children — which 
was left for us in the 1980s — by the Conservative government 
led by Mr. Grant Devine and those who still represent and 

support the wisdom of what that party did over the ’80s. And 
some of them are still in those benches today, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And that’s why Saskatchewan people vote for and 
re-elect New Democratic governments for 60 years in this 
province. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, they vote for Saskatchewan New 
Democratic people because — and the party — because they 
know that they have had successions of leadership, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They’ve had outstanding leadership in this 
province. Men who’ve gone on and . . . recognized as 
ambassadors to Canada, who are international figures, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And they talk about . . . Who’ve made 
outstanding contributions not only to our province but to 
Canada. 
 
And when you take a look at the history of our party, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, in relationship to the history of Conservative 
parties which we have opposite of us today, in 60 years, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we’ve had five outstanding leaders, Madam 
Deputy Speaker — five outstanding leaders for 60 years. 
 
And what have they had over there, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 
not even 20 years? They’ve had six leaders as well. They can’t 
keep their leaders in place, Madam Deputy Speaker. And that’s 
why we see Saskatchewan people continuing to elect a New 
Democratic government in this province on a regular basis, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leadership is about making a difference. Leadership is about 
talking about the future. And that’s what this Throne Speech 
does, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what did we hear from the members opposite in their 
speeches over the last number of days? That this is too 
ambitious, this Throne Speech is too ambitious, that in fact we 
hadn’t spent enough in this Throne Speech. Well, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this is an ambitious Throne Speech. And it 
also identifies how we’re going to go forward both in the short 
term and in the long term. 
 
[11:45] 
 
I can’t believe that I’ve listened over the last number of days 
. . . members from the opposition stand up and talk about how it 
is. And we had a debate the other day about the agroforestry 
piece. The agroforestry piece is very much a part of our future 
direction as we do with agriculture into the future. 
 
When we talk about one-third of our energy renewal fuels being 
coming, Madam Deputy Speaker, from renewable fields. That is 
a laudable goal for this province, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
it fits in to the issues of how we build a biomass and biodiesel 
and the ethanol industry and the wind in this province. And it 
sets out an agenda about how to do that in the long term. 
 
And I listen to members opposite on their feet on a regular basis 
over the last number of days, and not one of them, Mr. Speaker, 
not one of them said anything positive about the Throne 
Speech. How is it when you put the kind, when you put the kind 
of resources as we’re putting into apprentices, apprenticeship 
and skills training, Madam Deputy Speaker, in which in our 
Saskatchewan rural communities of which most of those people 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

represent today and have community colleges in their backyards 
. . . And we’re going to see increases and enhancements in what 
we’re doing on the education side. Why is it that we wouldn’t 
have had one member on the opposite, on the opposite benches, 
stand up and say, you know what? This is a very good thing for 
our rural communities in Weyburn or in Estevan or in Swift 
Current or in Humboldt where we have colleges today. And 
we’re going to be training and gaining more resources for our 
young people. 
 
Why is it, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we haven’t heard one 
of them say, Mr. Speaker, that we haven’t had one of the 
members on the opposite side say to us, how about the building 
of the community funds, where we’re going to be putting 
money into communities, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that we can 
provide the cultural and the recreational and the economic 
development pieces that are necessary to build a rural 
economy? Why is it that we haven’t had one member from the 
opposition, from our Conservative Saskatchewan Party say to 
us, that’s a good piece because it’s good for rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? But not one of them — Mr. 
Speaker, not one of them — not one of them talked about how 
important it is to build that kind of a community. 
 
Why hasn’t anybody over there said on one occasion that we’re 
really pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to grow the 
oil and gas industry to the point where we’re going to yet need 
another upgrader in Saskatchewan? Who doesn’t believe that 
that’s not a good thing for this province? And we didn’t have 
one member on the opposite benches stand up, Mr. Speaker, 
and say, you know what? This isn’t a bad thing for us to talk 
about in Saskatchewan, to build a new additional upgrader. 
 
Nobody over there, Mr. Speaker, talked about the fact that 
we’re going to have an Asia desk, an Asia-Pacific desk. We 
think this is a good idea to have an Asia-Pacific desk, and some 
of them over there will say we think that that’s our idea. Well if 
it’s your idea, you should have stood up and said, you know 
what? This is a good thing to have an Asia-Pacific desk. And 
we congratulate the government in having it in their Throne 
Speech to build a stronger economy with the Asian Pacific rim, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why didn’t even one person on the opposite benches stand 
up, Mr. Speaker, and say, you know what? You did a good job 
with the CBOs [community-based organization] in this 
province, something of which I know a little bit about having 
lived and worked in it for 15 years, Mr. Speaker. And not one 
person on the opposite benches stood up and even tried to take 
credit for it, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t say a word about it. And 
it is good for Saskatchewan people. It’s good for Saskatchewan 
communities. And it’s good for the Saskatchewan economy, 
and it’s good for Saskatchewan families. And why wouldn’t 
somebody have said something about it? 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech touches on 
a number of issues that are short term. We talk about the tax 
review piece that will be coming out in the next few days, of 
which there’s a commitment in the Throne Speech to say that 
we’re going to address the tax piece. There is a commitment on 
the energy share piece, a commitment on the CAIS funding, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a commitment today on the midwifery. 
 

This Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is about directing 
Saskatchewan people on a track that will build a strong 
Saskatchewan economy. And it will be done with the kind of 
leadership that we’re accustomed to on this side of the House. 
Because as we go forward into the future, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan will continue to be led by men and women who 
have a conscience about not only the social democracy but also 
about growing a strong economic, vibrant province. And that’s 
why in the future, Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to see New 
Democratic governments serving in this province, not 
Conservative administrations as we’ve seen. 
 
And I want to say that I’m going to be supporting very sincerely 
the strength of this Throne Speech because it is, Mr. Speaker, 
the best Throne Speech that we’ve had in this Assembly in the 
past 14 years. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 
privilege to rise today in this House and give some clarity to the 
discussion that has taken place with regards to the Speech from 
the Throne. I had made myself a number of notes and points 
that I wanted to discuss, but it looks like the time allotted isn’t 
quite going to be enough. But we’ll do the best we can. 
 
I think first of all, as probably almost all members of the 
legislature have done, and that is to thank our communities back 
home, our constituencies, and our families for their support 
because there’s no one aside from the family of a legislator that 
knows the times that we’re not where we’re supposed to be, 
where there’s meetings that involve our family and we have to 
be elsewhere. I think no one else but those people understand 
that. And we’re all very thankful for that. 
 
I need to probably get into this very quickly, but I should also 
congratulate our Madam Deputy Speaker for achieving that 
particular position. I was hoping that she’d be able to be sitting 
in that chair for my speech because she’d heard what had gone 
on before and would be able to sort of relate the two together. 
But that’s fine. We’ll do that another time. 
 
The previous speaker went on and rambled on at great length 
with the usual name-calling, Mr. Speaker, the usual 
name-calling. And he went on with this sort of thing about how 
all this ultimate wisdom had been emanating from these handful 
of CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party] premiers that we’ve had. Well let me give 
you just one example, just one example where they fell flat on 
their face. And you, Mr. Speaker, and a few other ones in this 
House will understand this perfectly. 
 
And that is the unfunded liability of pensions — unfunded 
liability of pensions. I have one of those, and I remember a 
number of years ago when people from the STF [Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation] came around, and they sort of gave the 
two positions that might be coming out. And the question 
always was, how much money is there in the old pension plan, 
the one that old people like myself are a part of. 
 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

Now here’s the answer, Mr. Speaker, not one stinking dime. 
And then the question that we would ask is, well, how do we 
know that when we retire and start drawing that pension that 
there’ll be money there? Well it was trust us. Trust us. 
 
Well we know a bit about trust. We just saw a whole lot of 
people run out of this particular room after QP [question period] 
this morning who are now standing around the outside, and 
they’re over there in the place where they do all the scrums and 
stuff and we’re finding out about trust. It’ll be in our papers on 
the weekend. And you’ll be able to read it and you’ll know 
about trust. 
 
However to get back to my point about the unfunded pensions, 
the unfunded pension — the NDP premier at that time, it was 
presented to him, why doesn’t government start putting some 
money into that so when the people start collecting those 
pensions, number one, it’s not going to cost the taxpayer any 
money; and number two, the people collecting those pensions 
are going to know there’s a pot full of money for them? But this 
NDP premier said no, said no. 
 
There is a definite lack of wisdom on that side of the House. It’s 
come out decade after decade after decade. And for the Deputy 
Premier to get up in this House and to sort of claim that he has a 
political history of astute leaders is a bunch of nonsense. We’re 
not even getting close to talking about shoe factories, Mr. 
Speaker. We can go through that. But he better do a whole lot 
better than what he’s done so far with what he’s been talking 
about. 
 
Then he rambled on for awhile. I mentioned this a little earlier 
on, here’s where the misinformation comes from. Here’s where 
the misinformation comes from. As he’s busy trying to 
interrupt. He’s trying to blame all the debt on one particular 
government. $6.8 billion of debt from your Premier Blakeney 
— 6.8 billion. Now when did that take place? 
 
And this is a very critical part of this debate, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a very critical part of this debate because in Saskatchewan 
we’ve had a certain period of time where interest rates were 
very high. And the fact is I’d just love nothing better than to 
have some of those reds get up and say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order 
please. Order. The member has used a term which is 
unparliamentary and the member is out of order on that term, I 
would ask the member to withdraw the term before he proceeds 
with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So dealing with that particular issue . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member would withdraw the 
remark before he proceeds, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I withdraw from this House the awful remark 
of red. 
 
The Speaker: — Close but not close enough. The member 
would withdraw the remark unequivocally. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I unequivocally withdraw the remark red 
from this House. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Going through that 
interest rate time. And I’d love nothing better than for those 
now NDP, once CCFers to get up and admit how many of them 
would have lost their houses and had to walk away from them if 
there hadn’t been help for those poor people back during the 
’80s when interest rates hit how much? Twenty-some per cent. 
Okay, we hear 21, 22, 25. And we’ve got a person who knows 
some numbers, 22 per cent. 
 
Now here’s the critical part, Mr. Speaker. You take $6.8 billion 
— take out over there the people bad on math, take out your 
little adders — you take $6.8 billion, work that out at 22 per 
cent per year and find out what number you come up with. And 
you’ll find out what the total number really is, and the debt 
responsibility for that belongs to the CCF, the NDP, and Allan 
Blakeney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Do the math. Do the math. Don’t get up in 
this House and try and blame it on someone else. Don’t try and 
find an excuse. Just get there and take the blame for it because 
everybody in this province knows where the blame lies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, getting back to my constituency. I want to 
talk a little bit about Highway 11, a little bit about Highway 11 
because we had the Minister who’s responsible for highways 
yesterday say that regardless what I thought, he was going to do 
some twinning. 
 
Now there’s a few things about Highway 11 that I think the 
NDP-CCF over there need to know. There is one person on that 
side I must say, Mr. Speaker, who has an understanding of 
Highway 11. And every time I talk about Highway 11 we get 
this . . . And we know exactly who we’re talking about. We 
know exactly who we’re talking about. The rest of them I don’t 
think know. So this is largely aimed, Mr. Speaker, at the 
Minister Responsible for Highways. 
 
We just had a major interchange at the community of Rosthern. 
We used to have three access roads. One was taken away. And 
what I’m after at the bottom line over here is that there is an 
engineer that designed the most stupid piece of highway you 
could possibly imagine. And I would hope that sometime in the 
next year that engineer is out of province working someplace 
else. You want to catch up with Alberta? You get that engineer 
to build some highways in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now three accesses. They took one out. So the other one 
crosses Highway 11 at just a small angle and was thought it 
might be safer if it crossed at right angles. Fine. 
 
Now the highway comes through Rosthern; speed limit’s 40 
miles an hour. That just takes a teensy little jog, and you’ve got 
right angles. And on the other side you might need one of 2 or 
300 yards. What do we have? Two kilometres of highway built. 
Two kilometres of highway built along Highway 312 to 
accommodate that. 
 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

[12:00] 
 
We spent, on taxpayers’ money, $3.1 million on that 
interchange; most of it’s wasted. That access that was built 
going east of Rosthern goes through two sloughs and then just 
across the pasture. It could have done a nice little kink, would 
have been taken care of. There’s approximately 13 kilometres, 
13 kilometres of various and sundry roads running off into the 
middle of nowhere. It looks like a Christmas tree with its 
clothes off. They just don’t go anywhere. They don’t go 
anywhere. But we spent $3.1 million, could have done it for a 
fraction of that. 
 
Now the most dangerous part of that particular highway, Mr. 
Speaker, was this. There were no left-hand turning lanes. 
Everyone knows that. Fact is we’ve had people killed there on a 
regular basis, and that’s unfortunate. I’ve seen a car with two 
people in there burning, and the people couldn’t get out. They 
died. I saw that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
About two years ago, three years ago, there were two semis 
tried to avoid someone who wanted to make a left-hand turn 
there. Those two semis collided. Both went up in flames. I saw 
that. 
 
From my youth group, Mr. Speaker, I had one young girl sat in 
the back . . . was sitting in the back of a car, was hit from the 
back because on that intersection there was no left-hand turning 
lane. 
 
This new highway, Mr. Speaker, has good left-hand turning 
lanes. I’ll give credit where credit is needed and due, and this is 
just about it for that intersection, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now so you’re coming along and you need to turn left — that’s 
been provided for, well provided for. Or you want to go through 
— that’s been provided for. Now what happens if you want to 
make a right-hand turn? Where do you go? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Alberta. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The member says you go to Alberta. That’s 
very true. 
 
You move into the right-hand side and usually there isn’t a lane, 
but there’s usually a shoulder that you can pull on to. So I went 
out with my handy-dandy little Home Hardware tape and I 
thought I’m going to measure this to make sure I know what 
I’m talking about. So the shoulders, along Highway 11 for the 
most part are 11 feet, 11 feet from the line to where the 
pavement ends and then you may have some mud and gravel. 
On the 11 feet you can hide most any vehicle to make a 
right-hand turn whether it’s a VW [Volkswagen], whether it’s a 
cattle trailer, you can probably get onto that and survive. 
 
So here at this particular intersection where there have been so 
many deaths, you would think you would have a right-hand 
turning option. What has this engineer . . . And I want this 
engineer fired. I have no idea who it is but if I say it often 
enough maybe the Minister of Highways will be paying 
attention. How wide is the amount that’s now left for a 
right-hand turning lane? It’s 5 feet, Mr. Speaker. Who can hide 
a car in 5 feet? 

You can go out in the parking lot and there’s not one of them. 
We haven’t even talked about farm equipment. We haven’t 
talked about semis. We haven’t talked about car trailers. We 
haven’t talked about fifth-wheel recreational vehicles. You 
can’t hide them on five feet which means that they now still 
have to be partly on the through lane. But the left-hand turning 
lane is being used. Where can they go? Nowheres. And there 
will be an accident one of these days and I’m . . . personally say 
I hold the engineer responsible. 
 
Now we’ve been told they’re going to make some different 
changes on that. I hope those come very quickly because you 
can take a life, but you can’t give it back. 
 
Now there’s two other places where we have to look at what’s 
happening. And there’s an underlying theme through this, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is you can’t even give the NDP the job of 
building a highway and they can mess it up. And so we’re 
talking about the Speech from the Throne, you can imagine how 
massively they can mess up something like that. How massively 
could they mess that up? Well we’re going to find out. We’re 
going to find out. 
 
At the intersection of Warman Road and Highway 11, when 
that was originally built there was a short little curve you put in 
to turn to the right to go down toward Rosthern and Prince 
Albert. It was such a sharp turn after the straight stretch more or 
less along Warman Road that people were constantly hitting the 
ditch. They rebuilt that whole curve. Again surely some 
engineer knows how to build a curve. If that isn’t in about 
engineering 101, I don’t know. My question then is — 
obviously that one can’t — where are the members that are 
sitting on that side of the House who drive down those same 
roads? Where are they? Why don’t they say this person isn’t 
going to be building us another one of those kind of curves? 
You can go right down to Alberta and give us a chance to catch 
up. 
 
The other thing is if you try to cross coming from Warman 
road, you try to cross Highway 11 with a B trailer — super B — 
you can’t. It doesn’t work. Your back side is on the part going 
to Prince Albert; your front side’s the part coming from Prince 
Albert. You can’t find enough room on there. Again, what 
engineer can’t take out his Home Hardware tape, measure how 
long a truck is, and say I have to leave that much space for a 
truck when they have to stop waiting for some traffic. 
 
Now let’s talk about how that carries over to how these people 
are going to mismanage and mess up this particular Throne 
Speech. There’s money. They’re awash in money. Everyone 
admits it. They admit it. They didn’t think they’d have this 
much money. Had you asked an NDP on that side, how much 
money do you think you’re going to have in this particular year 
and asked them that two years ago, they would never have 
dreamt they would have had this money. So one of the bigger 
issues in rural Saskatchewan is education tax on property. 
 
Now what does the person in charge of the purse say about 
doing something with that? Well it’s not an election year, Mr. 
Speaker. I would never, as a politician, have been stupid enough 
to make a statement like that. My people back home would 
un-elect me so fast. To sort of say, hey it’s not an election year 
so I’m not going to spend any money, why? Because in an 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

election year I can spend the money and maybe with enough 
money thrown all over I can win the silly thing. They’ve been 
here before when they had less than 50 per cent of the vote. 
They know that. So now it comes down to how much money 
can we throw around. So we’re going to sit on it. We’re going 
to sit on this pile of money and we’re going to just squander it 
willy-nilly. When? At an election time. At an election time. 
 
I’d like to say a few things about school amalgamation, and I’ll 
do this very briefly. We went through an amalgamation some 
time ago in my area. The MLA from Saskatoon Nutana was in 
charge at that time. It was one of the early amalgamations to 
take place in the province. It was supposed to help give us 
better services and save some money. No one was quite sure 
how it would work. So it was an experiment. It didn’t work as 
good as it should have. And now we’ve got a new minister 
who’s just gone ahead and increased the size of those 
amalgamations and the difficulties, the problems, and the 
unsuccessfulness of it, if anything, is going to be a whole lot 
greater. 

 
And I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, with a particular 
comment that really bothers me more than anything else, more 
than anything else. I think at the end of the day, all legislators 
on both sides of the House want to take care of our people. Not 
necessarily take care of the rich ones . . . But we’ve got the 
Minister of Education now chirping from his seat. He should 
have learned better. There were two Maritimers and a bicycle 
that taught him a lesson a few years ago. He should remember 
that. He should remember that. We remember him sitting here 
with two black eyes. He’ll remember that. 

 
However it’s the poor in our province, the poor in our province 
. . . And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? When we look at 
what’s happening in Saskatchewan right now, there are almost 
2,000 more children needing food banks in 2004 than in the 
previous year. That’s an increase of 24 per cent — 24 per cent 
increase in the very poorest in our province looking for food, 
for food, Mr. Speaker. We’re not talking about quads. We’re 
not talking about summer camps. We’re not talking about any 
of those things. We’re talking about food for their bellies — a 
24 per cent increase in young people and children needing more 
of that. And this NDP-CCF [New Democratic 
Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] government 
has failed, has failed miserably. 

 
And just on the last part, Mr. Speaker, the last part, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve had a discussion over the last year or so about 
kids and drugs. This government has failed, has failed the kids 
who have a problem with drugs. They’ve failed the families. 
They’ve failed their communities. And you’re still failing them, 
and that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. That’s a shame when we’ve 
got our children hungry and there’s no security when they need 
some help to get off of drugs. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what a CCF-NDP is all about. I will not 
be supporting this Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
other members have indicated, it is always a privilege to stand 
in this legislature and to speak from one’s values, from one’s 
vision. It is a privilege to express freely our opinions in this 
legislature. It’s a privilege that’s afforded to only a few, and 
each of us who have this opportunity, provided to us by our 
constituents, by our voters, respect that privilege. 
 
I want to, with other members, join in congratulating our new 
Deputy Speaker for assuming a piece of Saskatchewan history 
— the first woman to occupy that Chair. And we congratulate 
our new Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say I have 
found the Throne Speech debate interesting as I have listened to 
speakers, as I have watched on occasion through television, and 
as I have read some of the comments. 
 
And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, I have found it interesting how 
often I have been quoted in the course of this Throne Speech 
debate. Quoted, I note, by members of the opposition. I have 
listened very carefully, Mr. Speaker, to all of those quotes of 
mine that have been part of this debate, the vast majority of 
those quotes made when I was privileged to occupy a bench in 
the opposition when their Conservative Party was then in 
government. 
 
I’ve reviewed all of those quotes, Mr. Speaker. And let me say 
this this morning. In hindsight, in hindsight I only think I can 
have one regret about those quotes and things that I said at that 
time. Only one regret. 
 
I regret, Mr. Speaker, that when I occupied a bench in the 
opposition that I didn’t do a better job to expose the backroom 
deals that were going on in that government, in this building, 
that I didn’t do a better job in exposing the sell-off of the 
province’s assets, assets belonging to the people of 
Saskatchewan, by that Conservative Party when they were in 
government. I regret that I did not do a better job of exposing 
what they were doing to the public service of Saskatchewan. I 
regret that I did not do a better job of exposing the financial 
mess they were putting the province and the people of 
Saskatchewan in, a mess that we’re continuing to pay for today. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker. I am proud of everything that I was able to say in 
this legislature when I sat in opposition. I am proud of the work 
of the New Democratic Party when we served in opposition. 
 
But I am even prouder, Mr. Speaker, I am even prouder of the 
record of the New Democratic Party in government — in 
government during the ’90s when we had to sacrifice with the 
people of Saskatchewan to put this province right again, when 
we had to labour long and hard through difficult years of 
following in the wake of that party in government. And I am 
proud today to be standing in my place to support the Throne 
Speech of this New Democratic Party government. Proudest of 
all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I find it interesting that the Leader 
of the Opposition was on the radio the other day. And when a 
caller-in asked him what was his involvement when he worked 
for that Conservative government, what was his involvement in 
the sell-off of the Highways equipment at that time, the Leader 
of the Opposition said to the public of Saskatchewan on radio, 
well I don’t want to talk about the 1980s. I don’t want to talk 
about the 1980s. Well little wonder. If I were a Conservative, I 
wouldn’t want to talk about the 1980s either. 
 
And it is passing strange that in the course of an entire Throne 
Speech debate, the only two premiers that are quoted by the 
opposition, the only two leaders quoted by the opposition are 
Tommy Douglas and myself. I don’t mind, Mr. Speaker, being 
put in that company. But isn’t it interesting that no member of 
the opposition seems to want to quote any current or former 
leader of their own. 
 
Now there’s been a number, Mr. Speaker. There’s been a 
number. They could have quoted Grant Devine. Premier Devine 
served for 10 years. You’d think in 10 years there’d be a quote 
they might have found. They could have quoted Mr. Swenson 
who led the Conservative Party. They might have quoted Mr. 
Bill Boyd who led the Conservative Party. They might have 
quoted the member from Rosetown who led the Conservative 
Party here. Or they might have quoted their own leader today. 
 
Now when I think of it, maybe they don’t want to quote Mr. 
Boyd because they want to wait till . . . what he says when he is 
the new leader of the Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will quote leaders of the New Democratic Party 
on any platform in any venue of this legislature, outside this 
legislature, anywhere in Canada, anywhere on this globe. And I 
will quote them with pride. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I do, I do want to take just 
a moment though to address one of those quotes of mine that 
has been referenced in this Throne Speech debate. It was I think 
yesterday that the member of Thunder Creek was kind enough 
to quote from a speech that I made in this legislature in 1988 
when I said to members of the Conservative government of the 
day, I said, quoting myself: 
 

Mr. Speaker, maybe these members opposite have 
forgotten, or perhaps they never knew, perhaps they never 
knew what it’s like to farm with old machinery, and just to 
go from repair to repair to repair. 
 

Now the member of Thunder Creek quoting that yesterday then 
stood in his place and asked a few questions. And I want to 
clarify his thinking and his knowledge today. He said then in 
this debate: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the Premier got his 
experience repairing old farm equipment. I daresay he 
imagined that part. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you. I was not privileged to be 
born into a farming family. I was born to working people in the 
city of Moose Jaw. So I was smart enough to marry into a 

farming family, to marry into a three-generation farm, albeit it a 
small farm, a farm that has always demanded off-farm income. 
And therefore as the son-in-law of this farm, it has been my 
great privilege each and every year to be on the farm — to be 
there at spring when we’re doing the seeding; to be there at fall 
when we harvest. 
 
Now about this matter of repairing equipment, and about . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well here’s the member from 
Thunder Creek, and I’m glad he’s now listening because he 
seemed to have some confusion in his mind yesterday. I’m 
going to tell the member of Thunder Creek and all members 
what I know about repairing farm machinery. 
 
So this spring for instance, Mr. Speaker, let me tell the 
members this. This spring for instance I was out on the farm 
and assigned to move a tractor. Well it was a wet spring, and I 
moved the tractor down through the alkali flat. And you know, 
Mr. Speaker, what happened here? I tell you it started to sink. It 
started to sink. And you know what I thought of? I thought of 
that great quote of the former Premier Devine: you don’t say 
whoa in a mudhole. Well you know the result of that good 
advice? You know the result of that good advice? I tell you I 
sunk the tractor right down to the axle. And they had to come 
with a four- wheel drive to get it out. 
 
Now just a month ago, just a month ago — well a little more, I 
guess, five weeks — I had the great experience of spending 
three days on the farm trying to help out with the harvest, trying 
to help out with the harvest of very wet barley. And, Mr. 
Speaker, well the member asked me, what did they assign me? 
Well they assigned me traditionally, can you, can you go and 
get the loader working? You see on the farm it’s not new, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s pretty old. It’s a loader. It’s an auger. My task here 
is to get that auger going so we can start to load a little bit of 
barley to the bins. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, for two hours, for two solid hours I worked 
on that auger. Two solid hours I worked on that engine to get it 
going. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a cantankerous old engine. It’s 
a cantankerous old engine. Two hours later I’ve got the thing 
running. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The whole time . . . 
And the member from Thunder Creek will be interested in this. 
He’s got lots of Conservative roots. I tell you the whole time I 
was working on that engine I was thinking about the current 
version of the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan. They call 
themselves the Saskatchewan Party. The whole time. Because 
you know what? Like that engine, they’re just a whole bunch of 
cantankerous folks, and they’re not very easy to start. 
 
But somewhere, Mr. Speaker, somewhere in the history of that 
loader, somebody, somebody had taken the time to put a little 
paint on it. They tried to spruce it up I think by trying to put a 
little paint on it and they tried to cover the name. They tried to 
cover up the name of that old engine. 
 
Well isn’t that a parallel, Mr. Speaker? Isn’t that a parallel? You 
can put a coat, a new coat of paint on it and you can try and 
cover up the old name, but it’s still the same old cantankerous 
engine. That’s it, Mr. Speaker, the same old cantankerous 
engine and it’s very hard to start. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now beyond my most recent experiences 
in repairing farm equipment, Mr. Speaker, this debate has been 
illustrative. As I have reviewed the speeches and listened to the 
speeches, I have heard members of this government stand in 
their place and deliver speeches that contain values, that contain 
vision, and that contain practical solutions for today and the 
people of Saskatchewan today. 
 
Meantime I have listened to the opposition speeches. Nothing 
but a week and a half of negative attack. Rare, rare is the new 
idea and even rarer is a sense of vision or purpose or dreams for 
the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what I observe and, Mr. 
Speaker, any objective observer of this House would agree with 
that assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have brought to this House a Throne Speech 
that is based on values — the values of the New Democratic 
Party, the values of the people of Saskatchewan. We have 
brought to this House a Throne Speech of vision. A vision not 
just for the near horizon, not just for today, but a vision well 
into the future, a vision for the children that are being born 
today. And we have taken those values and that vision and we 
have translated them into practical, practical steps forward that 
deal with today’s problems and build for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I referenced the Throne 
Speech. Here in a few, few solid words expresses much of the 
value of Saskatchewan people and the value of this government. 
This Throne Speech reads: 
 

Today, my government dreams of a province where no one 
[no one] is left behind on the . . . [pathway] to opportunity 
. . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, the times change; the values do not. What we wish 
for ourselves, we desire for all. No one in Saskatchewan that we 
believe in should be left behind on this pathway of opportunity. 
 
We believe, we believe, Mr. Speaker, and place in the Throne 
Speech, the value of Saskatchewan people, the value of this 
government. We believe that this province ought to be a 
province with an unbreakable social fabric, unbreakable social 
fabric. We believe that this province should be a place of 
growth and diversity in our communities. We believe that the 
future of Saskatchewan ought to be based on a green and a 
prosperous economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look to the future. We look to the future for 
that young person that’s born today, to that child that’s in 
school today. We look to a future for our children. Mr. Speaker, 
in this Throne Speech we make a bold claim on the future. In 
this Throne Speech we believe that by the time the children who 
are in school today in Saskatchewan are reaching their grade 12 
or they’re reaching their graduation, they should be graduating, 
and I quote, Mr. Speaker: in a province that will lead the nation 
in educational attainment and literacy rates. 
 
That is our vision. Leading the nation in education attainment 
and literacy rates. To achieve that vision, Mr. Speaker, we have 
put in place a Literacy Commission. We are pioneering early 
childhood education. We are leading with pre-kindergarten 

programs. We are leading with community school programs. 
And we want those children to have every opportunity. Now 
this week, in a few days, we will hear from that report on 
training and apprenticeship in our province — opening new 
opportunities for our youth. We have set as a vision the most 
literate province in the nation of Canada. We’re proud of that 
vision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talk about an unbreakable social fabric. In this Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker, we declare that every working person, 
every working person in this province should know the benefits 
of health and pensions. They should know health and pension 
benefits and by the time these children of today are entering our 
workforce, exploring their careers, building their lives here, 
they should do so in a province where there are benefits of 
health and pension for every worker in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s a bold, bold vision. That is an 
unbreakable social fabric. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from this Throne Speech we state our vision of 
diverse and growing communities in this province. 
 
In this Throne Speech we set bold goals and bold visions for 
immigration, for opening the doors of this province to people 
from around the globe, all over the continent. We want to open 
the doors. We’ve set ourselves targets to say that by 2008-09 
we will increase the number of immigrants to Saskatchewan by 
5,000 a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Five thousand a year, Mr. Speaker, 
building diverse and growing communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the future of this province needs to 
be built on a solid economic foundation. We believe in a green 
and a prosperous economy, building economy. Mr. Speaker, 
this Throne Speech talks about business tax review soon to be 
delivered and soon to be acted on by this government. 
 
This Throne Speech talks about doubling — doubling Mr. 
Speaker — the value of manufactured goods from this province. 
This Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, talks about adding 
value-added food processing. It talks about the expansion of 
livestock production. It talks about the expansion of ethanol and 
biofuels. It talks about growing the economy for the people of 
Saskatchewan and jobs for our young people here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it speaks to this in a way that is 
forward-looking, in saying that economic growth in this 
province can be green and healthy, leaving behind our 
generation to next generations an even more healthy 
Saskatchewan in its air and its land and its water. 
 
We are talking about green, Mr. Speaker. We are talking about 
conversion of arable land, agroforestry. We are making a bold 
commitment that by the time our children are graduating they 
will live in a province where fully one-third of all of our energy 
needs are supplied by renewable resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the evidence is in; the 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2005 

evidence is in. Just days ago the energy secretary of the United 
States of America from Washington, DC [District of Columbia] 
was talking about Saskatchewan. Was talking about our carbon 
dioxide sequestration indicating, not to just his world but to the 
entire globe, that the potential being developed in Saskatchewan 
for carbon dioxide sequestration could tremendously, 
significantly affect global warming in the globe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s Saskatchewan innovation. That’s Saskatchewan 
partnership between government, industry, and research. That’s 
Saskatchewan commitment to growing economy, and that’s a 
Saskatchewan commitment to a green and healthy future for our 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the times may change; our 
values do not. And this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, very 
boldly declares our values for the times in which we live in this 
Throne Speech. And let me simply quote: 
 

It is my government’s vision that . . . [our children] will 
live, grow and reach adulthood proud of Saskatchewan’s 
diversity, proud of our strong First Nations and Métis 
culture and tradition, proud of the rich tapestry of people 
from all parts of the world who make Saskatchewan 
strong. 
 

And it is our vision that these children of ours “ . . . will live 
together in harmony and respect, desiring for all, that which 
they wish for themselves.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the times may change. The values do not. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a Throne Speech with vision — bold vision — 
with practical application to bring about that vision. And I 
challenge members opposite to vote against that kind of vision, 
that kind of Throne Speech, those kind of commitments, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll see. In a matter of minutes, we’ll see. 
 
Is this an opposition that will vote against, that will vote against 
making Saskatchewan the most literate province in Canada? Is 
this an opposition that will vote against building economy? Is 
this an opposition that will vote against a vision for 
immigration? Is this an opposition that will vote against a green, 
prosperous economy? Is this an opposition that will vote against 
the future of our children? In a matter of moments, Mr. 
Speaker, we will see just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that members of the opposition have 
been kind enough, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I wish to inform the Assembly 
that under rule 16(4) it is my duty at this time to interrupt 
debate and put all questions necessary to dispose of the main 
motion. 
 
Order please. The question before the Assembly is the motion 

moved by the member for Saskatoon Eastview, seconded by the 
member for Regina Northeast: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present Session. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Those 
who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe the ayes have it. Call in the 
members for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:33 until 12:34] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The question before the 
Assembly is the motion moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview, seconded by the member for Regina Northeast: 

 
That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 

 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 
Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 29] 
 

Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Taylor Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hagel Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Addley 
Morin Borgerson  



November 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion, please rise. 
 

[Nays — 26] 
 
Toth Elhard Heppner 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Chisholm McMorris 
Harpauer Gantefoer Eagles 
Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Kerpan 
Merriman Morgan Dearborn 
Hart Kirsch  
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
29; those opposed, 26. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Address be Engrossed and Presented 

to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for The Battlefords, seconded by the 
Deputy Government House Leader, member for Saskatoon 
Nutana: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 103, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 103, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:37.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................259 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................259 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................259 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................259 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................259 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................260 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................260 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................260 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................260 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................260 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Children’s Day 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................260 
 Help for Drug-Addicted Children 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................261 
 St. Bernadette School Innovates to Combat Bullying 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................261 
 Results of Recent Polls 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................261 
 Filming and Broadcast of the Saskatchewan Centennial Canoe Quest 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................262 
 Arts Week in Saskatchewan 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................262 
 Realizing Vision through Education 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................262 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Response to Written Questions 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................263 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................263 
 SaskEnergy 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................264 
 Wait Times for Surgery and Diagnostic Services 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................264 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................264 
 Utility Rates 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................266 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................266 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................267 
 Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................267 
 Bill No. 23 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................267 
 Bill No. 202 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Set Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................268 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................268 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................268 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................268 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................271 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................274 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................276 



 

  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................279 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................282 
MOTIONS 
 Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................283 
 Ways and Means 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................283 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


