






















































Hansard: November 07, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 1A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2005, 2:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 November 7, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 14:30.] 
 
The Speaker: — Good afternoon and welcome everyone to the 
opening ceremonies for the second session of the twenty-fifth 
legislature. 
 
I wish to inform the Assembly that I have received a 
communication from the Private Secretary to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will open the 
second session of the twenty-fifth legislature at 2:30 p.m. today, 
the 7th day of November, 2005. 
 
Would all please remain standing for the arrival of Her Honour. 
 
[At 14:32 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. Her Honour was 
then pleased to open the session with the following speech as 
tabled.] 
 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, Honoured 
Guests, People Of Saskatchewan. 
 
Welcome to the second session of the 25th Legislature of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. Welcome to the first session of 
Saskatchewan’s second century. 
 
In the first Speech from the Throne to the Legislative Assembly 
of the new Province of Saskatchewan on March 29, 1906, my 
predecessor, the Honourable A.E. Forget, declared that “an era 
of general prosperity has been entered upon, the limits of which 
can hardly be estimated.” 
 
Our ancestors were people of vision, courage and optimism. 
They dreamed of a prosperous land and a progressive society in 
a province richly blessed by nature’s bounty. 
 
Today, we take up the challenge posed by their example. 
 
We are joined in the Assembly today by a number of 
Saskatchewan’s centenarians and some of Canada’s newest 
citizens. We welcome them. 
 
Joining us as well, in the gallery are some of our youngest 
citizens and their parents. These children, born in 2005, are the 
sons and daughters of our Centennial. 
 
My government’s vision for our second century is best 
described through the eyes of these children. Today we dream 
of the province in which they will live, grow and reach 
adulthood. 
 
It is the vision of my government that these children of our 
Centennial will live in a province that has clean water to drink, 
fresh air to breathe and beautiful landscapes to explore. 
 
They will know Saskatchewan as a place that is dynamic, 
innovative and strong – a great place to live, work and raise a 
family. 

They will live in a place that has embraced and marshaled 
technology in one of the most innovative, fair and competitive 
economies in the world: a province offering them abundant 
opportunities to pursue meaningful and rewarding careers. 
 
It is my government’s goal that the children of our Centennial 
will have the best possible chance to grow up free from 
addiction, lead healthy and active lifestyles, benefit from high 
quality education, and be actively involved in their 
communities. 
 
It is my government’s vision that they will live, grow and reach 
adulthood proud of Saskatchewan’s diversity, proud of our 
strong First Nations and Métis culture and tradition, proud of 
the rich tapestry of people from all parts of the world who make 
Saskatchewan strong. And they will live together in harmony 
and respect, desiring for all, that which they wish for 
themselves. 
 
We are in a time that we have never been, and in an age that we 
have never seen. 
 
Our vision today shall be our legacy for our children. 
 
Today, my government dreams of a province where no one is 
left behind on the path to opportunity, a province with an 
unbreakable social fabric, built on the foundation of diverse and 
growing communities, in a green and prosperous economy. 
2 

A GREEN AND PROSPEROUS ECONOMY 
 
Economic Prosperity 
 
Saskatchewan enjoys unprecedented economic momentum as 
we begin our second century. 
 
Four years ago, Saskatchewan was one of eight ‘have-not’ 
provinces. Today, because of the vision and hard work of 
Saskatchewan people, we are a ‘have’ province, and the only 
‘have’ province in Canada that does not charge its citizens a 
health care premium. We are a ‘have’ province with heart. 
 
Saskatchewan values fiscal responsibility. Our province has 
received its 13th credit rating upgrade since 1995. Our children 
should not inherit financial burden. During this session my 
government will balance the budget and pay down debt. 
 
The work that has turned Saskatchewan’s economic recovery to 
economic leadership will continue, based on the Saskatchewan 
Action Plan for the Economy: A New Century of Opportunity, a 
plan developed by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As our second century unfolds, Saskatchewan will have one of 
the most diverse business environments in the country. Private 
enterprise, co-operative enterprise and public enterprise will 
stimulate growth and create jobs. 
 
In this session, recommendations from the Business Tax 
Review Committee will be acted upon. Investments in programs 
that encourage entrepreneurs will be made. 
 
Active work will be undertaken to include more youth and 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2005 

Aboriginal people in the labour market and business sector. The 
recently announced Youth Opportunities Unleashed program 
will help support young entrepreneurs in rural communities, and 
the Saskatchewan First Nations and Métis Economic 
Development Program will involve even more Aboriginal 
residents in the economic mainstream. 
 
We will work with First Nations and Métis people to ensure 
they become full participants, as employees, and as business 
partners, in the economic mainstream. 
 
Environment 
 
A healthy economy and a healthy future for our children depend 
on a healthy environment. 
 
My government’s vision for the land that sustains us, is a vision 
of a natural environment even more habitable and nourishing in 
2025 than it is today. 
 
The results of our Green Strategy consultations will be built 
upon by expanding conservation and recycling programs, and 
pursuing a more integrated approach to managing our water 
resources. 
 
In the year ahead, a climate change and energy initiatives 
package will be developed and implemented, contributing to an 
even greener and more prosperous economy. 
 
In 2006, Saskatchewan’s provincial parks system will celebrate 
its 75th anniversary. Our parks will showcase clean and green 
practices, and our stewardship of protected land will be a lasting 
inheritance. 
 
During this session, my government will continue a process of 
consultation with northerners toward the recognition of the 
Churchill River as one of Saskatchewan’s natural legacies. 
 
Central to Saskatchewan’s green and prosperous economic 
future is our province’s vast forest. 
 
In the coming months, we will work tirelessly to address recent 
challenges in the forestry industry and we will work with 
industry to capture new opportunities in the forestry sector and 
its ever-changing marketplace. With the recent establishment of 
the Saskatchewan Forest Centre in Prince Albert, we are 
well-positioned to do so. 
 
Agroforestry, including the growing of trees as crops, is 
underway. My government has a bold vision for the future of 
this industry. Over the next twenty years, the goal will be to 
transform ten per cent of the arable land of Saskatchewan to 
agroforestry, creating another sustainable industry in our 
province. 
 
Saskatchewan will continue to be a leader in forestry 
management practices. 
 
Energy and Mining 
 
Today, Saskatchewan is leading the continent in the diversity 
and potential of its renewable and non-renewable energy 
sources. 

To capture the energy of the wind, projects already underway 
will produce 172 megawatts of zero emission power, five per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s electrical generation capacity, or 
enough for 73,000 homes. 
 
Saskatchewan was the first province to legislate the use of 
cleaner burning ethanol-blended gasoline. Today, Saskatchewan 
is poised to become a major producer of grain-based ethanol 
with production facilities nearing completion in Lloydminster 
and Weyburn, in addition to existing production in Lanigan. 
 
In the coming year, future opportunities with wind generation 
and ethanol production will be explored. 
 
Today, hydro power contributes to our energy needs. Research 
and development in biomass, biodiesel, hydrogren, and solar 
power are also taking place in Saskatchewan. 
 
Given our wealth of renewable energy resources, it is the vision 
of my government that by the third decade of this century, the 
children of our Centennial will live in a province where 
one-third of their energy needs are met by renewable energy 
sources, and Saskatchewan will lead the country in energy 
conservation practices. 
 
Saskatchewan is also a province with many conventional 
energy riches. We already account for one-third of Canada’s 
total energy production, primarily through our uranium, oil and 
gas. My government’s recent work with industry partners has 
developed our primary energy resources to record levels. In the 
coming years, Saskatchewan’s energy contribution will grow 
even larger. 
 
My government foresees the need for, and will pursue 
investment in, additional heavy oil upgrading capacity, clean 
coal technologies, natural gas in coal, and poly-generation 
opportunities. 
 
To reach these goals, government will work with industry 
partners to sharpen our competitive edge in the attraction of 
energy investment, pursue research and development through 
the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, and intensify 
efforts in enhanced oil recovery technologies. Saskatchewan 
will persist in achieving a Saskatchewan Energy Accord and a 
fair equalization formula with the federal government. 
 
A strong Saskatchewan is good for all of Canada. 
 
Today, Saskatchewan is a major player in Canada’s mining and 
mineral industry. Mineral exploration expenditures have 
doubled each year since 2003. In potash alone, the incentive 
package established in April has triggered more than $570 
million in investment intentions. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Athabasca Basin is currently the world’s prime 
exploration district for high-grade uranium deposits. One of the 
richest uranium mines in the world is gearing up to go into 
production at Cigar Lake in 2007. 
 
Continued growth and investment in our traditional mining 
sectors will be ensured, and we will pursue opportunities to 
expand the scope of mining in our province. Saskatchewan has 
one of the largest diamond bearing Kimberlite clusters in the 



November 7, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

world. We have rare earth elements used in the production of 
new technologies. Major markets await. 
 
Manufacturing and Export 
 
Over the next decade, it is my government’s goal that the value 
of manufacturing shipments from Saskatchewan will double 
from both small and large manufacturing sectors. We are well 
on our way. Saskatchewan manufacturing shipments grew by 
twice the national average last year. 
 
Working with our industrial and research parks, technology will 
be commercialized. A favourable investment climate for small 
business and manufacturing will be fostered. 
 
A new, five-year operating agreement with Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership will assist new exporters and 
continually seek new opportunities. An Asia-Pacific Desk will 
be established in the Department of Industry and Resources to 
pursue opportunities in Asia. 
6 
In global trade, every opportunity to seek fair trade and a level 
playing field for our producers and exporters will be seized. 
 
Research and Development 
 
Praised as the social laboratory of Canada for generations, 
Saskatchewan’s creativity has driven discovery and innovation 
in science, technology and industry throughout our history. 
Research and development will be even more important to our 
economy in our second century than it was in our first. 
 
In the coming year, success will be built on the work of 
Saskatoon’s Innovation Place and Regina’s Research Park, and 
such innovators as our universities, the Canadian Light Source 
Synchrotron, the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, the 
Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, the Saskatchewan 
Forest Centre, the Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization 
and the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
Saskatchewan is fast becoming known as the Science Province. 
 
Agriculture 
 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural sector has benefited from 
significant technological and innovative advancements in the 
past century. Global trade, diversification, and changing 
demographics have also had major impacts on the industry. 
 
In recent years, no other sector has faced such daunting 
challenges including a significant cost/price squeeze. Our 
history is inseparable from the farm economy, and the 
agricultural sector will continue to play a central role in our 
province’s future. 
 
As we build a successful future, livestock and grain production 
sectors will be vital. Farming in Saskatchewan will continue to 
evolve, and we will continue to be leaders in a changing world. 
 
Guided by the recommendations of the Action Committee on 
the Rural Economy, and the advice of other leaders in the 
agricultural sector, we will facilitate further diversification to 
keep pace with growing opportunities. 

Traditional and organic processing will be enhanced. Feedlot 
capacity in the province will be expanded. 
 
In the coming months, the work being done around food 
processing opportunities, such as those at the University of 
Saskatchewan Food Centre will be highlighted, and investment 
in value-added food production will be pursued. Over the next 
two decades, the utilization of our abundant water resources 
will increase the potential of irrigated crops. 
 
My government will fully fund the provincial share of the 
Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization (CAIS) program for 
2005, while continuing to seek improvements to farm programs 
and a fairer share of national support for Saskatchewan farm 
families. 
 
The land that has sustained past generations will sustain 
generations in the future. 
 
Transportation 
 
As our future unfolds, Saskatchewan’s economy and standard 
of living will depend upon a solid transportation network. 
 
During this session, the safety and efficiency of our 
transportation network will be improved by continuing the 
twinning of the TransCanada and Yellowhead highways, with 
an additional 40 kilometers in total to be open to traffic within a 
year. 
 
My government will work with communities to support a 
short-line rail network that links with Canada’s major railways 
and alternate grain handling facilities. 
 
Our vast north has tremendous economic potential and 
transportation is essential in reaching that potential. In addition 
to connecting people with jobs, and industries with resources, 
northern roads are lifelines that connect families with education 
and healthcare services, and connect communities with each 
other and the world. 
 
In September, a major new project connecting La Loche to Fort 
McMurray in Alberta was announced to link these northern 
communities. This is a good example of two provinces working 
together to build a stronger Canada. 
 
In this session, my government will announce a major 
multi-year northern road building strategy that will include an 
all weather road to the far north. This work with northern 
residents and communities will enhance economic development 
and create new opportunities for prosperity. 
 
As part of a long-term vision, the groundwork will be laid for 
twinning the highway between Prince Albert and Saskatoon, 
and for the further development of north-south corridors into 
the United States. 
 
To honour all Saskatchewan Veterans, Highway #2 from Moose 
Jaw to Prince Albert will be named Veterans’ Memorial 
Highway. 
 
 
 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2005 

DIVERSE AND GROWING COMMUNITIES 
 
Our provincial motto is “from many peoples strength.” We 
want our children to grow up together in a Saskatchewan more 
diverse than ever before. 
 
First Nations and Métis People 
 
Our diversity is our strength. While there is much work left to 
do, we are working together to respect our strong First Nations 
and Métis traditions, cultures and teachings. 
 
The upcoming meeting with First Ministers and Aboriginal 
leaders puts national focus on issues of great significance to 
Saskatchewan and ways of working more effectively to 
improve social and economic outcomes for First Nations and 
Métis people. 
 
We are strengthening our relationships in an environment of 
mutual respect. This is demonstrated by working closely with 
First Nations and Métis people in the province, and by 
respecting and building upon their historic Treaty and 
constitutional relationships with the federal government. 
 
Saskatchewan will have communities built upon the history and 
tradition of the First Nations, Métis and immigrant ancestors 
from centuries ago. 
 
Immigration 
 
Just as we did 100 years ago, Saskatchewan is turning again to 
the world and opening our doors to new immigrants. 
 
In partnership with communities, businesses and immigrant 
families, the Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee Program will 
identify and attract thousands of new immigrants to our 
workplaces, farms and businesses. 
 
 When the program is fully operational by 2008, my 
government expects approximately 5,000 new immigrants a 
year will make Saskatchewan their home. 
 
Government will work with our settlement agencies, 
postsecondary institutions, occupational bodies, and other 
partners to connect newcomers to jobs, communities and 
cultural groups - to ease their transition and create a more 
welcoming atmosphere in which they will prosper and thrive. 
 
Communities and Housing 
 
In the future, Saskatchewan communities will be larger and 
more cosmopolitan, requiring sophisticated infrastructure and 
services, and safe and affordable housing. 
 
In the years to come, HomeFirst, the province’s five-year, $200 
million strategy will bring safe, adequate, affordable housing 
and home ownership within reach for thousands of 
lower-income families. 
 
In this session, my government will establish a new Building 
Communities Fund to meet the economic development, cultural, 
social and recreational needs of our province. 
 

The province recognizes that municipalities provide a wide 
range of services to their residents, and will continue to work 
with municipalities to address revenue sharing needs. Efforts 
will be maintained with school divisions, municipalities and 
other stakeholders, to develop a long-term solution to education 
property tax relief that is in the best interests of students and 
taxpayers. 
 
My government will also ensure that individuals and families 
have the support they need to deal with the rise of energy costs. 
My government has introduced the Saskatchewan “Energy 
Share” program to help consumers this winter with the 
increased costs of heating, and will provide support to 
homeowners who make energy-saving upgrades. 
 
Culture and Tourism 
 
Among Saskatchewan’s most attractive features are the creative 
and cultural accomplishments of its people and its communities. 
 
Saskatchewan is known both nationally and internationally as a 
destination for visitors in search of natural beauty, ecotourism, 
and First Nations and Métis cultural experiences. There will be 
growing recognition of Saskatchewan as a world-class venue 
for major sporting and cultural events. 
 
Building on the success of Saskatchewan’s Centennial Gala, 
over the coming months, my government will continue to 
pursue the attraction of major Canadian music events for a year 
of artistic celebration in 2007. 
 
Supporting the social and economic vitality of our communities 
and regions, government will build and support cultural 
industries in the province. 
 
In 2006, the 100th anniversary of the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum and the 15th anniversary of our Saskatchewan 
Communications Network will be celebrated. 
 
Saskatchewan’s film and video industry, already equipped with 
state-of-the art production facilities, is flourishing because of 
our vast landscapes, historical venues and creative, talented and 
professionally trained people. 
 
Support for Saskatchewan’s film and video industry in its 
efforts to attract new productions will be enhanced through 
increases in the film employment tax credit. We will make the 
home of Corner Gas even more competitive and successful. 
 
Saskatchewan has always been a cradle of creativity, and will 
always be a natural and welcoming home for artists of all 
disciplines. 
 
We value for our children culturally rich and diverse 
communities in which they can live and grow. 
 

AN UNBREAKABLE SOCIAL FABRIC: 
NO ONE LEFT BEHIND 

 
Building on sound environmental stewardship and economic 
momentum, over the next twenty years this government 
envisions a Saskatchewan with an unbreakable social fabric. 
My government is determined that on the path to future 



November 7, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

opportunity and prosperity, no one will be left behind. 
 
This social fabric relies heavily on the commitment, dedication 
and generosity of volunteers. Through the Premier’s Voluntary 
Sector Initiative, the province is formalizing its long-standing 
relationship with the thousands of organizations that comprise 
our voluntary sector. Government acknowledges the invaluable 
contribution of the voluntary sector – and individual volunteers 
throughout the province – to our quality of life. 
 
Health 
 
The birthplace of Medicare will continue to be the model 
jurisdiction of publicly funded, universal health care, with fully 
integrated, modern services and facilities. 
 
For the children of today and the children of tomorrow, good 
health begins early. 
 
Over the years, government has heard from many, calling for 
new services in midwifery. In the coming months, support for 
midwifery services will be provided. Midwives will offer their 
skill and training as part of multi-disciplinary teams in hospital 
and community settings, contributing to care that is safe, 
flexible and meets the needs of families. 
 
Work will continue with community service providers to 
support families with programs such as KidsFirst to ensure 
infants get the healthiest start in life. 
 
Pediatric services across the province will be enhanced by the 
development of a Children’s Hospital. This centre of excellence 
for pediatric care, to be located in Saskatoon, will be a 
children's hospital within a hospital, and will feature 
child-centred, concentrated expertise and an integrated 
approach to care. 
 
The training of our health care professionals must be ensured to 
meet the needs of the province. To this end, support for the 
College of Medicine to train future doctors will increase. A new 
state-of-the-art Academic Health Sciences Centre will bring 
health science educators, researchers and students together in 
one facility. In this session, a major investment will be made 
toward this project. 
 
A forward-looking strategy for training, retraining and 
recruiting physicians, nurses and other health professionals, will 
be released this year. There will be particular attention paid to 
ensuring that trained young people are able to find work in 
Saskatchewan’s health care system. 
 
Renewal of our health infrastructure is necessary to provide safe 
patient care and safe working conditions. Construction is 
underway, or will soon begin, on health facilities in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Herbert, Outlook, Regina, Maidstone, 
Preeceville, Humboldt, Swift Current, Moosomin, Saskatoon 
and Yorkton. 
 
Recognizing that substance abuse wreaks personal, social and 
economic havoc, my government will place a high priority on 
the implementation of the Premier’s Project Hope, a three-year 
plan to prevent and treat substance abuse in this province — an 
initiative that was acknowledged recently by the Canadian 

Centre on Substance Abuse. 
 
Saskatchewan’s surgical wait list is declining. Timely and 
appropriate surgical care continues to be a priority for the 
province, a goal that we are achieving with the support of the 
health regions, physicians and other health care providers. 
 
To meet growing needs, diagnostic imaging capacity has been 
enhanced by the addition of equipment and expansion of hours 
of operation. Capacity has increased by 80 per cent from five 
years ago and by the end of March 2006, MRI capacity will 
have increased by over 100 per cent. 
 
Safety and Security 
 
An unbreakable social fabric requires that our communities and 
neighbourhoods are safe. Criminal activity is not tolerated and 
gangs are not welcome in Saskatchewan. My government will 
work with the RCMP, municipal police services and 
communities to disrupt and dismantle organized criminal 
groups. 
 
In this session, legislation will be introduced to curtail gang 
activity, and empower police to combat organized crime. Ways 
will be examined to discourage the recruitment of gang 
members. 
 
In this session, government, Aboriginal leaders, communities, 
police services and other agencies will partner to develop an 
effective province-wide strategy for missing person cases. This 
strategy will include a task force and other initiatives to 
empower citizens to combat domestic and other violence. 
Further, it will ensure that sufficient resources are provided to 
the police so that investigations of violence or missing persons 
are never closed in Saskatchewan until they are solved. 
 
Continuing Saskatchewan’s leadership in innovative justice 
practices, the Aboriginal Court for northern Saskatchewan will 
expand, a new police complaints process will be implemented, 
our domestic violence courts will grow, a Drug Treatment 
Court will be established, and improvements will be made to 
our Coroner’s Office. 
 
This past year, Saskatchewan faced emergencies related to 
severe weather, such as widespread flooding, including in the 
Cumberland House, Arborfield and Lloydminster regions. We 
will work with communities as they continue to rebuild. 
Funding for the Provincial Disaster Assistance Program is being 
increased this year to assist in these efforts. 
 
In the year to come, our emergency management system will be 
strengthened through provincial, community and regional 
delivery of protection and emergency services. 
 
In addition, work is continuing with other provinces, territories, 
the federal government, and regional health authorities to 
develop a federal-provincial influenza pandemic plan. 
 
It is my government’s vision our children will grow up in safe 
and secure neighbourhoods and communities. 
 
 
 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2005 

Working People 
 
Even in the midst of today’s unprecedented prosperity, some 
workers do not earn enough income to adequately provide for 
themselves and their families. Many workers are without health 
and pension benefits. 
15 
As the children of our Centennial enter their working years, it is 
my government’s vision that no one in the Province of 
Saskatchewan will work for wages that leave them in poverty, 
and that every worker in Saskatchewan will have full access to 
health care and pension benefits. 
 
My government is moving ahead on its three-year commitment 
to increase the minimum wage, enhance protection for health 
care workers and firefighters, and better support the balance of 
work and family. 
 
Over the coming months, my government looks forward to 
receiving the report of the Commission on Improving Work 
Opportunities for Saskatchewan Residents. My government will 
act on the Report. 
 
Community-based organizations, and their workers, provide a 
critical array of services such as group homes for persons with 
intellectual disabilities, vocational centres serving persons with 
disabilities, child care, and mobile crisis units for children and 
families. 
 
In order to ensure the stability and effectiveness of 
community-based services to the public, additional funding of 
about $30 million over a three-year period will be provided to 
address issues of staff wages, recruitment and retention for 
these agencies. 
 
Education 
 
As our economy and labour markets grow, Saskatchewan has 
an opportunity to ensure that all of our people benefit from the 
prosperity being created. 
 
To take full advantage of these opportunities, Saskatchewan 
people need to have the tools to succeed at every stage of life. 
 
All children should have the best possible early learning and 
child care experiences, and today’s families should have the 
necessary support and assistance in their communities. To this 
end, a pre-kindergarten program for four-year-olds will be 
established and work will be undertaken to expand high quality 
and accessible child care throughout the province. 
 
My government’s goal is that by the time the children of our 
Centennial graduate from high school, Saskatchewan will lead 
the country in educational achievement and literacy rates. 
 
Our newly restructured school divisions, and the newly 
established Literacy Commission, are well-positioned to 
support this goal. 
 
Skills training and apprenticeship opportunities will be 
expanded to ensure that our training system meets the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. In the coming months, there will be work 
to build on the recommendations of a comprehensive external 

review of the training and apprenticeship system in this 
province. 
 
My government will work with Saskatchewan’s post-secondary 
institutions, including our universities, SIAST, regional colleges 
and First Nations and Métis institutions, to ensure that students 
have access to affordable and high quality learning 
opportunities that build careers here, and meet critical labour 
needs of our province. 
 
Youth 
 
Saskatchewan’s young people are deeply involved in our 
communities and workplaces, shaping this province’s future. 
For example, with government, young people participate in the 
Provincial Youth Advisory Committee, the GradWorks Intern 
Development program, the Leaders of Tomorrow program and 
Saskatchewan’s Green Team. 
 
My government will introduce new Saskatchewan Youth 
Award, to recognize the commitments and accomplishments of 
youth in the province and to show appreciation for those young 
people who have dedicated their time and talents to 
communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
Seniors 
 
As we look forward to our new century, we are reminded of 
those who have brought us to this day – our seniors, our elders. 
With respect and pride, we salute and thank them. They deserve 
the best in their quality of life and health care, with full 
opportunity to participate in the lives of their families and 
communities. 
 
In the coming months, to acknowledge our seniors and elders, 
my government will introduce a Saskatchewan Seniors’ Gold 
Card for residents 65 years of age and older. This will provide a 
source of information, and a passport to a variety of programs. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The year 2005 has been one of celebration and homecoming, of 
thoughtful reflection on our proud history and eager 
anticipation of our future. 
 
In the volunteer capital of Canada, we celebrated our 
cooperative and community spirit, our exemplary work ethic, 
and our famous qualities of compassion and generosity. With a 
team of 6,000 volunteers, we played host to young athletes and 
artists from across the country for the Jeux du Canada Games. 
 
We celebrated with Her Majesty the Queen and His Royal 
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh. 
 
We celebrated our artists in a gala event, we paddled the North 
and walked the South, and we honoured First Nations and Métis 
Women, Veterans and the peace-keepers of today. 
 
We celebrated with our elders. We celebrated with our children. 
 
We lit the living skies with fireworks to usher in a new century. 
 
We celebrated our connections to this land, our connections to 



November 7, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

one another and our connections to the whole human family. 
 
We celebrated our place in Canada. 
 
From the ruggedly beautiful forests and lakes of our 
breathtaking north, to the fertile hills and plains of our 
parklands, to what native son W.O. Mitchell described as the 
skeleton requirements of land and sky, the magnificent 
Saskatchewan prairie, we celebrated our birthright in a land of 
natural wealth and wonder. 
 
As we embark on our second century, let us consider how best 
to secure the birthright of the children of our Centennial. 
 
As we move toward our new century, let us build together a 
green and prosperous economy, and diverse and growing 
communities with an unbreakable social fabric. Let us build a 
province where no one is left behind on the path to opportunity. 
 
Twenty years from now, as we do today, may the children of 
our Centennial sing together, “we are many, we are one…. we 
love this place, Saskatchewan.” 
 
May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 
this Assembly in all its deliberations. 
 
God bless Saskatchewan. God bless Canada. God Save the 
Queen. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 15:18.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that a Bill respecting the Administration of Oaths of 
Office be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 
the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that four of the 
Pages for this session will be Isla Dowling, Julianna Hill, 
Jonathan Moscoso, and Arielle Zerr. Thank you for coming and 
for serving. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: —Mr. Speaker, it is moved by myself, and 
seconded by the Deputy Premier, the member from Yorkton: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Tuesday, November 8, 2005. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Riversdale, the Premier, seconded by the member for Yorkton, 
the Deputy Premier: 

 
That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
be taken into consideration on Tuesday, November 8, 
2005. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, again seconded by 
the Deputy Premier, the member from Yorkton: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, and 
seconded by the Deputy Premier: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the  
adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 
 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2005 

I would like to thank all of the guests and members of the 
public for joining us today. 
 
Thank you to the grade 8 students from White City School, the 
grade 10, 11, and 12 students from Ogema School, and their 
teachers and chaperones for attending today’s ceremony. 
 
Welcome also to the Kamala Youth Choir from the Battlefords. 
I will be calling on them to sing for us in a few moments. 
 
I would like to thank the members of the Reserve Units from 
Saskatchewan for providing us with the Honour Guard this 
afternoon as well as the 10 Field Regiment for the 15-gun 
salute. 
 
Also thanks to Dr. Ed Lewis for playing the viceregal salute 
during today’s ceremonies. 
 
I would also like to invite everyone to join their Honours, the 
Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s Tea which will take 
place immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea 
will be in two locations – Room 218 in the west wing and the 
Library Reading Room in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
I would now like to welcome the Kamala Youth Choir, under 
the direction of, and accompanied by Dianne Gryba and JoAnne 
Kasper. The Kamala Youth Choir is the senior group of the 
Battlefords Children’s Choir organization. The choir takes part 
in numerous community events and festivals. 
 
In 2006 they will be taking part in a festival in Tuscany, Italy 
and will perform in Provence, France with Saskatchewan’s 
renowned baritone, Henri Loiselle. The choir will sing two 
selections for us this afternoon — “Suluhisha” and “Music 
Down in my Soul.” Ladies and gentlemen, the Kamala Youth 
Choir. 
 
[The choir sang.] 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Well, on behalf of all present, I would like to 
thank the choir for that very special treat, for that very, very fine 
performance and they will be performing for us again in the 
rotunda following this ceremony. 
 
One final announcement. I ask that members and guests observe 
the following order when departing from the Chamber: the 
Speaker’s Party, then Her Honour’s special party, followed by 
the Premier and Mrs. Calvert, the Leader of the Opposition; the 
Judges of the Court of Appeal, Queen's Bench, and Provincial 
Court — and thank you for being with us again today; members 
of the cabinet and their spouses; other members of the 

Legislative Assembly and their spouses; and then finally 
everybody else. 
 
This House does now stand adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 
p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:37.] 
 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................1 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Pro Forma Bill 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
  The Speaker...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
MOTIONS 
 Speech from the Throne 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
  Calvert ...........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


