
















































Hansard: November 23, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 11A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 371 
 November 23, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition with citizens who are concerned of the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Lake Lenore, Foam 
Lake, Saskatoon, Humboldt, Watson, Archerwill, and some I 
can’t even read, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve SaskTel cellular service in rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway 19 in the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are protected for reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Hawarden, Saskatoon, 
Strongfield, Loreburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
for improved cellular telephone coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in regions 
encompassing the constituency of Biggar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I arise with a petition 
today on the deplorable condition of Highway 368 and the 
prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it is signed by the good people of Annaheim, St. Brieux, 
St. Gregor, Humboldt, and Lake Lenore. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received and pursuant to rule 14(7) hereby read and 
received sessional paper no. 26 and addendums to previously 
tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 27, 2, 5, 7, 18, and 
22. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: has the 
Department of Agriculture and Food prepared any briefs to 
be presented at the upcoming WTO conference in Hong 
Kong? 
 

Supplementary: will any officials from the Department of 
Agriculture and Food be attending the upcoming talks in Hong 
Kong? 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure this afternoon to introduce three 
people seated in the east gallery. I have had the opportunity to 
introduce two of them a number of times before because on a 
regular basis my dad comes in for his regular cancer checkup. 
And that’s what he’s doing again here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce my dad, Peter 
Krawetz; and my stepmother, Sophie; and Sophie’s son-in-law, 
Ron Mackie, has joined them. And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to 
also indicate that the month of November is my dad’s birth 
month, and back on I think November 1 he celebrated his 88th 
birthday. 
 
But also during November he made an announcement that he’s 
officially retiring from one of his jobs. And one of his jobs has 
been to be a cantor in the Ukrainian Orthodox church for 60 
years, and he’s now decided to retire. So I’d like all the 
members to join me in welcoming my dad, my stepmother, and 
Ron Mackie to the Assembly this afternoon. 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
pleasure today to introduce to the House and welcome to the 
House through you, sir, a number of visitors who are seated in 
your gallery. In your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, we have 
Vice-Chief Don Deranger, of the Prince Albert Grand Council; 
Isidore Desjarlais and Isidore Campbell, from the Northwest 
Regional Development Council; Ron Merasty, editor of the 
Prince Albert Tribune; and Napoleon Mercredi, of the area 
transportation committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals from our beautiful North are in 
the capital today to share with us in the announcement of Roads 
to Prosperity, our northern Saskatchewan infrastructure project. 
I thank them for travelling the great distance to be here. We 
welcome you to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition I want to join with the Premier in welcoming our 
guests in your gallery today, Vice-Chief Deranger, and others 
that have joined him here in the gallery. And you know, the 
announcement earlier today of a northern roads strategy is 
something that the Saskatchewan Party has certainly advocated 
for. And we’re grateful that they could join us today in the 
Assembly. We join with the Premier and welcoming them here 
as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — [The member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your time, and I’d like to ask all 
members of the Assembly to welcome with our special guests 
that come from 1,200 kilometres away, a group of 20 students 
from the Pinehouse Lake School. And with them today are their 
teachers and Ron — well their chaperones and I think Ron is 
the principal there as well — Ron Skage and Jacquie Skage. 
I’m not sure if Jacquie is Ron’s wife or daughter; the verdict is 
out. And we also have Raymond Iron and Rayna Natomagan. 
 
And I just basically told the students in Cree, Mr. Speaker, to 
not be afraid of the size of the building, nor the importance of it, 
but to embrace it and to learn from it, and to visit as many 
people as they can, and to tell them that they’re very welcome 
to this Assembly. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see that 

we’ve been joined by a former colleague of ours, Lewis Draper, 
who used to represent the constituency of Gravelbourg, always 
very colourful. It’s wonderful to have you back here again, 
Lewis. I know he’s very active yet in his community, and we 
see him around the Legislative Building quite frequently. So 
welcome back. And please join with me in welcoming Lewis 
back to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Publication of The Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour today to rise on 
behalf of the official opposition and congratulate the Canadian 
Plains Research Center on the production of The Encyclopedia 
of Saskatchewan. The phrase, no small feat, has been used 
many times but perhaps never more appropriately than in the 
case of The Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan, a project which was 
over nine years in development and benefited from the 
contribution of over 800 writers, making it the largest 
educational publishing project in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
The result, Mr. Speaker, is a truly remarkable piece of work 
featuring 2,300 entries and over 1,000 charts, maps, and tables 
covering all aspects of life in Saskatchewan, which taken 
together serve as a testament to the rich history of this province 
and the diversity of people and geography that continues to 
define the Saskatchewan experience. 
 
We have a lot to celebrate in Saskatchewan, as our centennial 
has served to remind us, and the encyclopedia documents it. It 
is fitting therefore that the production of this outstanding 
reference guide should occur in this our province’s centennial 
year. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, thank you to David 
Gauthier, the staff of the Plains Research Center, and all the 
volunteers who contributed countless hours to provide us with 
this important new reference work that will benefit the people 
of Saskatchewan for many years to come. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina. 
 

HMCS Queen receives Fenco MacLaren Trophy 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it has been said the 
best sailors come from the Prairies. And I’m proud to tell you 
the best sailors in Canada are the crew of HMCS [Her 
Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Queen, Regina’s naval reserve 
division which trains and parades in my constituency. 
 
Earlier this month Queen’s officers and sailors were presented 
with the Fenco MacLaren Trophy which recognizes outstanding 
achievement in an operational environment by an individual, 
group, or team. 



November 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

Queen’s accomplishments over the past year include dedication 
to change and commitment to leadership which has resulted in 
continuous improvement in administration and training; 
organizing the Saskatchewan ceremony marking the 60th 
anniversary of the Allied victory in Europe; coordinating the 
naval participation in the royal visit of Her Majesty the Queen 
and the Duke of Edinburgh to Saskatchewan; providing 
on-water support for canoeing, kayaking, rowing, and sailing 
events during the Canada Summer Games; and hosting two 
namesake city visits by representatives of the West Coast 
frigate, HMCS Regina, including their participation in the 
Labour Day Classic football game. 
 
According to Queen’s Commanding Officer, Lieutenant 
Commander John Bell, he has always had high expectations for 
his sailors. At every opportunity, his sailors meet and exceed 
these expectations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all honourable members to join me in 
wishing Bravo Zulu, well done, to the officers and sailors of 
Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship, Queen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Carrot River Wildcats Win Provincial Championship 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week my colleague from Saskatoon Silver Springs lamented the 
fact that the Saskatchewan Roughriders had never won a Grey 
Cup under the suffocating influence of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. 
 
There is however, Mr. Speaker, a team that has been successful 
in spite of an oppressive government. And last Saturday, Mr. 
Speaker, the Carrot River Wildcats won the provincial six-man, 
2A championship. The Wildcats won in fine fashion, defeating 
the Clavet Cougars by a score of 54-22. It was a fine day for 
football in Carrot River, Mr. Speaker, with a crowd of over 700 
people out to cheer on their respective favourites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six- and nine-man football has provided many 
post-secondary football players in the past few years. From my 
constituency alone, Mr. Speaker, Darryl Leason, a star with the 
Regina Rams, is from Hudson Bay. And former Roughrider 
star, Bob Poley, is from Prairie River, who also played his high 
school football in Hudson Bay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the fact in our house, our son 
Tyrel, who played his high school football with the Loreburn 
Aztecs, has been part of a national junior football championship 
with the Saskatoon Hilltops. Loreburn by the way, Mr. Speaker, 
holds the world record for most provincial or state 
championships in six-man football with eight. 
 
The list of success stories to come out of rural Saskatchewan 
and high school athletics goes on and on. But one thing is 
certain, Mr. Speaker. Young athletes and young people from 
rural Saskatchewan are proving again and again in whatever 
their endeavours that they can compete with anyone, any time, 
anywhere. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Combating Racism 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker: 
 

To be destructive is fast and easy, while to be constructive 
requires thought and sustained hard work. Acts of 
destruction can be portrayed in a single headline; while the 
constructive response to a difficult issue is more of a 
struggle, taking time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are the well-considered words of David 
Arnott, Saskatchewan’s Treaty Commissioner. He’s talking 
specifically about our ongoing struggle with racism. Mr. 
Speaker, although racism certainly exists in Saskatchewan, 
steps are being taken to combat it, and some progress is being 
made. For example Saskatchewan’s Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner has recently received the Canadian Race 
Relations Foundation’s biennial Award of Excellence for its 
anti-racism programs. And for these public education programs 
the Treaty Commissioner’s office received similar recognition 
last year from the United Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these programs promote a deeper understanding of 
the spirit and intent of treaties, First Nations heritage, and the 
destructive nature of racism. They speak to the realities of our 
shared past and present that have to be acknowledged as we 
move together as a people into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner on receiving this prestigious award and for all it 
is doing in partnership with teachers, administrators, and First 
Nations to ensure a positive and vibrant future of all people here 
in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Maple Creek’s Wall of Remembrance Memorial 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 11 I 
had the honour of attending the Remembrance Day ceremony in 
Maple Creek, and that same day I witnessed the unveiling of the 
Wall of Remembrance, a memorial to the men of the area who 
served and perished in World War II. About one year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Jack Shepard of Maple Creek initiated the Wall of 
Remembrance project. Now this wall was modelled after the 
wall erected by the Legion in the community of Abbey, which 
contains 18 photo tributes there. 
 
With the passing, however, of Jack Shepard in February of this 
year, members of the Maple Creek Legion took it upon 
themselves to complete the project that Jack Shepard had 
begun. The Wall of Remembrance in Maple Creek displays the 
photo tributes of 23 servicemen from Maple Creek and other 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

communities in the surrounding area. 
 
Mr. Doug Chisholm of La Ronge created the photo tributes 
displayed on that Wall of Remembrance. Mr. Chisholm’s 
profession as a pilot led him to a passionate venture of 
photography, where he’d go and take pictures of the geographic 
locations in northern Saskatchewan that are named after the 
World War II servicemen and women. The photo of each 
serviceman as well as the photo of the geographic site named 
after him is displayed on that tribute. His name, his unit, home 
town, casualty date, and burial location is also included. 
 
It was a great honour to have the opportunity to attend this 
commemorative event along with representatives from the 
families of the many servicemen whose pictorial tributes hang 
on that Wall of Remembrance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to recognize the members of the Maple 
Creek Legion for their efforts in the creation of this wall, and 
other Legions around the province where similar projects have 
been undertaken. It’s important that we remember the efforts 
and sacrifices made by those who served in the war in order to 
protect our future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Community Housing Registry Database Unveiled 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday it was my great 
pleasure to attend the unveiling of the Core Community 
Association’s community housing registry database. 
 
The registry is the product of a partnership between the Core 
Community Association, Ehrlo Community Services, the 
United Way of Regina, and about 10,000 hours of volunteer 
work. It provides an inventory of all the properties in the core 
area and a description of their condition. 
 
The registry is a big step forward in the Core Community 
Association’s efforts to improve housing conditions in their 
neighbourhood. The project will also serve as a great 
complement to the work underway with the provincial 
HomeFirst program and the efforts of the Inner City 
Community Partnership’s by-law standards enforcement team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project is community driven, and while it’s 
directly focused on housing issues, the registry provides a 
valuable tool to support efforts at improving the overall quality 
of life in the core neighbourhood. 
 
The Core Community Association’s executive director, Leila 
Francis, put it like this, and I quote: 
 

We are going to take the community back. We are going to 
remove slum housing. We are going to decrease crime. 
And we are going to make the housing safe and affordable 
for all our community residents. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government will be working alongside 
the core every step of the way. 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating association Chair, 
Glen Trafford, executive director, Leila Francis, the staff and 
volunteers of the Core Community Association as well as their 
partners on building this valuable tool for the critical work of 
enhancing and improving housing in the core community, the 
heart of Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Blogging and Saskatchewan Issues 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In today’s 
world almost everyone has heard of blogs. Even the Minister of 
Learning has heard of them. Last week he even quoted from one 
of the more prominent blogs that reports on Saskatchewan 
issues. 
 
The minister took issue with smalldeadanimals — one word — 
.com blogger Catherine McMillan’s opinion that our leader, the 
member for Swift Current, is the real thing. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister said that he thinks that bloggers are totally irrelevant. 
The Minister of Learning, during his Speech to the Throne on 
November 14 said, and I quote: 
 

. . . but I will tell you that the Saskatchewan people that 
are going to . . . the polls in the next election are not going 
to be swayed by . . . small dead animals. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, smalldeadanimals.com and the bloggers had 
something to say about this. Readers of her blog would know 
that McMillan was very happy to be mentioned by the minister. 
In fact she called getting slagged in the provincial legislature by 
Learning minister Andrew Thomson a high point of her blog. 
 
Blogger Shane O. had this to say: 
 

If you can pull off that kind of influence, Kate, and 
actually kick the Sask socialists out of power — you may 
just convince me to move my family back to 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The minister may be interested in knowing that 
smalldeadanimals.com had more than 1.2 million hits, averaged 
4,000 a day and 29,000 a week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
quote if I can from the front page of today’s Prince Albert 
Herald under the headline “Mill deal unplugged?” The article 
begins — and I’m quoting now, Mr. Speaker — it says: 
 

Poor treatment by the province and task force leader Eldon 



November 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

Lautermilch could kill a deal with Chinese investors 
interested in the Weyerhaeuser plant . . . 
 

In the article there are many other comments from the 
representative of these potential investors about that minister, 
Mr. Speaker, the member for P.A. Northcote, and about the way 
he has already mishandled this file. The question to the Premier 
is direct this afternoon. The question is simple: will he remove 
that member from the task force? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 
not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the representative of the potential 
investors for this deal had this to say about the actions about the 
member for P.A. Northcote in his capacity as the task force 
Chair. He said he was flabbergasted, disgusted and astonished. 
He went on to say that the minister’s handling of this particular 
deal and this opportunity was an absolute joke. So maybe the 
Premier wants to explain why he will not remove that member 
from the task force. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would want to begin by saying I’m pleased to have 
the opportunity to provide some clarity on this matter. First of 
all I want members of the opposition to understand the 
government’s role in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, the minister please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Understand the government’s role 
in the sale of these assets. First of all the task force is providing 
a forum to share information and to improve . . . how to 
improve long-term viability of our forest sector. And it’s not the 
task force’s role to pick winners or losers. Nor is it the role to 
negotiate the sale of Weyerhaeuser’s assets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition I want to say we’ve established a technical team of 
forest and investment experts who have been working with 
Weyerhaeuser to help to secure a buyer for the assets as quickly 
as possible. And I want to say as well, I’m quite convinced that 
we’re going to be successful. We’ve got some very positive 
candidates, some very good quality candidates who have been 
working with Weyerhaeuser in a positive way in an attempt to 
bring this to a positive conclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 

Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that minister just highlights 
what he thinks the role of the task force is. He’s the Chair of 
this task force. He’s been assigned to help solve this problem, to 
pursue possible opportunities. 
 
I wonder if it’s his role, Mr. Speaker, to return phone calls, to 
have the common decency to return phone calls to his office 
made by people who represent others that want to employ 
700-plus of his constituents and keep that plant open? Is 
returning phone calls part of the role of the government, Mr. 
Speaker? The minister might want to answer. Is his role to do 
something about the cogeneration issue so that there is a viable 
option for this pulp and paper mill? Is that part of his role? 
 
And if neither of those things are, I ask the Premier again, will 
he fire that minister from the task force? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say clearly 
the role of my staff and myself is to return phone calls when 
they’re made. And I want to say as well, we have a pretty good 
track record in terms of communicating with people who 
choose to communicate with us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I want to do today is, with respect to this article, table a 
letter that I think will help clarify this issue in a very positive 
way because what it does is it outlines four demands that the 
person in this article has put before the people of this province 
with specific reference to these demands. I want to share them 
with the Leader of the Opposition so he will know. 
 
First of all, he has been told on the first two demands that we 
will negotiate on a proposed biomass cogeneration and on 
power production, as well we will negotiate the wood supplied. 
But I’ll tell you on the third and the fourth, Mr. Speaker, we 
will not negotiate because one of his demands is that we get rid 
of all of the environmental legislation and regulations that that 
mill operates under. And that’s not negotiable. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to unilaterally scrap 
the contract between Weyerhaeuser and their employees. We’re 
not . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser — Weyerhaeuser, 
who operated in this province and still do — and other large 
industrial operatives, people who operate plants and employ 
people in this province have consistently highlighted this 
government’s intransigence and refusal to allow cogeneration 
and the wielding of power as a way to create and sustain jobs in 
the province. What this episode has proved to us again, what it 
has proved to us again is that minister is incompetent. As he 
was on SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

Company], he is here as well. 
 
Will he stand up and do the right thing, Mr. Speaker, and 
commit that this government will act on the cogeneration issue 
so there is a future in P.A. [Prince Albert] at that mill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell the 
Leader of the Opposition what we will do. We’ll continue to 
negotiate with the legitimate people who have come forth and 
who have been made . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the leader of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party may be willing to tear up 
negotiated contracts between private sector companies and their 
employers. And they may be willing to support individuals who 
ask of this government to absolutely eliminate and eradicate 
environmental law as it relates to industries operating in this 
province. I’m going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I tell the 
people of Prince Albert, we are not going to be doing that. 
 
This environment is important to us. These contracts, these jobs 
are important to us. And this is nothing but another attack by a 
right-wing, provincial Conservative Party leader in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to work to protect those 
700 jobs. He can play politics all he wants, Mr. Speaker. He 
should make his position clear on those items. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if that Premier doesn’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if that Premier doesn’t fire that 
member from this task force, then we won’t have to worry 
about a contract and the jobs at the Weyerhaeuser pulp and 
paper mill because he’s going to see to it that that mill closes 
without an option if he doesn’t smarten up on these basic issues 
of cogeneration and what’s been presented to him by the 
government, not just by these proponents, but by others, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order members. Order, order, order. 
Members will allow the question to be put. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the article goes on to 
say in the P.A. Herald today. In addition to referencing that 
minister’s conduct as an absolute joke and the fact that he does 
not return phone calls, it goes on to say this particular 
representative of the deal is going to tell others who are looking 

at Saskatchewan. He says, quote: 
 

“I will do everything I can do to persuade them to look 
elsewhere as long as this government’s in power.” 
 

Because, Mr. Speaker, what we have not heard from the 
government on Weyerhaeuser is that they’re prepared to move 
on capital tax, that they’re prepared to move on dues, or that 
they’re prepared to move on cogeneration. Will the minister 
commit to make those fundamental changes that will make the 
project viable in Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the leader of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party has a responsibility in this 
House to tell us where he stands. Does he support Ekstrand’s 
demand that we scrap a negotiated agreement between 
Weyerhaeuser and its employees? Does he support that? Does 
he support the elimination of labour laws as it relates to the pulp 
and paper operations in Prince Albert? Do you support that? 
Yes or no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this whole argument 
turns on whether or not we accept the word of the minister 
responsible for SPUDCO. That’s what it turns on, this minister 
who misled the people of this province for six years about 
SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. You know what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. I ask members 
on both sides to come to order. The Chair recognizes the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, here’s a chance for 
that minister of this government or the Premier or somebody 
over there to stand up and say they’re prepared to act on the 
cogeneration issue. Whether it’s this project, this potential 
project, or another one, they all say the same thing. And that 
minister, in correspondence that we’ve seen, refuses to talk 
about it. He says, well maybe we’ll negotiate a separate deal. 
 
When will the government get the fundamentals right? When 
will it get its job right in the dilemma that’s at Prince Albert? 
When will it do the right thing on cogeneration, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, again you’ve got the 
leader of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party who won’t 
listen. I indicated quite clearly just a few minutes ago that we 



November 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

were more than willing to enter into negotiations with respect to 
biomass, with respect to cogeneration, with people who 
Weyerhaeuser will choose to do business with, Mr. Speaker, 
understanding that it’s Weyerhaeuser who will choose who the 
purchasers or the potential purchasers are, not us. We don’t own 
that asset. Weyerhaeuser owns the asset. 
 
But I’ll tell you what we will do, Mr. Speaker. We will ensure 
that there are sound environmental regulations and legislations 
when a new owner comes, just as there are now with 
Weyerhaeuser. And I want to know if he’s made any kind of 
commitment with respect to scrapping labour legislation and 
labour laws and environmental laws to Mr. Ekstrand — yes or 
no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just got the letter that the minister 
tabled. I can’t believe it, Mr. Speaker. The point that he’s 
referring to, point number 3, talks about the fact that the new 
owner is going to be looking for labour, environmental, and 
governmental agreements that they agreed to. It’s subject to 
negotiation. That’s what it says. It would be part of a 
negotiation of a deal. 
 
But do you know what, Mr. Speaker? There probably isn’t a 
deal to negotiate because these people have had enough, Mr. 
Speaker, of this government and that minister. Will the minister 
explain why he, moments ago, just misled the House about a 
document that he tabled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . the third demand into the record 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. There was nothing that was able to be 
heard, members. I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me read the third article into the 
record, Mr. Speaker. And I quote from Mr. Ekstrand’s letter: 
 

. . . will not be held liable for or committed to any existing 
labour [law], environmental or governmental agreements 
excepting with the approval of the new owner. 
 

That’s one of his demands, Mr. Speaker. Does that member 
agree to it or does he not? Mr. Speaker, this is the same leader 
of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party who said he is going to 
war with organized labour. Now we know. Now we believe 
him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure it’s good for 
taxpayers, but for the purposes of debate it’s good to have angry 
Homer back in the House, isn’t it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The point of the fact that the letter that that minister tabled is 
that they want to negotiate these things. That’s what they’re 
saying. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think they want to negotiate 
any longer because that government refuses to move on 
cogeneration. The state-owned electrical company won’t 
negotiate with them on cogeneration. Imagine the irony of the 
communist Chinese being unable to do a deal because there’s 
too much state-owned enterprise in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Will that minister make a commitment today to 
do the right thing on cogen and help this project help saves jobs 
in the city of P.A.? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, for the information of 
the leader of the Conservative Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Ekstrand has been told that we are willing to negotiate 
cogeneration, biomass. Biomass and cogeneration. It’s part of 
our Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear that that’s 
where this province is headed. Are we willing to do that? Of 
course we are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out this. There are more than five, 
less than ten credible private sector forest companies who are 
now in the process of giving information to Weyerhaeuser so 
that they can be shortlisted to enter into negotiations. Mr. 
Speaker, the only one who’s negotiating in the Prince Albert 
Daily Herald is Mr. Ekstrand. Maybe that member can tell us 
why. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Sale of Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development  
Company Equipment 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More people in 
Saskatchewan are very skeptical about anything the minister 
from P.A. says. He’s the NDP sequel to Pulp Fiction. Mr. 
Speaker, we all remember another deal that that minister was 
involved in. It was the botched SPUDCO deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2003 Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation 
sold some of the SPUDCO potato equipment to Cavendish 
Farms of Prince Edward Island for about $750,000. The sale 
was not tendered. No one else was given a chance to bid on the 
equipment. Why not, Mr. Speaker? Why did the NDP cut this 
special deal with Cavendish, and what was the total value of the 
equipment that the government sold for $750,000? 
 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 
Safety and Corrections. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t have knowledge of the details of this sale. I’ll 
take notice of the question, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order please. 
Would the minister repeat please because I was not able to hear 
the remarks. They were not on the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take notice of 
the question and provide the member with an answer when I 
have the information. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand how the 
minister can’t know, when this question was a written question 
asked in this House before. The answer, the $750,000 is on the 
record. You’d think the minister would know what equipment 
was involved in the deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one actually knew how much equipment . . . 
No one in the public has been told how much equipment 
Cavendish got from SPUDCO because they never really used 
that equipment. It sat in their storage facility for three years 
until earlier this fall when it had to be removed to do some 
repair work. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has obtained pictures of the brand new 
equipment that the NDP practically gave away to Cavendish 
industries. Mr. Speaker, you can even see a piece of equipment 
with the C-O of SPUDCO painted over, so it says SPUD. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we estimate that this equipment is worth about $3 
million, and yet the NDP sold it untendered for $750,000. Mr. 
Speaker, why did the NDP agree to this sweetheart deal? Why 
weren’t local potato farmers also allowed to bid on this 
equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — I indicated to the member I’ll be taking 
notice. And I take notice of this question as well, and I will 
provide him with an answer as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we had the first 
minister answering questions, just blowing a bunch of hot air. 
This minister doesn’t even know his portfolio. 
 
The NDP keeps telling us that SPUDCO was supposed to grow 

the potato industry. So why on earth did they give away 
millions and millions of dollars of potato equipment to a PEI 
[Prince Edward Island] company that took that equipment and 
locked it up in a potato storage bin so it could not be used? This 
equipment could have been sold to local Saskatchewan potato 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. It could have been tendered out — the 
proper, responsible thing to do. Instead it’s been gathering dust. 
It’s been depreciating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to get to the bottom of this. Why did that 
minister, why did that NDP government agree to cut a 
sweetheart deal with Cavendish potatoes and undersell that 
equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
indicated to the member I’m taking notice, and he will have an 
answer. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Federal Financial Assistance for Farmers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, today the stress level on farms in Saskatchewan went 
down a wee bit. The federal government finally got the message 
that our farmers in Saskatchewan need help. For that matter, 
farmers across this country need help in the grain and oilseed 
industry. 
 
And in their announcement today I believe it was $755 million 
for farms, farmers — 250 approximately of that coming to 
Saskatchewan. And in their announcement, Mr. Speaker, they 
used the word that they would invite the provincial government 
to put their share in for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
The first question today is: will that minister and that 
government take their . . . answer their question and put that 
money in for Saskatchewan farmers, the provincial share, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think it’s important to clarify first of all that I 
expect that the member opposite is using the article that 
appeared in the Leader-Post this morning which is full of 
inaccuracies. 
 
And clearly, Mr. Speaker, in the discussions that I had with the 
federal minister last night, it was very clear that there was no 
intention for the provincial government to be pressed in any 
way. He recognizes clearly the amount of money that we have 
put into agriculture in this past couple of years, and he 
recognizes clearly that across this country provincial 



November 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

governments have been stretched as they have supported 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And therefore in the press release from the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Department of Agriculture there is clearly 
no reference — no reference, Mr. Speaker — to any extra 
provincial contributions at all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well some of the 
reports that we’re getting then are totally inaccurate because 
according to what we’ve read today, that at least three other 
provinces have agreed to put their money up front and put it in. 
And as usual, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan NDP government 
has said, no they will not come to the plate for Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about a month ago, we wrote Mr. Goodale and we 
wrote Mr. Mitchell, the Agriculture minister for the federal 
government. And we asked that government to support us at 
that time, telling the federal government what a predicament our 
farmers were in — the emergency situation, the need of money 
out here on the family farm. And that government’s response at 
that time was no; they will not support us. In fact the Deputy 
Premier made the comment that the CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] program was adequate; crop 
insurance was adequate, and there was no need for emergency 
aid. 
 
I find it amazing that the federal government has seen fit to help 
Saskatchewan farmers, and that government, even though they 
say there’s not a problem, see what the federal government has 
done and once again will not help Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will that minister reconsider, or will the Premier 
reconsider and help Saskatchewan farmers get through till next 
spring and help put next spring’s crop in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again I 
need to point out that the article in the Leader-Post was 
incredibly inaccurate. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there are not three 
provinces that have agreed. The other provinces talk about the 
programs that they have done as we do — the extra funds that 
have been put into agriculture, the funding programs that we 
have. That’s what they talked about. There’s ASRA [farm 
income stabilization insurance program] in Quebec. There’s a 
market program in Ontario. And in Alberta they have done their 
own unilateral adjustments to the CAIS program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here over the last two years, $1.2 billion into 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. That is a significant amount for this 
province. Mr. Speaker, we have pointed out many times the 
disproportionate amount of weight that this province must carry 
in supporting agriculture relative to the other provinces — in 

CAIS, 10 times the provincial per capita average. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have been there. And in fact this year, we 
announced the 2005 CAIS full funding far earlier — far earlier, 
Mr. Speaker — than the 2006 budget in order to help take stress 
off our farmers so that they could plan, so that they would know 
that support would be for them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, last month when we asked for help from the federal 
government and we asked for support from that government, 
which we didn’t get, APAS [Agricultural Producers Association 
of Saskatchewan] agreed with us. And they said also — and 
they’d been lobbying on behalf of farmers — farmers need 
help. Here’s their comment today. They say that: 
 

“This announcement is a good opportunity for the 
provincial government to make a wise investment in the 
economy through agriculture . . . The provincial 
government can show its support to producers by matching 
any portion of the federal funding or reducing taxes on 
agricultural farmland.” 

 
Here’s another promise that that Premier has made to farmers. 
If they won’t put any money into this emergency aid program, 
will they at least lower the education portion of property taxes 
for farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, not only is the 
newspaper report inaccurate but so are the quotes of the 
Conservatives opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly we have been arguing for further support 
for farmers in Saskatchewan. We have pointed out the billion 
dollars — Mr. Speaker, I say billion dollars — in trade injury 
that this province has suffered annually since the federal 
government unilaterally chose to cut subsidies. 
 
We have been struggling, Mr. Speaker, to get this federal 
government to take its responsibility seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are thankful, we are thankful that this 
federal government has finally acknowledged our letters, our 
verbal petitions, our phone calls, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re glad the Sask Party does provide some support 
occasionally. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are thankful for this money and the 
money in the spring and the help that it will provide the 
Saskatchewan producers. Thank you. 
 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Roads to Prosperity — Saskatchewan’s Northern  
Economic Infrastructure Strategy 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. All members of the Legislative Assembly are aware of 
the fundamental importance of transportation to 
Saskatchewan’s economy. We live in a province where 
two-thirds of the provincial GDP [gross domestic product] is 
generated by exports that are sent to the farthest corners of the 
world. The industries that are propelling the province to new 
levels of prosperity — mining, energy, tourism, manufacturing, 
agricultural value-added processing — are all driven by 
transportation. 
 
While we have in this province the most extensive network of 
highways and roads in the country, in many parts of northern 
Saskatchewan transportation infrastructure remains 
undeveloped. 
 
This past summer the Premier travelled extensively throughout 
northern Saskatchewan visiting with community leaders, key 
stakeholders, and the people of the North. 
 
In virtually every community we heard concerns about the state 
of transportation infrastructure in the region. These concerns 
were not new to us. This government has been working in 
partnership with northerners to improve the transportation 
system in the region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we currently invest in the order of $30 million 
annually to build, operate, and maintain the northern 
transportation system. And our partnerships with organizations 
like three northern area transportation planning committees, the 
Athabasca Economic Development & Training Corporation, 
and the Hatchet Lake band are providing northerners with the 
opportunity to play a direct role in the ongoing planning, 
development, and maintenance of the transportation system. 
 
Despite these efforts we’ve not gone far enough in providing 
access and mobility in the region. This places barriers to both 
economic and social prosperity in the North. Increasingly 
northerners see transportation as the key to unlocking the 
economic and social development potential of the North. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, this government is responding in a manner 
that demonstrates the unwavering commitment we have to our 
northern citizens. This morning I had the honour of joining with 
Premier Calvert and Vice-chief Don Deranger of the Prince 
Albert Grand Council to unveil Road to Prosperity, 
Saskatchewan’s northern economic infrastructure strategy. This 
is the single most significant investment in transportation in 
northern Saskatchewan’s history. Through this strategy we will 
invest 65.5 million over the next five to seven years to develop 
northern Saskatchewan’s transportation system. 
 
This strategy is based on four pillars. 

First we leverage this investment to generate capacity-building 
opportunities for northerners. The primary purpose of the 
capacity-building initiative is to ensure benefits are maximized 
for northerners. Northerners should be involved in construction 
projects in a manner that has lasting economic development 
benefits. 
 
Capacity building means providing opportunities for 
northerners to strengthen or impart specific job skills that will 
directly be transferable to the economic opportunities 
transportation infrastructure enables; to develop skills in local 
organizations that improve their ability to play a lead role in the 
ongoing planning, development, and operation of infrastructure 
in the North; and to support business development; to 
participate in the management of complex projects as well, sir. 
 
Through the capacity-building component, northerners will 
work in true partnership to deliver on the strategy’s second 
pillar — a principal road network for northern Saskatchewan, 
essential to economic development and social well-being. 
 
There exists in the North significant untapped economic 
potential, particularly in mining, tourism, and forest industries. 
The development of a principal northern road network that 
improves connections to the rest of the province and beyond 
will make the investment in the region more attractive and 
stimulate development. Improving access to and mobility in the 
North will assist entrepreneurs and businesses in creating 
economic activity where northern residents can participate in 
the production of goods and services that are in great demand 
around the world. 
 
The third pillar of the strategy involves improving community 
access to the principal system. Currently some of our northern 
communities have no access or very limited road access. For 
example, Wollaston Lake’s ground access to the rest of the 
province by barge that can only operate when the lake is 
ice-free or by an ice road that can only operate when ice is 
frozen to a sufficient depth. The result is this community only 
has access to reliable ground transportation for four to five 
months of the year. 
 
Many other northern communities rely on substandard gravel 
roads that provide the only link from their community to the 
province’s social and economic life. This situation makes 
access to vital services like heath care and education — that the 
rest of us take for granted — very difficult. And in many 
communities it results in exorbitant prices for vital staples. For 
example, the cost of a 4-litre jug of milk in Stony Rapids is 
about $12. 
 
As residents of Saskatchewan, northerners have a right to basic 
transportation infrastructure that provides them with the 
opportunity to capture their social and economic development 
potential. 
 
The fourth pillar of this strategy is to employ flexible funding 
strategies that will enable us to use our $65.5 million 
commitment to lever federal government cost sharing on 
specific projects such as construction of an all-weather road in 
the Athabasca basin. 
 
At the announcement this morning, Chief Deranger very clearly 



November 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

articulated the responsibility of the federal government to 
contribute to the development of transportation in the North. 
Our industry partners in the North recognize the benefits of 
improved transportation links to, not only their own operations, 
but to the broader economic and social aspirations of 
northerners. To this end we will continue to work with them to 
encourage their participation in both the development of critical 
infrastructure and the capacity-building objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this potential in the North is virtually limitless. 
There’s an abundance of opportunity in mining, energy, 
tourism, fishing, and other industries. Most importantly, sir, 
there’s tremendous human potential in the region. By improving 
economic infrastructure in the North, we are opening doors to 
economic and social development in the region, but we’re doing 
much more than that. We’re creating a legacy that will benefit 
the entire province for generations to come. 
 
2005 marks the province’s centennial year. The time is now to 
provide northerners the opportunity to fully develop the 
potential of their people and their communities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On a point of order, I wish to advise the 
member that he did refer to another member by surname, and 
the member should only refer to other members by their titles or 
by the name of their constituencies. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
minister for sending me a copy of his statement on the northern 
road strategy. I had the opportunity to listen to the Premier and 
the Highways minister deliver the announcement this morning. 
 
This is good news for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
They will no longer have to pay 12 to $14 for 4 litres of milk. 
They will have the ability to be connected to neighbouring 
communities in the rest of the province. They will be able to 
develop not only the economic potential of the North, but the 
social and human potential as well. 
 
And while the announcement itself is a good news for the 
people of northern Saskatchewan, the minister made a point 
when he said that Saskatchewan’s contribution to the northern 
highways in the past has been insufficient — insufficient, Mr. 
Speaker. That comment speaks about many parts of this NDP 
government and very aptly describes the party’s commitment to 
the roads in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As we heard this morning, the northern roads proposal has been 
in negotiation and discussion phase since 1998. That is seven 
years, Mr. Speaker, and will take up to an additional seven 
years to complete this project. So the people of northern 
Saskatchewan will have been waiting for nearly 14 years to 
have sufficient transportation infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan we heard this morning is light on details. 
The minister did not say when construction would start. The 
minister did not say what roads will be fixed or even if new 
ones will be built. He did say, however, to wait until February 
for more details and another announcement. Again making 

announcements is more important to the NDP than taking 
action. What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? That means that 
northern people will continue to wait for their link to the rest of 
the province. That means northerners will continue to pay 
astronomical costs for basic necessities of life. 
 
Neither the Premier nor the Minister Responsible for Highways 
can say definitely what the federal government is contributing 
money to this project. While it is hoped that the federal 
government would invest in such a worthwhile project, it is a 
concern that the provincial government has not secured that 
funding before announcing the project. The Premier and the 
Highways minister said that they hoped industry players would 
also contribute money to the project. The provincial 
government does not have any details, but they hope industry 
will contribute. 
 
I want to make it clear that the Saskatchewan Party fully 
supports the building of a northern roads infrastructure. In fact 
it is idea no. 18 in our 100 ideas for Saskatchewan’s 100 years 
which states: 
 

Partner with the Government of Saskatchewan to build 
three new all-weather roads in northern Saskatchewan to 
facilitate sustainable northern communities and sustainable 
northern economic development. 

 
I would hope that the people of northern Saskatchewan do not 
have to wait any longer for something so basic as a reliable road 
to and from the community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — More ministerial statements. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Learning. 
 

Local Accountability and Partnership Panel Report 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Today I am pleased to rise in the Assembly and 
announce our response to the local accountability and 
partnership panel report. The vision and recommendations 
presented in this panel’s report have provided us with a firm 
foundation on which to build a new local governance system 
that will enhance parent and community participation in our 
schools. 
 
Last February we appointed the panel to develop a provincial 
framework that would enhance the learning outcomes for all 
students by addressing the need for parents and communities to 
be actively involved and have a voice in education planning and 
decision making. I do want to today congratulate the panel 
Chair Craig Melvin and the members of that panel, Shirley 
Gange and Gary Shaddock, for the work that they had in 
developing these recommendations. 
 
As part of their research, they held over 40 meetings, including 
consultations with education partners and 7 regional 
consultations. Their extensive research involved consulting 
provincial experts, reviewing relevant literature and 
investigating the work of other provinces. 
 
Today we are addressing the key issues outlined in the panel’s 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

report by moving forward with this initiative. There is a need to 
ensure a mechanism for parents and community members to be 
actively engaged at the school level in decision making of the 
boards of education, and we need to make sure that that is not 
lost as we move to the larger restructured school divisions. As 
such, we are committed to ensuring that the development of 
larger divisions will not be at the cost of local involvement in 
the education system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report recommends and we are establishing 
school community councils across the province. In fact in every 
school or within every community there will be these councils 
that will play an integral, purposeful part in terms of school 
division governance. 
 
Legislation to create the school community councils will be 
introduced in the spring 2006 session of the legislature. Once 
that legislation is in effect, school community councils will 
replace local boards which currently exist in rural areas. Other 
parent and community-based groups will continue to be able to 
work with their local boards as they do today. 
 
These councils will ensure that both urban and rural residents 
will have access to the same opportunities for involvement in 
their children’s learning and the same framework of local 
governance. 
 
[14:30] 
 
These school community councils will work with parents and 
community members to develop shared responsibility for the 
learning success and well-being of all children and youth in the 
system. They will encourage and facilitate parent, community 
and youth engagement in school planning and improvement 
processes. 
 
These groups will be comprised of parents, community 
members, including First Nations communities, students, 
principals and teachers. They’ll be truly representative of each 
school community. Members of the school community councils 
will participate in a collaborative development and 
implementation of school improvement plans. They will offer 
advice to the board of education, to the school, and to the 
community on policies and programs and operations affecting 
each school community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school community councils will address key 
matters that make a difference in student outcomes, student 
learning, and student well-being. The school community 
councils will align their work with provincial and division goals 
and initiatives. They will be accountable. They will be 
transparent, and they will be responsive in the relationship 
between parents and the schools. 
 
By implementing these councils we are ensuring that authentic 
engagement of parents and community in learning success. We 
are going to support accountability in the pre-kindergarten to 12 
education system, and will support the implementation of 
SchoolPLUS, as well as other strategic directions established at 
the school and community level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize this is an extremely important 
step forward in the renewal of our province’s education system. 

It is a part that we connect the community to the school and 
build upon the strength that we have seen in the system today. 
This is a response that will ensure that we have sustainable, 
responsive communities where parents are involved in the 
education of their children. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to thank the minister for his comments today on the 
local accountability and partnership’s panel report and the fact 
that the government is making a response to this report in a 
timely manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges that have been articulated in 
this whole process of amalgamation of school divisions to 
larger regional boards has been the challenge that’s going to 
exist in keeping and building new corporate kind of alliances 
with these schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that have been expressed is 
that as we go to the larger school districts, there is the potential 
of having a disconnect between the communities, the 
community schools, and these larger school boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members, I believe that across the province in 
these school divisions that you’re seeing a move from more of a 
hands-on board than has been the case in the past to more of a 
policy-driven boards of education, which deal with the global 
issues in a more broad-based basis. And the concern has been 
that, as communities are struggling to continue to have 
ownership of their community schools, how are you going to 
make that happen in a meaningful way? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the panel that was chaired by Craig 
Melvin and Shirley Gange and Gary Shaddock have done a 
great deal of work in trying to identify in a practical way what a 
methodology is going to be to allow this connection between 
the community and the school that they are attached to. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the panel’s recommendations have been 
thoughtful and practical and worthy of serious consideration. 
And although the minister has not outlined specifically what 
recommendations are going to be followed and in what detail, 
we look forward to the minister’s response in the spring of 2006 
to see what specific legislation there’s going to be proposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have hoped that perhaps this legislation 
would have been ready at a sooner time so that it could be 
tabled in the legislature and would have been available on the 
period of time from this fall session to spring to invite comment 
and discussion on a local level about, will this new direction go 
far enough in order to ensure attachment to community schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that is of note in this is that there 
has been a very wide and diverse history of involvement with 
local school boards. In the rural areas, local school boards have 
been something that has been very important in some school 
divisions to largely misused in other divisions or underutilized 
in some others, and it is virtually an experience that doesn’t 
exist in urban city schools. And in some ways urban city 
schools I think have the same attachment to a school in their 



November 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

neighbourhood as there is in rural communities. And so I think 
that urban schools potentially are going to benefit by this 
minimum standard that is going to be expected right across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be a challenge in having these 
local school councils that are much more of a hands-on, 
connected to the community and to the schools they represent 
approach and the large policy approach that comes from the 
division schools, but I think it’s important that efforts be made 
to build this new cultural attachment across the province. 
 
This forced amalgamation process that we were concerned 
about in the past has created some real tensions between 
communities. And there’s going to have to be a real effort on 
behalf of these school boards and these community councils, or 
school councils, to build a new culture of ownership with the 
communities and the schools so that they can defend and 
enhance and encourage improved programming and superior 
program delivery in the local level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think that the minister’s words are positive and 
encouraging. We’re going to look forward and watch very 
closely what the details are going to be in the spring. And we 
trust in this whole process this will not be entirely a 
department-generated initiative but is something that really 
considers the needs and the concerns of local people as they try 
to develop new attachments and renewed attachments to their 
schools. This I think will be as an end result in the best interests 
of the children of our province, and that should be the objective 
of all of us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 28, The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Ag and 
Food that Bill No. 28, The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next sitting 
of this House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Before orders of the day I wish 
to at this time table the annual report for the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Library for the period ending March 31, 2005. 
 
Order please. Order. Would the members take this very 
important debate to some other private place. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
order questions 543 through 548 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 543 to 548 inclusive have been ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of this speech I will move second reading of 
The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, this Act supports our 
government’s commitment to ensure an accessible, flexible, and 
effective treatment approach for youth with substance abuse 
issues. It will be consistent with the enhancement to addictions 
services found within the Premier’s Project Hope. 
 
We released Project Hope almost six months ahead of schedule 
so implementation could begin immediately. At the time, we 
indicated we were reviewing ways to help addicted youth who 
are extremely difficult to reach and treat through more 
traditional measures. Today, we fulfill that commitment. 
 
Through Project Hope, Mr. Speaker, we are implementing 
proactive outreach programs and training for existing addiction 
workers. We’re adding new treatment options including 
detoxification, stabilization, and in-patient treatment. We’re 
also adding an element of aftercare in our programming that 
integrates community supports and helps to stabilize youth in 
their communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the youth detoxification and stabilization 
Act will help to further enhance the ability of parents, 
caregivers, and others to provide much needed support to a 
narrow segment of youth with extremely serious substance 
abuse issues. Mr. Speaker, these youth who are at risk to 
themselves or others and who are resistant to traditional 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

interventions such as voluntary detoxification, stabilization, and 
treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will include involuntary detoxification 
and stabilization services for youth aged 12 to 17 through an 
order from two physicians. We propose that youth remain in 
involuntary detoxification and stabilization within a facility that 
offers a safe and protective environment for a period of up to 5 
days, with the possibility of an extension determined by 
physicians for a maximum of 15 days. The youth would be 
prohibited from leaving during that time, using acceptable 
methods of intervention. 
 
We also propose provisions for involuntary community orders 
of up to 30 days that would be issued either before or after 
involuntary detoxification or as alternative to it. These 
provisions would allow for an order from two physicians for the 
safety and protection of a youth requiring involuntary 
detoxification and stabilization. 
 
We also understand that the rights of the youth in question are 
of the utmost importance, and we will ensure their rights are 
protected through due process provisions. We will also keep 
parents informed of the process. 
 
Using this Act would be a last resort, Mr. Speaker. We are 
confident that in most cases other available options for 
detoxification and stabilization will be successful. We will 
ensure all other avenues are pursued before authorizing that a 
youth be apprehended against his or her will. We will monitor 
the use of this Act closely using an evaluation mechanism to 
determine the effectiveness of this approach. This will continue 
to ensure the rights of youth are protected as well as their 
immediate safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge the work of my colleague, 
the Minister of Community Resources and Employment, who 
spearheaded the process to research this serious issue and 
consult with the people of this province. Her commitment, 
combined with the work of various government departments — 
Community Resources and Employment, Learning, Justice, 
Corrections and Public Safety, and Health — to research this 
issue and consult with the people of Saskatchewan ensures that 
this proposed legislation, this proposed new legislation is based 
on the needs and desires of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This Act will pave the way for more service options and will 
help us to better serve youth in all parts of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, with that I move second reading of The Youth Drug 
Detoxification and Stabilization Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services that Bill No. 27, The Youth Drug 
Detoxification and Stabilization Act be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure today to rise in this Assembly and speak to this Bill 
that’s just been introduced this afternoon. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that we have a serious problem in 
this province when it comes to drug and alcohol addictions and 
especially amongst our young people. And over the past 
number of years, Mr. Speaker, we have continued to see an 
increased dependence and use of the drug, crystal meth. And we 
see and witness on a daily basis the impact of that drug, the 
impact that it has on individual lives and young people’s lives 
and certainly on the lives of families who have to deal with 
individuals who have become addicted to drugs, whether it’s 
meth or any other form of drug. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the minister and his 
introduction to this Bill, one can’t help but wonder at the end of 
the day how much of an impact the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena and the member from Weyburn and the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest had in the implementation 
of this Bill because, Mr. Speaker, if you look at it very 
carefully, it’s not that much different than the one introduced by 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena back in the spring. 
 
And I guess the question is, Mr. Speaker, will this government 
at any time acknowledge that someone else besides themselves 
has a good idea and allow a Bill of that nature like a private 
member’s Bill to move forward? It boggles my mind to think 
that, when some one works as diligently as the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena and the member from Weyburn and the 
member currently from Saskatoon Northwest and come forward 
with a piece of legislation and come forward with some 
arguments . . . And the minister talked about detention of 
individuals who do not want to voluntarily address their 
addictions. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And these members on the opposite benches worked diligently 
and brought forward a piece of legislation that I believe at the 
end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the government would have a hard 
time knocking that piece of legislation because there was some 
very good principles to that legislation. And yet we could not 
get the government, get the Premier and his ministers and his 
colleagues to say, you know it probably wouldn’t hurt us to say, 
you know, that’s a good piece of legislation. The member from 
Kelvington-Wadena has done an excellent job on that 
legislation. 
 
Yes we have a problem. And I think maybe we should work 
together and let’s see if we can work together and tackle these 
addictions together as a Legislative Assembly and a group of 
members rather than government versus opposition. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, it’s imperative that we move 
forward on this issue. And my colleagues have certainly argued 
this for the past two years, that we need to do something, 
because parents have been coming to us. Young people have 
been coming to us, as they no doubt have been coming to 
members on the government’s side of the House, and they’ve 
been asking for help. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what is very interesting in this piece of 
legislation . . . And the government talks about building a centre 
where people can have their addictions addressed. You know 
this was the very government . . . And I will acknowledge that 
the current minister was not around when Mr. Romanow and 



November 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

his members of the day actually closed down Whitespruce 
treatment addiction centre in Yorkton. But the current Premier 
was a member of that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I speak about that because Whitespruce was a 
centre that was really reaching not only individuals but reaching 
the families. And I had the privilege of talking to many families 
who came up to me after they had young people in the centre 
and had their needs addressed. And they were, as families, they 
were able to go and spend some time at the centre, working 
together with the staff to address the issues of addictions that 
their teenage children or children were facing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t . . . I didn’t hear one complaint 
about the program at Whitespruce — not one complaint. And it 
didn’t matter whether it was an individual in the northwestern 
side of the province or the northeast or the southwest or from 
the two major centres. No one complained once they arrived at 
Whitespruce. No one complained about the centre and the fact 
that it was near the community of Yorkton, just outside of 
Yorkton, at Orcadia. Nobody complained about the location. 
The reason why, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, basically because 
of its location, it removed people from the influences that they 
had to deal with on a daily basis. They didn’t have to worry 
about their neighbours or their peers, who they may have been 
involved in drugs and alcohol with, harassing them as they were 
trying to get their lives straightened around. It gave them a 
sense that they had caring people around them who were 
willing to work with them to address their addictions. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, 14 years later we finally come to the 
realization we need a centre where young teenagers or young 
people can be placed or can be taken to address their addictions 
— and especially if they’re coming forward — a place where 
they will have the assistance of individuals who care for them 
and really want to assist them in addressing the addictions 
they’re facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that it’s taken this long. It’s 
unfortunate that we closed down a centre that was doing an 
excellent job. But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
pleased to see the government has finally realized that it’s time 
to move. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, government says we need to do 
something. The minister just talked about involuntary detention. 
The minister talked about a number of services that this piece of 
legislation deals with. The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is that 
while there are some services the government’s going to 
implement today, the facts are they really do not have the space 
and the beds available that they can utilize so that young people 
can have their needs addressed. 
 
And the government talks about the Premier’s Project Hope. 
And it’s, Mr. Speaker, it’s not going to be open for another two 
to three years. So while the government has finally 
acknowledged we need to move, there’s still a lag period as the 
government now is forced to deal with the issue; they need to 
find a place for beds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government as well was the government that 
disbanded SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission]. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about addiction services, I talk 
about what’s going on in our regional health districts. Kipling is 
a prime example of how our health districts are dealing with 
addiction services. We had a good addiction service in the 
community of Kipling, Mr. Speaker, and I understand that it 
may be phased out. We had an excellent councillor working 
with individuals who would come to the centre. And that’s, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why many people across this 
province are so annoyed at this government and the way it is 
dealing with health care. 
 
And while they continue to point to the statistics that would 
suggest that people are satisfied, the facts are . . . And I was 
reading an article the other day, and it was pointed out in the 
article that when you talk to people who finally found their way 
into the system to have their health needs met, people are quite 
pleased with how their needs have been met and the care, the 
attention they received. But, Mr. Speaker, they are not happy 
with the fact that they may have to wait anywhere from six 
months to a year to two to three years to finally have their 
health problems addressed. And I think that’s the same factor 
we’re dealing with here when we talk about addiction services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear the minister really talk much about 
the problem of crystal meth in this as he was introducing and 
doing second reading on his speech this afternoon, but we know 
that it continues and will be, for a period of time will continue 
to be a problem for young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we ask, where do young 
people go today while we wait for the full implementation of 
this government’s vision as how we’re going to deal with 
addictions in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can look at the past and we can say it should 
never have been done. Whitespruce should have never been 
closed. SADAC should not have been disbanded. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government decided in their 
good wisdom that we didn’t need those services any more. So 
that’s in the past. We need to move on into the future. 
 
And I want to say thank you to my colleague, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, for the way she has spearheaded the move 
and kept our caucus informed of the concerns that have been 
brought to her attention and the in-depth research that she has 
done in regards to crystal meth and the problems that people 
have and coming forward with ideas and solutions — ideas and 
solutions which that member had brought forward in her private 
member’s Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that there are a lot of issues 
around addictions that we need to look at very carefully. 
There’s no doubt it’s time we offered young people a source of 
help and assistance to address those addictions. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re pleased to see the government is finally 
acknowledging that there is a problem, that we need to address 
that problem, and they’ve come forward with The Youth Drug 
Detoxification and Stabilization Act this session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to see that the Act has been 
brought forward. I want to thank the minister for coming 
forward with the Act because this will give this, as has been 
mentioned, this will give all members over the next period of 
months till the spring session to actually have the debate and the 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2005 

dialogue in regards to the legislation to ensure that when the 
Act moves forward later next spring that we’ve actually 
addressed a lot of the concerns and that the Act will meet a lot 
of the requirements that people were looking for and hoping to 
see in this piece of legislation. 
 
And let me say one more thing, Mr. Speaker. While there are a 
lot of criticisms, I want to take a moment as well to compliment 
the minister for his work and efforts as well. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 
my colleagues have done a lot of work, but the minister 
certainly has, and I want to give him credit for taking the time 
to bring to his colleagues’ attention that there is a serious issue 
out there and we need to address it. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill 27 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
order to facilitate the work of the policy field committees, I 
move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:55.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................371 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................371 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................371 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................371 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................372 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................372 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................372 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................372 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Publication of The Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................372 
 HMCS Queen receives Fenco MacLaren Trophy 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................372 
 Carrot River Wildcats Win Provincial Championship 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................373 
 Combating Racism 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................373 
 Maple Creek’s Wall of Remembrance Memorial 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................373 
 Community Housing Registry Database Unveiled 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................374 
 Blogging and Saskatchewan Issues 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................374 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................374 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................375 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................375 
 Sale of Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Equipment 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................377 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................378 
 Federal Financial Assistance for Farmers 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................378 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................378 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Roads to Prosperity — Saskatchewan’s Northern Economic Infrastructure Strategy 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................380 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................381 
 Local Accountability and Partnership Panel Report 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................381 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................382 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................383 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................383 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................383 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................383 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 27 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................383 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................384 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




