















































Hansard: April 05, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 85A  TUESDAY, APRIL 5, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2361 
 April 5, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise on behalf 
of constituents of Cypress Hills to present a petition reflecting 
their concerns with forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
constituents from the community of Tompkins and Piapot. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about the epidemic of 
crystal meth that is taking over parts of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine with education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the Claybank Brick Plant. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 

Mr. Speaker, 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This petition is signed by people from North Battleford to Sault 

Ste. Marie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here, 
citizens that want to improve cellular coverage in rural 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Jansen, Raymore, and 
Semans. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
rise in the Assembly today to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of west central Saskatchewan concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many names on this petition from 
the town of Unity. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
certainly pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens who are gravely concerned with this government’s plan 
to force the amalgamation of school divisions. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse its decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition all come from the community of 
Wilkie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet 
another petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. Among their concerns are that the proposed changes 
to amalgamate 59 school divisions by January 2006 will not 
prove to be cost effective. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, communities in the constituency of 
Rosetown-Elrose represented on this petition include Rosetown, 
Fiske, Plenty, Stranraer, and Sovereign. And I am pleased to 
present this petition on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning cabin lots in the area of the Rafferty 
dam; that’s sessional paper 729; 
 
A petition concerning cellular phone coverage in rural 
areas; that’s 730. 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 180, 637, 638, 640, 715, and 720. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the Private 
Bills Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
present the third report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills. I’d like to move, seconded by the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Bills now be concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, seconded by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that the third report of the Standing 
Committee on Private Bills be now concurred in. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried and pursuant to rule 82, 
the private Bills 304, 305, and 306 are deemed to have been 
read the first time and are ordered for second reading on the 
next private members’ day. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 90 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what steps are you taking 
to control the outbreak of an unprecedented deer mouse 
infestation in west central Saskatchewan that threatens to 
destroy crops to an even larger extent than last year, and 
which also worries residents about contact with the deadly 
hantavirus associated with deer mice? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 90 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: what was the total cost to 
date of moving Saskatchewan Learning to its new 
facilities? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a second 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 90 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: are the former offices of 
Saskatchewan Learning presently occupied; if so, by 
whom? And was the asbestos problem addressed prior to 
the new tenants’ occupancy? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly some 22 grade 9 students from O’Neill 
High School in the constituency of Regina Coronation Park. 
They’re with their teacher, Mr. Chabot. 
 
And they have taken a little bit of a different tack, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve got a number of students who’ve been here before so 
they’re doing a student-guided tour, and the student guides are 
Esther, Shila, and Stephanie. And I know that this group has got 
a couple of other stops to make this day as well. 
 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

Mr. Speaker, I invite you and all members of the Assembly to 
welcome this fine group of grade 9 students and their teacher 
from O’Neill High School. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly three people who are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. Along with intern, Kyle Toffan, who is 
working with me until the end of next week, are a couple of 
people who are destined to become related to him in the not too 
distant future. 
 
We have in the gallery with Kyle, Mervin and Denise Bunnell, 
who farm just north and west of Moose Jaw, and because of 
Kyle’s involvement here have taken a new interest, not only in 
the building, but the proceedings here and are coming to see 
Kyle at work. They are enthusiastically looking forward to the 
spring seeding, which is not far away and being aided by the 
moisture outside today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to show a warm welcome 
to Mr. and Mrs. Bunnell. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

First Granddaughter for Sergeant-at-Arms 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of 
those special events in a person’s life is when the grandchildren 
begin to arrive. Today is one of those special days for our 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw. A new granddaughter, Chloe 
Brooke Knight, weighing in at 6 pounds, 11 ounces, was born 
this afternoon, the first granddaughter, likely the first 
grandchild of many to come hopefully. 
 
And as I’ve found, Mr. Speaker, as we grow older there are 
many things that become so important and one of those things is 
looking forward to a special bond that will grow and develop 
over the years that they spend together. So maybe the 
Sergeant-at-Arms could stand up and take a bow for such a 
great job well done and . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — And I’m sure all members will join me in 
congratulating Patrick, his wife Wendy, and the proud parents, 
Erin and Kevin Knight. And we hope that all is well with your 
new granddaughter. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 

First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend, 
myself and many members on this side of the House had the 
honour of attending one of the largest and longest-running 
powwows in the country — the 27th Annual First Nations 
University of Canada Powwow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, powwows are important social, spiritual, and 
cultural gatherings that promote cross-cultural awareness and 
understanding. This weekend more than 3,000 dancers, singers, 
drummers, and spectators from across North America gathered 
to celebrate traditional First Nations music, dress, song, and 
dance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this powwow was a celebration of life and 
provided participants with an opportunity to renew old 
friendships and to begin new ones. It gives students a chance to 
visit with family and friends and to say thank you for 
supporting them during their educational journey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the host institution of course is the First Nations 
University, which is tremendously important not only to the 
First Nations community but also to everyone in Saskatchewan, 
I believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this weekend people of all ages came together to 
compete in a variety of performance categories. In addition to 
dancing there was also a trade show that featured Aboriginal 
arts and crafts and a selection of very tasty traditional food. 
 
I ask all members to join me in acknowledging the powwow 
committee for hosting an excellent event, the First Nations 
University of Canada for hosting. Congratulations to all the 
performers and a special tansi to powwow MC [master of 
ceremonies] extraordinaire, Mike Pinay. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Kenaston and District Dinner Theatre 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last Saturday my wife and I had 
the privilege of attending the Kenaston and district annual 
dinner theatre. It was a great meal and wonderful entertainment. 
 
The Kenaston and district group has been doing this for 
approximately the last 10 years to raise operating funds for their 
community theatre, which is a new building which has now 
been paid for by a variety of community events. Many hundreds 
of thousands of dollars have been raised for that purpose 
through community events and I think the people from 
Kenaston should be commended. 
 
We noted that the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
from Arm River and Carrot River Valley were there working as 
waiters that evening. I’m not sure whether they were merely 
politicking or training for the potential of an unplanned career 
change. Having witnessed their ability as waiters, I would like 
to urge them to work hard as MLAs and ensure their re-election 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

because I don’t believe that they have a career in the food 
services industry. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating the citizens of Kenaston and area on their hard 
work and the excellent events that they put on and the fact that 
they have created a community centre that has now become the 
focal centre for that part of the province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Celebrate Saskatchewan On Ice 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, along with the 
Premier, it was my honour to attend an event that will surely be 
remembered as one of the outstanding evenings of our 
centennial year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Celebrate Saskatchewan On Ice saw over 1,000 
skaters ranging in age from 19 to as young as 4 come together 
from all across Saskatchewan in the largest skating 
extravaganza in the history of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the choreography, the costumes, and in particular 
the enthusiasm of the young participants was extraordinary, a 
living example of our centennial theme, 100 years of heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with nearly 7,000 people in the stands it was the 
largest single audience ever for the skaters. It was also their first 
time performing to live music, and they were pumped. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an evening of dreams — dreams long 
cherished coming true, with new dreams for the future being 
born. Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Co-Chairs of 
Celebrate Saskatchewan On Ice, Marge Auringer and Marilyn 
McEwen for turning their vision of this event into reality. 
 
I want to acknowledge as well Blaise and Yvette Kirchgesner of 
the Clavet Figure Skating Club who had the formidable task of 
doing the choreography for the event. And I want to 
acknowledge the time and efforts of all the 150 volunteers 
whose time and efforts were invaluable ensuring the show was 
a success. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the skaters 
themselves, who gave such an outstanding demonstration of 
Saskatchewan’s centennial spirit. Thank you to them all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Fishing Lake Hockey League Champions 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after a 
seven-game series against the Theodore Buffalos, the Canora 

Cobras senior hockey team is the Fishing Lake Hockey 
League’s 2004-2005 champions. 
 
This senior men’s hockey league consists of teams from 
Preeceville, Canora, Kelliher, Kelvington, Wadena, Springside, 
Foam Lake, and last year’s champions, the Theodore Buffalos. 
 
After splitting the first four games, Canora took game five with 
a 4-0 win due to outstanding goaltending by Cobras’ Dwayne 
Boddy. Crowd counts in both Canora and Theodore ranged 
from 800 to 900 fans for each game. Many of the Canora fans 
in attendance on Friday night hoped to see the Cobras win the 
series at home, but it was not to be. The Buffalos took game six 
with a 9-3 win to tie the series at three games apiece. 
 
The final game of the series returned to Theodore. Cobras had 
the lead at the end of the first period, but the Buffalos skated 
back to tie the game 2-2 at the end of the second. There were 
many chances to take the lead in the third period, but 
goaltenders on both sides of the ice played remarkably. Then, 
27 seconds into overtime, the Cobras’ Scott Marchinko scored 
the championship winning goal. 
 
Hearty congratulations go out to the Cobras’ coach, Cal 
Homeniuk, team trainers Nichol Martinuik and Matt Hrynkiw, 
office manager Carla Bugera, the team, and the entire Canora 
Cobras hockey organization for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Seniors Walk Length of Province to Celebrate Centennial 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, a group of Saskatchewan 
senior citizens is travelling the length of our province in 
celebration of the centennial, while establishing a foundation 
that promotes good health and well-being. The group left on 
March 11 and started their journey on cross-country skis in the 
northernmost region of the province. Upon reaching Black 
Lake, they continued their trek on foot and are now joined by a 
motorhome as they walk in shifts, rotating every 16 kilometres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the journey from Selwyn Lake to the US [United 
States] border just south of Estevan is estimated at 1,572 
kilometres and was expected to take 45 days. So far, Mr. 
Speaker, the group is ahead of schedule, walking about 80 
kilometres a day. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the group may be in 
Regina as we speak. We hope they stop by the legislature later 
this afternoon or tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the walkers start their walk at 7:30 in the morning 
until about 5 or 6 in the afternoon. 
 
Cliff Shockey is the organizer of this journey and came up with 
this idea as the ideal way to recognize Saskatchewan’s 
centennial and to promote healthy living. Since then, Mr. 
Shockey has been collecting pledges to start a foundation that 
raises awareness about exercise and good health. He’s hoping 
the walk will get people thinking about the lifestyle they’re 
living. 
 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in commending 
these senior citizens for promoting healthy activity and for 
embarking on an impressive adventure to commemorate this 
province’s 100th anniversary. I wish them a safe and enjoyable 
trip. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Lac La Ronge Indian Band Elects New Chief 
 
Ms. Draude: — On behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, I’d like 
to offer my congratulations to Tammy Cook-Searson, who was 
recently elected as the new chief of the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band. 
 
The election of Ms. Cook-Searson is a historic and proud 
moment for Saskatchewan’s largest Indian band. This is the 
first time that this band, which boasts over 7,000 members, has 
elected a woman as chief. And while she has large shoes to fill 
to replace former chief, Harry Cook, who served as chief for 18 
years, I know she is well prepared for the challenge and looking 
forward to working with band members on the task ahead. 
 
Prior to election as chief, Ms. Cook-Searson has served as the 
band councillor for the Lac La Ronge Band. Along with the 
chief and other councillors, she served on the board of Kitsaki 
Management Ltd. partnership, which has built a successful 
track record since its inception in 1986. 
 
Being an elected official holds challenges for everyone who 
seeks public office. It’s not always easy to balance the varied 
needs of constituents, and in this case band members. I 
particularly commend women who get involved in politics, a 
traditionally male dominated profession. 
 
The words that hold special meaning for me in this career are 
the ones spoken by Gandhi, “ . . . be the change you wish to see 
in the world.” 
 
On behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, we wish Chief 
Cook-Searson all the best in her new duties. And once again, 
congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Timing of Memorandum of Agreement Regarding 
Health Care Workers 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, an independent tribunal said there was political 
interference by the NDP [New Democratic Party] in the joint 
job evaluation deal that was signed on the eve of an election 
call. Yesterday the Minister of Health also admitted to political 
interference in these negotiations. 
 

My questions are for the Premier: what government officials 
interfered in this negotiating process and what role did the 
Premier’s office play in circumventing the normal negotiation 
process to benefit the NDP on the eve of an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 
once again shows that the research that he’s got at his caucus, 
and with what he’s doing, doesn’t get it right. It was very 
clearly laid out in the newspaper this morning that: 
 

Susan Antosh, [who’s the] president of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations . . . took issue with 
the tribunal’s contention that government officials had 
drawn up the memorandum of agreement by 
“cherry-picking” from proposals made by the unions and 
by employers represented by SAHO. It was each side, not 
the government, that drew up the deal, she said. 
 

That’s a direct answer to the member’s question, and thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
budget day the Premier was more than happy to jump to his feet 
and tell us how he supports fair collective bargaining and he 
would never interfere in the collective bargaining process. Now 
we find out that’s not true. And the Premier isn’t even getting 
up to answer the questions any more. Mr. Speaker, the 
independent tribunal said this agreement was incoherent and 
distorted because the normal negotiating process was 
circumvented for large “p” political purposes. 
 
My question is for the Premier: what was his role in this blatant 
political interference in the bargaining process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when agreements are 
reached in collective bargaining, they involve many parties and 
many different groups of people. But it’s at the bargaining table 
where that happens. It’s very clear that each party at the 
bargaining table act as representatives either from the union or 
from management. They are given certain mandates to go and 
bargain, and when they do that there are times where they have 
to go back to the employer or to the union and say, give me 
some other instructions, we can’t get that to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s happened in this situation was that they 
had been bargaining for over two years to come to an 
agreement. There was required some more resources, I think we 
can say in retrospect. That kind of request came forward to the 
appropriate processes in government and there were some more 
resources that were available. And that allowed them to then 
enter into an agreement which was as described by the president 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

of SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations]. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
everyone is now admitting to political interference in these 
negotiations. The president of SEIU [Service Employees’ 
International Union] said, and, Mr. Speaker, I’m quoting now, 
“It sure as hell was political.” 
 
Minister of Health said, and I quote, “In all public sector 
negotiations, politics, timing of elections, they are all factors 
and I think this is no different.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with that? Does politics 
and the timing of elections play a role in all public sector 
negotiations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not even sure how 
to answer that question, because it’s so naive. I think what you 
have to recognize in public sector bargaining, whether you’re in 
Europe or United States or Canada or Saskatchewan, there’re 
always issues around timing of election, who’s elected, how 
that works. That’s just part of what happens. And ultimately it 
is the taxpayers and voters in a particular province that will end 
up paying for that and it will be based on how well the 
government has managed all kinds of issues including 
collective bargaining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those kinds of issues continue throughout the 
mandates. It’s unfortunate — but I think fortunate for the 
people of Saskatchewan but unfortunate for that member — that 
he never has and never will have the opportunity to be involved 
in that process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear 
that the minister has indicated that this NDP government sees 
politics and timing of elections as key roles in public sector 
bargaining. The negotiations had been dragging on for four 
years. Then all of a sudden, on the eve of an election, the NDP 
suddenly found millions of dollars to come up with a 
settlement. 
 
In fact, I received an internal memo from CUPE [Canadian 
Union of Public Employees] that says, and I quote: 
 

An agreement was reached, after the government of 
Saskatchewan intervened and approved the funding . . . on 
October 3rd, 2003. SAHO was unwilling to bargain . . . and 
signed the agreement reluctantly . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, CUPE says the NDP approved extra funding to 
make this last minute deal. The Premier would have been the 
only person to have known about this approval of new funding. 
Will the Premier admit that he interfered in the negotiating 
process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again, I would like to 
talk about the member’s naiveté about this because practically 
every single deal involves parties bargaining. If there aren’t 
sufficient funds for the government bargaining committee or, in 
this case, for health, the SAHO bargaining committee, what do 
they do? They say we need some more funds, we need some 
more room to bargain. And they go back to the government and 
through the processes in government which include public 
sector bargaining, Treasury Board, all of those places. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s just how the process works. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, part of the challenge for the member 
opposite is that he may want to talk to the person who wrote 
this report and find out why he said these things. But we know 
from the people who involved that they would be very much 
willing to tell him that they had been bargaining hard for a 
couple of years and they finally had all of the pieces together to 
make a deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear from the 
tribunal document, and the minister can indicate the members 
that were on that tribunal that they drew a conclusion from the 
information that was provided to them. On the eve of an 
election these unions that negotiated were able to get a 13.3 per 
cent increase. But the minute the election was over, the NDP 
slapped on a 0, 1, and 1 wage mandate on all the other public 
sector unions. And even some of the workers who received a 
$1,000 lump sum payment may have to pay some of that money 
back. 
 
It just goes to show the NDP has no problem manipulating the 
collective bargaining process. The NDP has no problem using 
public sector workers for its own political purposes. Mr. 
Speaker, why is the Premier using workers for his own political 
gain? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the health sector is a very important employer. 
There are many people who work and provide health care for all 
of the citizens of the province. and so it’s absolutely crucial that 
you end up working hard to get an agreement. Now practically, 
there are many issues and many things that come together when 
an agreement is reached. And part of that is a bargaining 
process that moves through and takes the opportunity when an 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

agreement is available to be reached. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we see that again and again. Sometimes it 
involves a strike; sometimes it involves many days of people 
testing each other’s sort of will to resolve things. But always, 
Mr. Speaker, we believe the best agreement is reached at the 
table no matter what the process is around how to get there. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to get there and make sure that 
all these things work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — That’s pretty clear and it’s been verified by 
this tribunal that said that there was not a negotiated process — 
that this government interfered. No wonder so many teachers 
and nurses and other public sector workers are angry at this 
Premier and this NDP government. They see how the NDP uses 
the people. They see how the NDP say one thing before an 
election and then they do exactly the opposite after the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was not one word from the NDP about 0, 1, 
and 1 before the election. In fact, the Premier had millions of 
dollars to step in and circumvent the negotiating process. That’s 
why so many public sector workers are feeling betrayed by this 
NDP government. And the Minister of Health tells them to get 
over it. How arrogant can one get? Mr. Speaker, when will the 
Premier get over it and stop using public sector workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member 
opposite was trying to figure out why some groups would be 
quite interested in the timing of the election as it related to 
resolving labour issues. And, Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of 
quotes from those members that might make a difference in 
how people see how labour negotiations go. We have the 
member from Wood River who says: 
 

The whole bureaucracy, the whole civil service, has to be 
cleaned out. Every socialist system in the world has 
collapsed under its own weight. I can wield a pretty good 
sized broom, and you know what I would do with the 
broom in there. 
 

We also, also have that fairly calm former Health critic who 
even says when he talks about civil servants: 
 

We need to reward excellent performance and clean out 
the dead wood. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those are not the kinds of comments you make 
about valued employees in your health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Strike by Emergency Medical Technicians in Yorkton 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 15 
emergency medical technicians in the city of Yorkton are now 
on strike. The main issue for those working in Yorkton is wage 
parity. The EMTs [emergency medical technician] say they are 
paid $5 an hour less than their counterparts in Melville, a town 
as close as 25 miles away. Mr. Speaker, can the minister 
explain why ambulance workers in Yorkton are paid 
significantly less than their counterparts just a few miles down 
the road? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this matter that’s being 
raised by the member relates to bargaining between a private 
sector contractor who contracts to provide those services to the 
Sunrise Health Authority and the particular union involved. The 
kind of funding that’s available on a province-wide basis for 
ambulance service is done on a common policy across the 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Minister 
of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the funding that’s provided 
for ambulance services across the province is on a similar basis, 
is a common policy, and that money is available through the 
Sunrise Regional Health Authority for this particular private 
contractor. And we encourage them to resolve this matter at the 
bargaining table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
was an amazing answer. Right now we have a strike in Yorkton. 
The safety of Yorkton residents are at stake and that minister 
doesn’t want any part of it. And yet days before an election call, 
that government got involved in the process when it was to their 
benefit, not depending on the people of Saskatchewan’s safety, 
just the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan EMS 
[emergency medical services] association has been lobbying the 
NDP government to solve the wage parody issue between 
public ambulance services and contract services. This 
government has taken extraordinary measures to implement job 
evaluation for the health sector at an estimated cost of about 
$65 million. 
 
Can the minister tell us why this issue hasn’t been addressed 
and will he address this issue today? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before we have a 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

common level of funding for these kinds of contracted services 
across the province, and there are many other ambulance 
services that are operating using this funding in a very positive 
way. We encourage the members of the union in this particular 
case and their employer, who is a third party contractor with the 
health region, to go back to the bargaining table and sort this 
one out. Mr. Speaker, that’s how we resolve labour issues here 
in Saskatchewan and that’s how they’ll continue to be resolved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I understand that a few replacement workers have been 
hired but nowhere near the 15 EMTs that are now on strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how will this strike affect the 
quality of emergency care for people living in Yorkton and 
area, and what kind of a contingency plan does this government 
have to ensure Yorkton and area residents will receive timely 
emergency care? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The regional health authority has made 
very clear plans for providing care. They operate the ambulance 
services in Melville, Langenburg, and Ituna; and all of those 
services have been on alert and are providing services as 
required in the Yorkton area. This is the plan that they’ve had 
for some time, and we know that it will continue to provide 
good care for the people in that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Guidelines for Waiting Lists for Medical Procedures 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
waiting time alliance of Canada has reported this week . . . now 
the alliance is a group of doctors from six medical specialities, 
and this group has said regarding the waiting lists that they are, 
quote, “alarmingly long.” There is no place in Canada that 
knows that better then right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
When will the minister adopt the guidelines that were set out by 
this group of respected physicians in Canada? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the guidelines that we set 
out about 13 months ago have become a model for the rest of 
the country around how to develop guidelines for surgery. Mr. 
Speaker, what the special committee of the Canadian Medical 
Association has done is added their ideas into this because they 
know that the provinces and territories and the federal 
government are in the process of discussing national guidelines 
as it relates to specific areas. 
 
I would inform the member that last week in Toronto there was 

a meeting called Taming the Queue which included experts 
from around the world and every part of Canada. There were 28 
speakers on one day, and I’m informed that in every single one 
of those speeches they talked about the groundbreaking work 
done in Saskatchewan around wait lists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that is amazing to think that 
when we’ve got some of the longest waiting lists in Canada, 
that they would be using Saskatchewan as a model. It’s not a 
model of what to achieve; it’s a model of what not to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an example of that is a waiting time alliance said 
that radiation therapy for cancer treatments should be done 
within 10 days. Here in Saskatchewan, Dr. David Popkin, head 
of the cancer centre for Regina and Saskatoon, says their goal is 
50 days between initial visit of a radiation oncologist to the start 
of treatment. Let’s see, the national average, 10 days; 
Saskatchewan, 50 days. You call that a model, Mr. Speaker? 
Does the minister call that a model? Why such a huge 
discrepancy between what we offer here in Saskatchewan and 
what is targeted in the rest of Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that that 
member is continuing a long tradition of the opposition in not 
doing their research. There’s a great big deal of difference 
between targets, between targets about what you want to do. 
 
The Canadian Medical Association has traditionally taken a 
position around the fact that you need to increase more 
capacity. What we know from the research we’ve done in 
Saskatchewan, working with people from right across North 
America, is that there are two issues, there’s capacity to do 
surgery and there’s management of the flow of patients. And 
the doctors will always come down on a capacity issue. We will 
say there has to be a balance between these two. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we know in Saskatchewan is that we 
have to continue to work around the management. That’s the 
message from the national conferences. That’s the message that 
I hear at the national tables of ministers, and we’re going to 
continue to lead the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we see how they’re leading 
the way on cancer treatment — 10 days to 50 days. Well let’s 
try orthopaedic surgery. Mr. Speaker, the time of waiting 
alliance says that people waiting for knee and hip surgery 
shouldn’t wait any longer than five months. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
if you check this minister’s own patient registry, you’ll see that 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

a quarter of the patients waiting for this type of surgery are 
waiting longer than five months; that’s 1,750 people waiting in 
Saskatchewan longer than five months for some orthopaedic 
surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are failing. We know of people that have 
waited two, three, and as much as four years for this surgery. 
Does the minister think that that is a model that the rest of 
Canada should follow? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what I think is a model that 
the rest of Canada should follow — and in fact they are 
following it in Ontario; they’re following it in British 
Columbia; even in Alberta they’re watching very carefully what 
we do — and that is to find out exactly what’s happening and 
then make sure you manage the flow. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those members opposite yesterday voted 
against the budget which put millions of dollars towards these 
particular issues and they continue to vote against all the 
initiatives that are going forward to make sure we improve 
everything for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting that he brings up the budget now and that they put in 
more money, because the minister was on radio today and he 
was quoted as saying that — over the noon hour — that the 
problem is capacity. According to the minister this is a 
management problem, not a staffing problem — a management 
problem. 
 
I’d be very interested to talk to the health care professionals in 
the front lines that we have talked to and see if they think it’s a 
management problem or a personnel problem, Mr. Speaker. He 
seems to feel that everything’s just fine, just tinker with the 
management a little bit and it will be that much better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at five times the waiting list for 
cancer treatment in this province and when you look at waiting 
lists for orthopaedic surgery that is up to five times the national 
guidelines, does he think it’s only a management problem? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, not only do they have 
difficulty with the research, when they actually look at the 
information they have trouble with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we do here is we look at all of the different 
parts and we try to provide balance. And as I said just 
previously before he just read the last question without listening 
to me, what we have to look at is capacity and management. 
And basically there are places where the capacity needs to be 
looked at. There’s also places where management looks . . . has 
to be looked at. 
 

But it’s clear from the experts right across the world, that the 
flow of patients through your health system is where the 
wait-list problem comes and that takes management of how you 
get the patients there. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the information now in Saskatchewan 
that allows us to make choices around how we spend our money 
in this budget and in coming budgets to deal with both the 
capacity issues and the management issues. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to do that because we know that that’s going to 
provide a solution for all of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that he would 
talk about research and that we’re not doing our research. 
 
Well you know, the Fraser Institute reported last fall on waiting 
lists. And what they reported was that it was a 104-week wait 
for knee and hip surgery. But the Minister’s response to the 
Fraser report is that he questioned the methodology — it 
couldn’t be right; it was the Fraser Institute that was making 
that report. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now the waiting time alliance, these 
respected physicians, have come out with an identical report 
saying that waiting list times in this province are amazingly 
long, amazingly too long, Mr. Speaker. If the Fraser Institute 
wasn’t good enough because of their methodology, are you 
going to question the waiting time alliance and these 
physicians? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been working very 
carefully and diligently on this. And because of that, I know 
that my colleagues across the country have been providing 
support and saying, we’re going to use what you’re doing. 
 
In Ontario, the Minister of Health has gone forward to the 
people of the province and said, we’re going to adopt the 
Saskatchewan surgical registry as a program in Ontario. And 
we have said to them, please use what we’ve learned; we’re 
interested to learn from you what you’re doing, but we’re happy 
to share what we know here. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
continue to do that because we are leaders and groundbreakers 
as it relates to providing health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they voted against the 
budget. We haven’t been able to figure out if they’re on plan 1 
or plan 10 or plan 200. But we know that we have a very clear 
goal, and that’s to serve the people of Saskatchewan for the 
long term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Before orders of the day, I would like to comment on a 
point of order that was raised yesterday. The point of order was 
raised by the Government House Leader regarding remarks 
made by the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
I have since then had a chance to review the record, on page 
2336 of Hansard, where it was clear that the member of 
Canora-Pelly was indirectly using language which otherwise 
would be considered unparliamentary. I consider, members, that 
many of these statements are sort of on the slippery slope. I 
brought it to the attention of both sides earlier, or last week, that 
the use of phrases which would incorporate members’ names 
. . . order, please . . . is also unparliamentary. 
 
So on the basis of these precedents, and I’m sure there are 
others, the point of order raised by the member, by the 
Government House Leader, is well taken. And I would ask 
members to refrain from introducing unparliamentary language, 
using slang or other figures of speech. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 921 through 925 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 921 through to 925 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Health Labour 
Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004, and I will do 
so at the end of my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes of the Assembly’s 
time this afternoon, first to outline the background to this 
legislation, to give a brief explanation of what it does, and to 
explain how it benefits Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act 
was passed by this Assembly in 1996. That Act provided for the 
appointment of a commissioner to examine labour relations 
between employees and employers in the then newly created 
health districts. 

More specifically, the commissioner, James Dorsey, was 
charged with developing the regulations necessary to rationalize 
labour relations in the new health system with minimal 
disruption. That health reform process then under way had 
consolidated a large variety of health services in a single local 
health district. As a result, the workers in previously unrelated 
bargaining units found themselves working for the same 
employer. The unions were involved with the government to 
develop this process to facilitate a smooth transition to this new 
system. At that time, Mr. Speaker, there were 538 bargaining 
units in the health care sector and it was clear that something 
had to be done. 
 
The so-called Dorsey regulations did three things. First, they 
grouped workers in the health sector into three broad categories. 
Second, the regulations established a process to decide the trade 
union that was to represent the health workers in each category 
in each region. And third, the Dorsey regulations provided for a 
stable period of transition in the health sector by placing a 
moratorium on any attempts to change the trade union 
representing the employees in any particular bargaining unit. 
 
Since then this Assembly has twice extended the period in 
which the Labour Relations Board has prohibited . . . was 
prohibited from making orders that amend, varied, or rescinded 
union representation in the health sector, most recently until 
January ’05. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in considering the amendments before us we 
should be mindful of what the Dorsey Commission and The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act and the regulations 
flowing from it have accomplished. When all is said and done, 
the Dorsey regulations were endorsed by unions representing 
more than 80 per cent of the workers in the health sector. The 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, 
representing almost every health employer in the province, also 
supported the new streamlined structure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Dorsey regulations significantly reduced the 
number of bargaining units in the health sector. Streamlining 
the collective bargaining process in this way was a significant 
step forward in fostering stable labour relations in the health 
sector while the health system evolved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our health system continues to evolve and 
improve. But this year sees some unique challenges facing us, 
not the least of which is the fact that all of the collective 
bargaining agreements in the health care sector have expired 
and for some of these bargaining units, it’s the first collective 
agreement in the restructured health authorities. 
 
With this Bill, we therefore propose to extend the moratorium 
until January 1, 2006. This will allow all involved in collective 
bargaining to focus on the task at hand, the successful 
conclusion of bargaining in these newly structured units without 
having to worry about changes in the unions representing the 
employees. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not a step that we take lightly. We do 
believe that workers’ rights to choose their own unions is a 
fundamental principle and that’s why we are committing to 
allow the moratorium to expire on January 1, 2006, thereby 
restoring this fundamental principle to health care workers 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

across the province. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also provide us with the 
mechanism to give the Labour Relations Board the authority to 
amend or rescind orders or to make new certification orders 
with respect to multi-employer bargaining units in the health 
care sector. This is an important step because while there 
currently are a number of multi-employer bargaining units in 
the health care sector, the Labour Relations Board does not 
have the authority to make orders respecting such units. Clearly, 
the concept of multi-employer bargaining units is fundamental 
to the model in place today and this amendment ensures that the 
LRB [Labour Relations Board] has the necessary authority to 
amend or rescind orders or to make new certification orders 
where appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by saying that, in general, the 
Dorsey regulations have been a positive development for our 
health care system. Extending the moratorium will ensure 
continued stability throughout the course of the rest of this year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 88, The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 88, The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise to speak briefly this afternoon on Bill No. 88, An Act 
to amend The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of us who have been in this legislature for 
some time remember quite well the Dorsey report, that made 
very sweeping recommendations about reorganizing health care 
unions in light of the formation of health districts. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we understood at that time — and for the record, I 
believe it was 1996 — that this reorganization of the 
representation of workers in the health system was reorganized. 
And with that very dramatic reorganization there was an 
argument that said for some reasonable period of time that there 
should be some rights of workers taken away in terms of being 
able to move to whatever union they saw fit, and that it was 
important for the stability of the health care system that there be 
a period of time of cooling off for allowing this reorganization 
to take hold. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think when I recall the arguments of the 
day they were reasonable arguments at the time. But here we 
are in 2005, almost 10 full years after this initial change and 
recommendations of the Dorsey Commission, and this 
government is still asking for extensions for that stability to 
continue. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think in the 10 intervening years 
there have been some significant changes in the health care 
system itself. 
 
We’ve moved from the districts to the regions, and over that 
period of time certain groups of workers have lobbied members 

of the government and ourselves as opposition and made pretty 
compelling arguments about the fact that the current 
arrangement in all instances doesn’t serve everybody well. 
Technicians and technologists in the laboratories for example 
have said that they don’t feel that the bargaining unit that 
they’ve been assigned to by Dorsey is serving their purposes 
well and they would like to exercise their rights as workers to 
have different representation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while the arguments of the government a 
decade ago almost had some validity, I’m not so sure that they 
currently have that same validity given the intervening time and 
years and the changes to the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also mentions that it’s necessary to 
have the Labour Relations Board have some additional 
authority and powers that they don’t have. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
given the Labour Relations Board’s track record, I’m not too 
sure that it’s in the best interests of workers that that group of 
people have any more authority and responsibility than is 
already allocated to them, and certainly not without the support 
and comment of workers in this province that share that same 
desire. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s extremely important that we 
have time to be able to consult with the workers who are saying 
to us that they don’t feel the current configuration is appropriate 
for them. We need to listen to their arguments and get their 
counsel, and in order for that to happen, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s important at this time that I adjourn debate. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill 88 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 94 — The Apiaries Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of my remarks I will move second reading of The 
Apiaries Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s beekeepers have done an 
excellent job of growing and diversifying this province’s 
honeybee industry through extensive research and development, 
and through careful management and control of insects and 
pests. The legislation I’m proposing today will continue to 
support this growing industry. There have been big changes in 
the industry in the past 30 years in Saskatchewan and Canada, 
with the greatest changes occurring in Western Canadian 
beekeeping. 
 
Saskatchewan beekeepers have one of the highest per colony 
honey production averages in the world, Mr. Speaker. They 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

have gone from an imported packaged bee industry to one of 
relative self-reliance with overwintering of bees. They have 
learned how to monitor for the presence of mites and to apply 
controls to minimize the damage while maintaining 
productivity. These producers are leaders in research and 
development to improve genetic resistance to the mite, thereby 
reducing the dependency on chemical controls. 
 
The Apiaries Act was first introduced in the 1920s and was last 
fully revised in 1973. The last amendment was in 1995 and it is 
time to again update the Act to ensure that it meets industry 
needs. 
 
The proposed Bill I’m introducing in the House today will 
ensure that the necessary legislative authority is there to support 
the industry’s efforts in minimizing the impact of bee diseases 
and pests. In order to support this industry, Mr. Speaker, we met 
with the Saskatchewan Beekeepers Association and we 
communicated with the producers. Mr. Speaker, they support 
the policies on the proposed Bill because they are concerned 
about threats to the industry from the resistant strains of 
American foulbrood and varroa mites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they anticipate the Act will continue to provide 
authority for programs to prevent or minimize the spread of 
these mites. I appreciate and thank all the stakeholder groups 
who provided us with their valuable input throughout this 
process. 
 
The main purpose of the Act is to minimize the spread of 
diseases and pests of honeybees. This Bill will continue to 
require registration of beekeepers, sets out conditions for 
operating apiaries, provides for quarantines to limit movement 
of bees from areas infested with a bee pest to non-infested 
areas, requires permits for importation of bees, and provides for 
orders to correct unsatisfactory operations. Amendments to the 
Act are proposed to ensure that the legal authority exists to 
enforce the intent of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is critical that we continue to support this 
valuable industry with enforceable legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I say let it be. And I move that The Apiaries Act, 2005 be read a 
second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 94, The Apiaries Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
indeed a pleasure to be able to stand today to speak about The 
Apiaries Act that was just introduced by the minister. I would 
like to join with the minister in the praise that he has given of 
the beekeepers in our province. They are indeed very important 
to the agriculture industry as a whole to Saskatchewan, and they 
are doing extremely well within our province. 
 
It was a surprise to me because there’s a few sizeable 
beekeepers in my own constituency. I was surprised to learn 
that the drought affected them quite considerably when we had 
two years of consecutive drought in the Humboldt constituency. 

And in speaking with the beekeepers that are in that area, they 
were telling me how their feed costs were increased 
significantly because they needed to feed the bees more when 
there was a drought. 
 
It’s been an ongoing situation with the beekeepers and a debate 
among the beekeepers, when it comes to border crossing of 
bees. There are some of the beekeepers that feel that queen bees 
should be more accessible from the US, and there’s other 
beekeepers that doesn’t agree with that viewpoint. So it will be 
interesting to meet with them to see what they feel this Bill will 
do to affect their industry. 
 
But I do understand the need for very tight border controls on 
the bees because of disease. My background, as most members 
in this Assembly know, is working in a microbiology lab. And 
even though it was human lab, I am first-hand knowledgeable in 
what happens when you get an antibiotic resistant bacteria and 
all of the difficulties and challenges that comes with that. And 
yes, in humans is one thing. But in the livestock, bees, etc., in 
the agriculture industry, it’s also extremely important that we 
monitor and safeguard ourselves from antibiotic resistant strains 
of bacteria getting into any sector within the agriculture 
industry. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I will be 
taking this Bill to the beekeepers that are in my area as well as 
meeting with the organizations in the industry, and getting their 
input and seeing what they have to say about this Bill. 
Therefore I will adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Humboldt that debate on second reading of Bill No. 94 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Now why is the member 
for Saskatoon Centre on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — To introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to the rest of the House I’d like to 
introduce the walkers that I was talking about earlier that have 
been busy walking from the North to the South. They’re here in 
your gallery, and I just ask them to give a wave as I read their 
names. Don Skuce, okay, Don. And Roland Duquette and 
Shirley Kowalski and the organizer — the drive here — Cliff 
Shockey. All right, there you go. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — There you go, all right. Now you may 
notice that they’ve got their centennial pins on, and they’ve 
been carrying the Saskatchewan flag proudly across the 
province. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I ask you all to give them a 
warm welcome, send them off to finish off their trip. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Moose Jaw North on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to join in the introduction of guests 
if I may. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been granted. I recognize the member 
for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the centennial I just 
want to join with the Hon. Minister of the Environment in 
extending congratulations to our walkers who have undertaken 
an outstanding centennial project, going from the north end of 
this huge province of ours to the southern tip all in celebration 
of good health and bringing attention to that. 
 
Over the course of the last week and a half or so I’ve had three 
occasions to pass the walkers and after . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I was driving. They were they were walking 
then, and walking rather briskly I would add. But each time I 
passed, I was pleased to just give a . . . to toot the horn as just a 
short rejoinder of celebration together with them, get a hearty 
wave both ways. 
 
And I want to extend centennial congratulations to our walkers 
to wish them well on the rest of their journey and to wish them 
all a very happy centennial. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
after my remarks I’ll be moving second reading of the 
amendments to The Ecological Reserves Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are blessed. Our forests, 
lakes, rivers, and native prairie are second to none. On the 
whole, our environment is vibrant and healthy. Even so, we 
recognize the need to make sure it stays that way. We have 
taken several steps to do just that. 
 
For example, our representative areas network protects a system 
of areas representing the full range of ecological and biological 

resources found here in Saskatchewan. The representative area 
network now stands at 9 per cent of Saskatchewan’s land and 
water, close to 6 million hectares. With additional sites 
identified, that will move us to 10 per cent in the next few 
years. 
 
We are committed to using the representative areas network to 
protect about 7.8 million hectares or about 12 per cent of 
Saskatchewan. Land included in the representative areas 
network will still be available for other uses such as camping, 
hunting, fishing, and trapping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our protected areas also include 38 ecological 
reserves. Our ecological reserves conserve some of the most 
unique and valuable environments in this province, including 
the Great Sand Hills representative area ecological reserve. The 
amendments to The Ecological Reserves Act clearly state that 
the boundaries of any of the provinces 38 ecological reserves 
cannot be changed without approval of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The changes to The Ecological Reserves Act also includes extra 
protection for the Great Sand Hills representative area 
ecological reserve in the form of an additional amendment. This 
amendment would ensure that, as well as the boundaries, land 
uses allowed in the Great Sand Hills reserve could not be 
changed without approval of the Legislative Assembly. This 
will provide a greater level of protection for the Great Sand 
Hills ecological reserve than any other ecological reserves have 
received under this legislation. 
 
The Great Sand Hills ecological reserve covers 36,585 hectares 
or 141.25 square miles. That’s about 18 per cent of the Great 
Sand Hills. The amendments would allow for activities such as 
exercising treaty rights, ranching and hunting to continue in the 
Great Sand Hills representative areas ecological reserve. 
However, activities such as gas development would not be 
allowed. 
 
The Great Sand Hills is a unique and sensitive area. It is rich in 
flora and fauna, including endangered and rare species that are 
unique to the Great Sand Hills ecosystem. The Great Sand Hills 
also have the largest area of sand dunes on the Canadian prairie. 
The area also has significant gas development underway with a 
potential for more in the future, making it important to the 
economy of the area and the province. 
 
The government has accepted all the recommendations of the 
Great Sand Hills land use strategy review committee in 
principle and added more protected land to the area. 
 
We recently established a scientific advisory committee that 
will conduct a regional environmental study of nearly 200,000 
hectares or 750 square miles in the Great Sand Hills. The field 
work for the regional environmental study will begin this spring 
with a target date for completion of the study’s final report set 
for 2006-07. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our actions demonstrate our government’s 
commitment to conserving our environment while developing a 
green and prosperous economy. These actions are also 
significant steps forward in the government’s commitment to 
addressing recommendations of the Great Sand Hills land use 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

plan review committee. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I respectfully move second reading of the 
amendments to The Ecological Reserves Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that the Bill No. 95, The Ecological Reserves 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak to this Bill 
and to make certain comments about this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
reviewing this piece of legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
purpose of this Bill is to ensure that the ultimate accountability 
for ecological matters regarding this Bill and this area come 
back to the legislature and are not dealt with by way of 
committee or by way of bureaucratic involvement. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s imperative for all 
members of the House to realize that whether they do the things 
by way of regulation or by way of legislation, that they are 
ultimately the ones that are accountable to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan for this. The problem with bringing things back 
to the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the risk of politicizing the 
situation and politicizing the process that takes place. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have no fundamental problems with the 
process coming back to the House by way of . . . for further 
debate in the event that there’s going to be changes made to 
this. However it is the expectation of the members on this side 
that the hard work and diligence that would be done before it’s 
brought forward and that we would see reports and evaluations 
that are done using best practice methods, and would be done 
with proper review, evaluation, and environmental assessments 
rather than mere politicking on the parts of some of the other 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Great Sand Hills is one of Saskatchewan’s 
little-known jewels. It is part of the diverse ecological heritage 
of Saskatchewan. There are many unique species in this area, 
including — and if I have my wording right — the ferruginous 
hawk, the Great Plains toad, and the Ord’s kangaroo rat, which 
sounds to me suspiciously like some cabinet members’ names. 
But at the risk of crossing the line, I will withdraw that before I 
even make the statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this area, the Crown owns 85 per cent 
of this land. It is used for ranching, gas exploration, and 
recreation. These are all major uses of this area. There is a very 
high potential for natural gas development. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we need to ensure that there is an appropriate balance 
to allow development, exploration, and utilization of that, while 

at the same time protecting this very fragile environment and 
very fragile ecosystem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the 1990s, the RMs [rural municipality] of 
that area and the Great Sand Hills Planning District 
Commission developed a report and did a very extensive review 
and made recommendations to the government that allowed for 
additional land to be set aside and other areas of that land to be 
controlled growth. That report was submitted in June 2004. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it would be my recommendation and 
suggestion that that report should be circulated through that area 
and elsewhere to allow for some appropriate community input 
and industry input as well. If there is going to be development 
in this area, there should be some significant environmental 
assessments done to ensure that the ecosystem is protected. 
 
There is also significant potential for recreational use in this 
area. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen certain areas of shore 
land elsewhere on the continent that have been badly damaged 
by dune buggies and other types of motorized vehicles. We 
would want to take steps to ensure that the recreational uses that 
the Great Sand Hills would be put to would not damage this 
fragile environment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I noted as well when I was researching for 
this Bill that in Sceptre, Saskatchewan, there is a museum. And 
while I haven’t attended the museum, I would like to note and 
suggest that all members might want to attend it as they travel 
through that area. The admission fee is only $3 and given the 
current state of MLA compensation, it may be a good 
affordable summer break to go to that institute. So would like to 
suggest that may be an appropriate thing for all members to 
review. 
 
This is, Mr. Speaker, an interesting area of the province. People 
travel through there on their way to Swift Current, Medicine 
Hat, Calgary and often drive by without going in. And it may be 
advisable for all MLAs to consider visiting this part of the 
province. It’s not something that’s remotely situated. 
 
We want to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ensure that if there is going to 
be further development in this area, that it’s done appropriately. 
There are the possibilities of horizontal drilling and other things 
that may well allow for the safe development of the natural gas 
reserves that are in this area. And we should be approaching 
this with the area, that we are stewards of this resource, but we 
want to see the resource developed and appropriately utilized 
for the long-term benefit of all of the residents of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think the members opposite too often see themselves as a 
goalie and they want to block all development and I don’t think 
that’s the appropriate approach that should be taken. We should 
see ourselves as wanting to be careful stewards, balancing the 
risks that are there. We would want to see ourselves, in effect, 
as a referee or a coach, rather than as a goalie using terms that 
some of the members opposite might feel more comfortable. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast 
has moved debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. After 
my remarks, I’ll be moving second reading of The Prairie 
Forest Fire Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
In 2001, a $40 million forest fire contingency fund was put into 
place as a mechanism to ensure that funding was available to 
fight large forest fires. Since then, significant changes to our 
approach to forest fire management, both operational and 
financial, have rendered this fund unnecessary. 
 
In March 2003, the province approved a new fire and forest, 
insect and disease policy framework, developed after extensive 
public consultation. The new policy uses a values-at-risk 
approach to ensure that our firefighting resources are being used 
appropriately. 
 
Under the new policy we continue to protect what’s most 
important to people. The new policy also allows fire, wherever 
possible, to play a more natural role in the ecology of our 
northern forest. As well, in November 2004 we announced 
plans to invest significantly in the renewal of our fire response 
fleet of aircraft, a $42.4 million investment over the next four 
years. 
 
Last year we implemented an additional increase of $30 million 
to the fire management and forest protection branch’s base 
budget. As documented in this year’s budget, we are continuing 
to fund fire management and forest protection at this higher 
level. All of these enhancements taken together have addressed 
many of the reasons for establishing the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. The fund was depleted during the difficult 
2002 fire season, it has not been used since, and there is no 
money in the fund now. 
 
To simplify budget accounting for the fire program, and to 
implement the recommendations of the Provincial Auditor, we 
are winding up the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. To do this it 
is necessary to repeal the section of the Act that brought the 
fund into existence. 
 
I therefore respectfully move second reading of The Prairie and 
Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 98, The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well when you first 
look at this fund, it sounds like the present day government . . . 

broke and out of money. 
 
It says this fund was started in 2001 so I vaguely remember it 
coming through the House, and I remember some of the stuff 
that was said on it. It said that creating the constituency fund 
will ensure money is readily available to fight large forest fires 
and allow us to better address ongoing priorities. It also will 
prepare us to staying on top our forest fire situation both fiscally 
and responsibility. Which is good, Mr. Speaker, because the 
people that fight these forest fires, they put their lives on the 
line every day and they do need the money and the protection. 
 
And I can remember a couple of the issues that were raised with 
. . . about it, concerns I guess would be, is this going to be more 
of a bureaucratic fund? Will some of that money instead of 
actually going to the front-line services, Mr. Speaker, or, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, going to the front-line services, will it be eaten 
up by bureaucracy? And that I’m not sure of yet. You know we 
could do some checking on that because I want to make sure 
that they have the funds. 
 
Now I know the last year was a wet year and there wasn’t many 
forest fires up there. In 2002, like the minister had said, it was a 
dry year up North. I can remember the forest fire situation up 
there was desperate at times in 2001-2002. 
 
Now this government has a tendency to maybe not look too far 
ahead sometimes and one of the issues that I want them to 
realize that there will be some more dry years coming on and 
there will be some large fires and then we’ll have a forest fire 
problem again. 
 
Now by shifting this money in to fight these fires, closing out 
this fund, I want to make sure they haven’t actually cut the 
funding to ensure that when these large fires, and we do have 
. . . When dry years come along that we do have the resources 
up North that they will be able to fight these fires, Mr. Speaker, 
that they’re going to have the equipment to actually fight them, 
so that when the . . . Because that is what this government’s job 
role is to provide so the firefighters up there will have the 
services and the resources to fight these fires. 
 
Now he talked about consulting with the interested parties out 
there and I’d also like to . . . We’re going to be finding out in 
the next week or two if they actually did because this 
government has kind of a habit of saying they did and then 
really not doing it, like consulting with some of the parties in 
the past, which has been proven too. In the past it’s been, it’s 
pretty well a known fact on that. There’s been quite a few 
instances of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are the roles that we will be looking at, to actually talk 
to the people, the front line people on there, if they have 
adequate services to be fighting these fires on there and that 
they’re not just basically shortchanging them when they take 
away this fund. Are they going to be short? Basically there was 
$40 million thrown into it. Does that mean in the upcoming 
budget in the next year or two that they will be short $40 
million when they have to go out and fight these fires? 
 
We talk about tourism in the North and we need to preserve the 
forests there and the safety of the people that are fighting these 
fires with this contingency fund that was set up and now being 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

dismantled. 
 
It also raises the question, and we did raise it back in 2001, is it 
just more . . . was it just more bureaucratic, another level of 
administration with having a separate fund. Is it getting to be 
the point of . . . Our role as government and the role over on 
this side is to simplify government; to simplify that the money 
flows to the right hands when it’s needed at the right time and 
not different funds over here, and different funds over here, and 
the pocket of money over here, because this government has 
been known to shift money around and play with figures. It’s 
been proven in the past with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund at that 
end, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I’m going to be adjourning 
debate on this while we go out and consult with the people that 
will be directly affected by this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 59 — The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
thank you for the opportunity to speak on Bill No. 59, The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004. It’s a pleasure to be up in 
the House. There was quite a lineup of people wanting to speak 
on the centennial year debate and speak about the horrendous 
budget brought down by the NDP, and I didn’t get into that 
queue. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to speak on this Bill 
because I’ve had considerable feedback from constituents in the 
Rosetown-Elrose riding, and throughout Saskatchewan, 
expressing their concerns about Bill No. 59, The Ambulance 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act is an important Act because it affects 
health care, and it affects people being able to receive health 
care when they need it — particularly in an emergency 
situations — and receive it in a timely fashion, in an immediate 
fashion, so that hurt may be relieved and in fact lives may be 
saved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you will allow me, I’d like to go back a few 
decades, actually back to the 1970s, and relate a personal 
experience. Mr. Speaker, that’s a long time ago. In fact that was 
way back when Allan Blakeney was the premier of 
Saskatchewan. And at the point in time was when my wife Gail 
and I were beginning our career on the farm in Saskatchewan. 

We’d just been married and we were building a house. 
 
Now unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there was a construction 
accident on the site. And this I believe was in 1978. And it was 
a serious accident, Mr. Speaker. We called the closest health 
care facility, which was the hospital in Beechy, and they had no 
ambulance. And this gentleman was in severe pain. In fact we 
weren’t sure whether it was life threatening. And that’s a very 
frightening situation to be in, and I wish that upon no one in this 
room, or no one anywhere. But it happened. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had to wait a long time for our doctor to arrive 
in a station wagon, and we had to make shift a way to get the 
injured worker out of the basement of a house under 
construction, into the back of a station wagon, and that station 
wagon had to drive — I believe it was about three-quarters of 
an hour or longer — to meet an ambulance. It might have been 
a little less, it might have been half an hour to meet the 
ambulance which I believe was coming from another distant 
community. And then they had to transfer, try to stabilize this 
construction worker, move him out of the station wagon into a 
health care facility, and then out of that health care facility into 
an ambulance and rush him into the city of Saskatoon. It turned 
out he had a number of broken ribs and there was some internal 
hurts, and it was in fact a very serious injury. And he 
experienced a lot of pain and we experienced a lot of anxiety 
because there wasn’t proper emergency care present when it 
was needed. It just wasn’t there. 
 
Others shared those concerns in our community, and the 
community in the 1980s, I believe it was, bought an ambulance; 
fully outfitted that ambulance. It was community owned and it 
brought a lot of comfort to all of us who were concerned about 
health care emergencies and the timeliness of having an 
ambulance reach an injury scene, or be available to take a heart 
attack victim or whoever required ambulance service to a health 
care facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only has our community purchased an 
ambulance, but they have made sure there are trained staff to 
service that vehicle and to be on board that vehicle when it’s in 
use. And in fact the ambulance has been traded off and a better 
ambulance has been acquired. And you know, the story is fairly 
positive because of community initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s even a paramedic from Edmonton who 
returned to his home in the Beechy area and he is part of the 
team that are involved in providing good emergency measures 
service to our community. People have become confident in our 
emergency measures response team and in the ambulance 
service that we have in our community. It’s trusted and it’s a 
needed service. 
 
Well recently, Mr. Speaker, with some of the budgeting of 
health care dollars in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
Heartland Health Authority has indicated that it wants to reduce 
ambulance service in its health care authority region. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a consolidation of service and it’s causing a lot 
of concern in the community in which I live and in other areas 
like Dodsland and Plenty where ambulance service has been 
reduced and further cutbacks are being threatened. 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

And so then they hear about this Act that we’re debating today, 
Mr. Speaker, and they find out that this may further impair 
emergency response service to the communities that I represent. 
And they feel threatened by this, Mr. Speaker, and rightfully so. 
 
SEMSA [Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services 
Association], the Saskatchewan emergency measures 
association, have pointed out that there are flaws in Bill No. 59. 
Particularly, the flaws are the loss of sections no. 10 and section 
no. 18. Mr. Speaker, if this amendment is passed, it will mean 
that with the loss of section 10, deemed renewal is gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those providing ambulance service, that means 
it’s more difficult to secure the financing, particularly if you 
want to improve your equipment. It’s more difficult to go to the 
bank and receive the required funds — if some are needed — 
when in fact the deemed renewal is not there, regardless of how 
good your service is and whether you’re meeting the needs of 
your community and doing it in a proper manner. 
 
And then of course, with the loss of section no. 18, the process 
of mediation and arbitration for contractual disputes related to 
the assignment of the contract and the performance of the 
contract is also lost. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there needs to be accountability, 
and all of those who provide emergency services such as 
ambulance service to the province of Saskatchewan are 
certainly prepared to be accountable. There’s no doubt that they 
want to improve their quality of service, that they want to meet 
the standards that are set. But, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is particularly wrong and unfair of this government 
to suggest that the deemed renewal should be removed and that 
the process of mediation and arbitration for performance on 
contracts should be lost. 
 
This is a wrong move and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, one of 
two things needs to happen: either this Bill should be 
withdrawn, corrected, and reintroduced or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this Bill should receive some significant amendments. And 
we’re not talking about mere friendly amendments. We’re 
talking about some substantial change to make the Bill 
acceptable and beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just the way that the Health minister 
has approached this Bill is particularly disappointing. It seems 
like he’s more interested in getting his little piece of legislation 
through than considering the consequences of an important 
service to the people of Saskatchewan and what might happen 
to that service if this Bill isn’t fixed. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
indeed a regrettable position to be taken by the Minister of 
Health, and one that I wish that he would reconsider and 
change. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we need a government, an NDP government 
over there, that recognizes that it’s wrong and will change the 
mistakes it made. Now, Mr. Speaker, we keep seeing the NDP 
government repeat over and over mistakes, and we see them sit 
on those mistakes until the problem becomes so huge that they 
have to, in fact, make a change. We see them lacking vision and 
direction, and The Ambulance Act, I believe, is another 
example of that. 
 

But there are examples like the PST [provincial sales tax]. Mr. 
Speaker, I remember when the NDP raised the PST. They 
raised it from 7 per cent up to 9 per cent. And then, Mr. 
Speaker, they decided to lower it from 9 per cent down to 7 per 
cent and then from 7 per cent down to 6 per cent. They always 
talk about when they lower the tax but they never talked about 
when they raised it. Now, Mr. Speaker, they’ve increased the 
PST back up to 7 per cent. People are frustrated by a 
government that doesn’t know how to create a strong economy 
and how to ensure that there’s predictable tax levels in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Likewise, they want to have confidence that the Minister of 
Health and his department has a grip on providing health care, 
and including emergency services in health care, to the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, same thing, the same attribute of the NDP that 
we’ve seen, and with The Ambulance Act has been seen, in the 
issue of property tax. Mr. Speaker, a few years ago the NDP 
said, well we should try to lower the property tax on 
agricultural land. And so they brought in this 25 per cent 
reduction but it was only for two years. And, Mr. Speaker, 
when the two years were up, then they cancelled the reduction 
and full property tax was again assessed and collected on 
agriculture property. And then now, Mr. Speaker, they are back 
at it again in another two-year program. This time it’s a measly 
8 per cent reduction, probably far less than the increases that 
municipalities will be forced to impose on their ratepayers 
because of the NDP’s neglect in funding for education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now they’re doing it again with this 
ambulance Act. Mr. Speaker, they had the proper clauses in the 
original Act, the clauses that allowed deemed renewal to take 
place. And, Mr. Speaker, the section of the Act that recognized 
performance, they want to take this out. It’s a big mistake. So I 
challenge the Minister of Health to, for once, recognize the 
mistake before the damage is done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not, this is not . . . we’re not talking about a 
tax measure, and those are serious issues. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
not talking about the forest fire amendment Act and the 
contingency fund, another example of where they tried 
something and then they took it away. 
 
And I remember that debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We voted 
against the budget. And the members on the other side said, you 
shouldn’t vote against this budget. I remember the member for 
Athabasca and the former member for Cumberland arguing that 
we should support the budget because it had a Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund in it. If we voted against it, somehow or 
another we were against fighting forest fires in Saskatchewan. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now the NDP themselves are discontinuing 
the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. It has no money and they say 
it’s not needed. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t problematic, and if that doesn’t 
exemplify the problem with this ambulance Act, I don’t know 
what does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also saw the NDP government introduce a new 
municipal Act. And they told us last year, you’ve got to rush 
this municipal Act through the legislature. We’ve got to have it 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

out there lickety-split. Well, Mr. Speaker, we said, no. The 
municipal Act is an important Act, just as this ambulance Act is 
an important Act. And it needs to be duly considered. And we 
need to think about the consequences of this Act. Let’s not rush 
it through. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for Municipal 
Affairs in this spring session of the legislature withdrew that 
new municipal Act because it needed to be fixed up. I tell the 
Minister of Health, this ambulance Act needs to be fixed up. I 
ask the Minister of Health to either withdraw the Act and fix it 
so it protects the people of Saskatchewan and ensures good 
ambulance service through the province or else do a major 
overhaul through amendments of the Act. Do not let this Act go 
forward in its current state. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s one thing the NDP needs to be told over 
and over again, it’s get things right; get things fixed. Don’t put 
up with second-class legislation. Don’t make third-rate 
decisions. Start doing things right. Get it right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP needs to stop spinning its wheels. Our province is just 
teetering on the edge of whether we’re a have province or a 
have-not province. Every decision we make will either 
strengthen this province and help us to be on strong ground, 
strong fiscal grounds, provide better health care including 
emergency health care, or it moves us into the have-not side of 
the ledger, where we can’t afford good health care, where we 
can’t afford good emergency response systems. Mr. Speaker, 
these are all important issues. 
 
And so in conclusion, again I ask the Minister of Health, 
consider the importance of Bill No. 59, The Ambulance 
Amendment Act, 2004. Consider the consequences if they 
remove section no. 10 and section no. 18. Bring it back; fix it, 
bring it back. Do it right, before it goes through this House, 
rather than allowing the mess to continue, the second-rate 
legislation to be implemented, and then having to bring it back 
like they brought back the forest fire amendment Act and as 
they’re bringing back the municipal Act. Start getting things 
right to start with. It’ll save us all a lot of time, a lot of trouble; 
save the people of Saskatchewan a lot of heartache, a lot of 
grief, and a lot of anxiety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon that I would move that we now adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 59. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Rosetown-Elrose 
has moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 86 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m certainly 
pleased to be able to enter into debate on Bill 86, the second 
amendment that we’ve seen this sitting to The Labour Standards 
Act. 
 
I was listening carefully to my colleague, the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose, and I heard him say that this government 
needs to get things right. And they certainly do. This may be a 
rare occasion where — at least in the limited scope of this Bill 
— where they’ve got it at least three-quarters of the way right. 
And one of the reasons that perhaps they did is because they 
looked at the private member’s Bill that my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast tabled, the whistleblowers 
Act, and that’s what this Bill basically, these amendments 
basically deal with. There are some provisions of these 
amendments that we feel perhaps could be strengthened and we 
would hope that perhaps the minister may bring some 
amendments forward before we’re done dealing with this Bill. 
 
But there certainly is a need to protect those workers that in the 
workplace who see individuals breaking the law, whether it be 
other colleagues of theirs in the workplace or the employer, that 
they have an avenue whereby they can report these 
wrongdoings and not be persecuted for doing so. There has 
been recent cases in this province where working people have 
stepped forward and said, what’s happening in my workplace is 
wrong, and they’ve reported it to their superiors and ended up 
losing their jobs. And that certainly is not acceptable, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And so therefore, these amendments would 
certainly correct some of those inequities and I think we need to 
acknowledge that. 
 
[15:15] 
 
However there are some things in these amendments that 
perhaps need to be clarified and if we would refer to some of 
the press that surrounded the first reading . . . or second reading 
of this Bill, a lawyer from Regina who represents Ms. Linda 
Merk in a case where Ms. Merk stepped forward and indicated 
that there were some problems in her workplace, the lawyer, 
Roger Lepage, is quoted as saying in the November 27 issue of 
the Leader-Post that while these amendments are helpful, 
perhaps they didn’t go quite far enough in the area of defining 
lawful authority and direct and indirect supervisors. And the 
lawyer, Mr. Lepage, goes on to say that — and I’m quoting now 
— he’s referring to the lawful authority section: 
 

“It should say something like “any person who has control 
over the workplace or the employee or the employer” . . .  
 

And that perhaps is something that the minister may want to 
look at and perhaps bring forward an amendment. 
 
I believe in that same article she was quoted as saying that she 
may be . . . that this Bill would be held over to the spring 
session, sitting, which we are in now, and that perhaps we may 
see some changes. So we will be watching carefully to look at 
and see if some of those amendments are being brought forward 
or perhaps we may have to do that on the opposition side. 
 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

But we will certainly be willing to work with the Minister of 
Labour and this government to strengthen protection for 
working men and women who feel . . . who will come forward 
and report wrongdoing. I think that needs to be very strong in 
our society for the betterment of all members of our society. 
 
It’s interesting, I think that we will probably — if we can take 
the Minister of Labour and the Premier at their word — we will 
see a further amendment to The Labour Standards Act 
sometime in this spring sitting. And we’re certainly waiting to 
see this, a third amendment brought forward dealing with the 
government-directed, additional hours issue, section 13.4 in The 
Labour Standards Act. This was an ill-fated attempt by the 
Minister of Labour to perhaps gain some . . . for political gain, 
which blew up in her government’s face, and I think the sooner 
that she and her government deals with this issue, I think, the 
better. I think we need to put this to rest. As indicated by not 
only working men and women but by employers, by 
municipalities whether they be urban or rural, by universities, 
health regions, that that certainly wasn’t an appropriate way of 
directing additional hours. That is best left to be negotiated and 
done within the workplace. And so, we need to deal with that in 
a fairly quick and precise way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Also I’d like to take this opportunity to perhaps make a few 
general comments about the misconception that we see on that 
side of the House as far as the bargaining process and defending 
workers’ rights. It seems to . . . The NDP seem to think that 
they are the guardians and the stewards of workers’ rights. Well 
nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
It does no one in this province any good to see one group of 
individuals being taken advantage by another group. The role of 
government should not be to take sides either on one side of an 
issue or another side of an issue, when it comes to labour 
relations . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. There are 
individuals who vote against some of the very people, their 
colleagues, that they worked hard alongside to represent. 
 
And we hear a member from the backbenches from Regina 
protesting as if we are intruding on their ground and that is . . . 
Nothing could be further from the truth. All the reasonable 
people in this province have a vested interest in seeing that we 
have fair and impartial labour laws and that they be interpreted 
and administered in a fair and impartial way. 
 
I can tell you that as my role, former role as Labour critic, I 
spent a number of hours sitting down with labour leaders in this 
province and talking about labour relations and the atmosphere 
and the environment of labour relations in this province. And I 
want to tell this House that if these people on that side of the 
House think that the people in the labour movement are entirely 
enthralled with the direction that this NDP government has 
taken in the last few years, they better wake up and smell the 
toast. Because there are a lot of working men and women who 
have seen what this government has done, has used the working 
men and women as political pawns for political gain. 
 
And I can tell you it’s been noted and it certainly hasn’t been 
appreciated. And I can also tell you that it would not surprise 
me in the next election that that discontent will be very evident 
at the polls, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

As I was saying, the role of government needs to be that fair 
and impartial body that both employees and representative 
employees and employers can go to help them deal with 
conflict within the workplace; and to help them come to 
contracts, settlements, if they are unable to do that themselves. 
But it must be fair and impartial. And even though when in my 
discussions with labour leaders we had very different opinions 
on how we would attain that, we certainly did not disagree on 
the fact that the government’s role in any jurisdiction should be 
that third party that is fair and impartial, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and that the application and creation of new labour laws and the 
administration of labour laws should be done so, and fairness 
should be the underpinning of that. 
 
And that is what this party is all about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Because when you have that environment, it leads to job 
opportunities, career opportunities for the working men and 
women of this province, and that is a good thing. And it is 
something that people feel comfortable in coming to our 
province to create jobs for the betterment of all citizens of this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, although as I said we are certainly 
supportive of many of the parts and amendments that are 
contained in this Bill, I think we will just like . . . I would like 
to adjourn debate at this time to give the Minister of Labour 
perhaps the chance to strengthen a few portions that have been 
identified. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Last Mountain-Touchwood that debate be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 87 — The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to enter in debate on Bill No. 87, 
The Trade Union Amendment Act. 
 
As I understand the intent of the Act, it basically deals with 
several issues. They are to allow the Chair of the Labour 
Relations Board to designate him or herself, or the Vice-Chair, 
to hear certain matters alone; to give board members the same 
privileges and immunities as justices of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench; to allow members of the board, presumably including 
the Chair and the Vice-Chair, to complete cases that they have 
been involved in after the completion of their term; and to 
provide powers to the board to have themselves or any 
appointee enter and inspect premises and question any person. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to allow to matters between union 
members and unions to be heard only by the Chair or 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

Vice-Chair of the board opens the door to even wider than it is 
now towards bias towards one party or another. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, every precaution must be taken to protect 
the most vulnerable in these kinds of matters. And all 
reasonable people will understand that a trade union would 
likely be better represented in a situation of this kind than 
would an ordinary employee who happens to have a complaint 
against his union. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this unequal struggle is one that needs to 
be addressed. It is certainly not an area for any board that 
operates by the good graces of the provincial government 
should be seen to be cutting corners. These individual workers 
who have complaints against their unions deserve the 
consideration of a full panel of the Labour Relations Board, just 
as unions and employers do when they square off against each 
other. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one might even suggest that it is an 
attempt by one party or another to keep complaints of this kind 
by employees against their own unions as quiet and as low key 
as possible, even though this may mitigate against the weaker 
party receiving justice in that situation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this kind of corner cutting also takes 
whatever balance out of situations like this that was supposed to 
exist with the Labour Relations Board, whether such matters 
were to be heard by . . . whereby such matters were to be heard 
by a balance of board members from trade union and employer 
side of issues. This so-called balance has been badly violated by 
this government that owes its very existence to the trade union 
movement. 
 
But to proceed with this Bill would be to pretend in a very 
blatant fashion that no such balance was to ever exist. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as regards giving members of the board the 
privileges and immunities of justices of the Court of Queen’s 
Bench, it should only be considered that justices of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench are bound by very strict rules on process and 
procedure, especially as it relates to how hearings are 
conducted. 
 
No amendment to such in 18.1 should be considered unless the 
government is willing to remove all current members of the 
Labour Relations Board and reappoint a full board through a 
much more stringent appointment process and a process that 
will result for the first time in recent history in some real 
balance between labour and management on the board. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not acceptable for members of the 
board who may have been dismissed for one reason or another 
to be able to complete investigations and deliberations on cases 
that they have been involved in. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is no 
more proper than it would be for those members opposite to 
continue on as MLAs after they are defeated in the next 
election. Mr. Speaker, I won’t go on at length about this issue 
because it is obvious to any member of the public that people in 
any job must leave their duties when they are dismissed or their 
mandate expires. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, finally with regard to the provision that 
would allow the board or any appointee of the board to enter 

into premises and inspect, view work, material, machinery, 
appliances, articles, records, or documents, and to question any 
person, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, these are powers 
ordinarily given only to police and safety offence regulators, 
and powers that are even in the hands of those professionals to 
be used only in very limited circumstances usually involving a 
court order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no need or justification for any 
adjudicative board to have such powers. Mr. Speaker, the 
Labour Relations Board is seen now as a board that is biased 
against management, and heavy-handed in the abuse of the 
powers that they already have. To give the board extraordinary 
powers of this kind in an atmosphere already poisoned by the 
board’s perceived bias is nothing short of irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the government will reconsider this Bill 
and pull it from the agenda. Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 
must be defeated and for now I move to adjourn it. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek that second reading debate on Bill No. 87, The 
Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004, be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 80 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
the debate on this particular Bill, Bill No. 80, The Education 
Amendment Act. Probably since I’ve been a MLA this 
particular subject of amalgamation, trustees, education, has 
been one of the ones I’ve received the most letters on and also 
probably the most talking. And I’ve attended a lot of meetings 
throughout the last year dealing with it; it’s a very contentious 
issue dealing with it. 
 
This particular Bill, understand, deals with the election of 
trustees which in itself — never mind the amalgamation end of 
it — is quite contentious. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I was just going through a map . . . In fact I had one person, 
trustee, phone me and he’s thinking of running for election. But 
where he had one little school, he now has — he will if he wins 
that election — he will have three schools to look after and a 
district that is almost half the size of my constituency. Because 
the whole school division that I belong to personally is three 
times the size of my constituency. 
 
My constituency is one of the larger ones in this province. I 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

think I’m at 4,500 square miles of it, so you can times that by 
three. For some of the members opposite, it starts at Davidson 
. . . well comes up closer to Craik, coming down No. 11 
Highway, and runs west all the way to the Alberta border. And 
that’s quite a drive, basically. So if you’re going from one end 
of it to another, basically, doing any business, you’re almost 
going to have to pack a lunch on it. That’s how far it is from 
one end to the other. 
 
And then that’s been raised, of the size of these school board 
areas, and a lot of parents are worried about it. Because I can 
remember talking to trustees before. You know, they got quite a 
few calls and you’ve got to remember this isn’t a paying job. 
They’re paid per diems for meals, for meetings, and that’s it. So 
they take their calls in the evening and they have to respond to 
the calls back in the evening, on that. And it’s on their free 
time, basically. They don’t get paid for that. And when they 
were with just one school, they used to get quite a few calls. 
 
Now this particular trustee with three schools or more, and 
some trustees will maybe have more than that under their . . . 
are they going to be . . . The parents are worried: are the trustees 
actually going to be able to address the problems? Because a 
trustee basically is like a councillor, is like an MLA. It’s going 
to be the go-between, between the student and the person and 
the people and the actual school. It’s going to be the 
go-between. That’s who a parent, if it feels that it needs to 
address a particular problem in a school, that it will go to the 
trustee, to its elected official to raise that issue with the school. 
And there is concern out there that they will not be able to 
address that on both sides, on the elected trustees even looking 
at size of the divisions of it and also from the parents’ end. 
 
And I had a couple of trustees also, good trustees — there’s 
many, many — anybody that takes a public office, you know, 
that deserves the public’s respect. They do it to better it, 
whether it’s trustees, councillors, whatever. And they’re even 
worried with the size of it that they won’t be able to do an 
adequate job. That they’re worried that they’re not going to be 
able to run. 
 
I’ve had some of them tell me, I’m not going to run. I don’t 
think I’m going to have the time. I’m actually scared I’m not 
going to be able to address the concerns of the people that 
elected me for that job; that I’m not going to be able to do a 
proper job with the size that they’re giving me to look after. 
Basically, because they’re going to have to do it at nights and 
on the weekends and whenever they’re not at their regular job 
because it isn’t a high-paying job being a trustee, as anybody 
knows that’s ever been involved in that particular end of public 
life. So looking at that, it is a concern with the trustees. 
 
I don’t even know . . . there’s some areas that there is basically 
. . . I’m glad that this one person finally said that he was going 
to step forward and put his name forward, because throughout 
my constituency the elections, I believe, could be coming up 
fairly soon this year. You should be . . . you’d think you’d be 
hearing talk of people wanting to run for this job, wanting to 
take over this particular job. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
There isn’t. Out there, there isn’t interest. 
 
When I’ve been out asking, the people that are doing it are 
saying I really don’t know if I want to go ahead. I don’t think, I 

don’t think I have the time to do what they’re asking me to do. 
That’s how conscientious these people are out there. They feel 
if I can’t actually provide the service that I’m not going to run. 
So that’s a worry out there. 
 
I think there could be some divisions out there that could have 
trouble getting people to run under these huge borders. You’re 
dealing with, like I say, from the edge of basically coming out 
of Regina, north about . . . it starts at 60 miles north of the 
Alberta border. That is a very huge, huge area. That’s three 
times my size of my constituency. 
 
And I know the trouble I have getting from one end of my 
constituency to the other. It takes me from one end to the other, 
it takes me three hours to go visit somebody and visit the 
communities and touch base. So these trustees, when they go to 
meetings, go to different events are going to have trouble with 
that, and it’s a concern. 
 
I mean, I’ve gotten letter after letter after letter dealing with 
this. And I would like to read a couple of them into the record, 
Mr. Speaker, and also for some of the members opposite just so 
they know the feeling that deals with the amalgamation out 
there, that also deals with the election of trustees. It deals with 
some of the problems because these are . . . these issues I want 
to bring to the floor and let the people know opposite of the 
feeling out there. 
 
I’ll start with this one letter that is from the Kenaston area: 
 

. . . [the minister] says he is amalgamating school divisions 
to address the inequity between the highest assessed and 
lowest assessed school boards. I’m not saying that school 
division amalgamation is not good, but I am unable to get 
clear answers to my questions. 
 
Why Amalgamate? 
 
What are the benefits of Amalgamation? It does not appear 
that there will be an improvement to education. It does not 
appear to result in a reduction in tax on property. For some 
municipalities taxes will increase. It does not appear that 
there will be a reduction in the cost of education. 

 
There are other ways to eliminate zero and negative grant 
boards and to equalize education funding besides trying to 
mix high and low assessed school boards. Roy Boughen 
had suggestions. 
 
Should we not learn from the amalgamation that occurred 
in Manitoba? The larger divisions did not have 
improvements in their education system, but did cost 
more. Any increase in dollars should be spent on 
improving education. Mr. Thomson says that [the] “larger 
school divisions will be better able to provide a full range 
of programs and services.” How? If they do not save 
money how can services be improved? 
 
Why Rush Amalgamation? 
 
Why is Mr. Thomson rushing the proposed amalgamation 
through? Why . . . [is he] not consulting with the people 
who will be affected by this change? I know that the 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

Equity Education Task force talked to the existing school 
divisions prior to presenting their report, but there has 
been no public discussion since the report has been 
presented. 
 
The newly drafted school divisions are too large covering 
thousands of square miles. The proposed division in our 
area is about 200 miles by 110 miles covering 11,600 sq 
miles. This area is too large for sports competitions, too far 
for specialists to travel to assist students, and too large to 
govern without a much larger administration. There is talk 
of satellite offices and creating sub-divisions. Why design 
a bureaucracy that is so large and is so much more 
expensive to operate than many of the current divisions? 
Further, these large boards will have less accountability to 
parents, students, and the community. 

 
Smaller school division boards have a better knowledge of 
the communities, families and students they serve and are 
therefore better able to understand and met their needs. 
Why not keep the decision-making power in the hands of 
the local communities? 

 
SchoolPLUS 
 
SchoolPLUS is an important thrust of the Saskatchewan 
government. Students, parents and community members 
see the benefits of increased public participation in our 
schools. I am encouraged that the Sask Learning and the 
school divisions are facilitating [or operating] more 
interaction. However, local accountability for and local 
participation in education go hand-in-hand. I am 
concerned that these mega-sized school divisions will 
hinder the development of SchoolPLUS. 

 
It goes on about impact on rural communities. 
 

My number one concern is providing the best possible 
education to all of our students. My second concern . . . 
[is] keeping rural Saskatchewan alive. We need to do more 
to build a prosperous future in rural Saskatchewan. It is an 
untapped resource for the province. All government 
decisions should consider the impact on the economic 
development of our province. Many rural communities are 
working hard to develop the local economy but the 
uncertainty created by the new proposed school divisions 
is making people reluctant to move to or invest in rural 
Saskatchewan. I am concerned that the final outcome of 
this amalgamation will . . . affect rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The first outcome in the process will be centralizing 
division offices in the larger urban centres eliminating jobs 
in the smaller areas and in the rural area. 

 
Most people I talk to are either unaware of the 
amalgamation plans or resigned to the “inevitable”. Can 
Sask Learning not take the time to show us the information 
that resulted in the Minister’s decision to create large 
school divisions? Can he not get input from the people 
directly affected by this change and allow then the 
opportunity to accept the change? If these mega school 
divisions are not successful it is our children . . . [that] will 
suffer. 

So that’s a lot of the concern that is out there. The worry out 
there, Mr. Speaker, is that schools may close. One trustee, three 
schools — is this government going to fully fund the education 
end of this? Is it going to put more money in to cover this? Or 
are the small schools going to be the first to go? Are children 
going to be on the bus for numerous, numerous miles from 
school to school? 
 
And those are legitimate concerns out there with that, that they 
feel that anything larger that they will have lost their input into 
it, then there will be smaller schools that don’t have a trustee to 
represent them. The trustee that represents that school will live 
maybe 50, 60 miles away. How much input is he going to be in 
that school to keep that open, even though that school, if it is 
closed, will put students on the bus maybe for as long as an 
hour, riding it. So it is a huge concern from one end of the 
constituency to the other. 
 
I’d like to read another letter, another concern. These are just a 
few letters, but I’ve gotten hundreds of them, and talked to 
literally close to 1,000 people over this issue, and had lots of 
calls. As a rural taxpayer . . . and this one is from the Holdfast 
area: 
 

As a rural taxpayer I am appalled by the changes you are 
making to the rural school divisions in this province. I 
have seen references made to Ontario, possibly Alberta 
and Manitoba, maybe some others that apparently you are 
using as examples to justify these drastic changes. First of 
all, we don’t have the population to effectively have 
school divisions with at least five thousand students. 
Ontario and Alberta have cities that have a . . . [larger] 
population than the whole province of Saskatchewan. 
Manitoba did not realize any significant savings in their 
recent amalgamations. Our population, other than the 
cities, which are exempt, is scattered over a large area. 
Most certainly, when your plan is put in place, we will 
have school closures and I’m sure students will have to be 
bussed many more miles. Remember [that] these are 
young kids. Our infrastructure is in terrible shape, some 
highways are worse than prairie trails and most rural kids 
have many miles of gravel roads to get to those highways 
plus our winters can be very severe. 

 
The timing of the whole issue shows a total disregard for 
the rural people. You make the announcement in the 
spring, send out the map in late summer and have the map 
finalized in the fall. All this is taking place between 
seeding and harvesting, the busiest time of the year [in 
rural Saskatchewan]. 
 
We live seven miles from Holdfast where my wife, [and] 
our kids and myself all received our education. We were 
happy to belong to [the] Sask. Central School Division. 
The Director, Mr. Eliasson, Superintendent of Business, 
Mr. Benson, and all the other office staff make regular 
visits to our school. Everyone knows who they are and I 
think that is important. [The] Division Board holds their 
monthly meetings here on occasion, as they do in most 
other schools in the division. That gives the board a 
chance to see every school and when important decisions 
are to be made, they know what the school looks like, who 
the staff and students are and what their culture is. Now, 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

according to the map your Task Force has drawn up, [that] 
we are in the Qu’Appelle Valley . . . [School District] and 
we don’t want to be there. In fact, Sask. Central . . . 
[School Division] will no longer exist. 
 
There are a couple of criteria that your “Task Force” have 
failed to . . . [show us] in their mandate. It is stated that 
“Except in exceptional circumstances, there should be 
amalgamation of whole school divisions”. “. . . [Wherever] 
possible, previous voluntary amalgamations should be 
respected”. Why didn’t you respect these two points 
regarding Sask. Central? 
 
That is quite a THANK YOU from your government to a 
School Division that was a pioneer in the amalgamation 
process. In case you didn’t know, your government was 
promoting volunteer amalgamation several years ago, and 
Sask. Central was a result of that suggestion. They didn’t 
resist and say, “No [No] Way, we’re standing pat”, they 
went out and they did it. I give them credit for that. But 
now we will resist. We did our job, now make sure all 
other divisions do the same before cutting US in half and 
disposing . . . us, yet some other divisions are exempt. 
 
It seems to me that your government thinks that unless 
[changes] not operated from a city, they cannot be cost 
effective and run properly. Sask. Central was operated 
from a small two story building in Watrous. Office staff 
look after most of the maintenance and cleaning. No one is 
hired to clean the building every night or come in and 
change the light bulbs, now that is cost effective. Are your 
new Super Divisions going to be run that way, I don’t 
think so. Sask. Central relies heavily on the local school 
councils for input. They are the pulse of the communities 
that make up our division and . . . a vital part of our 
division. Division trustees mostly represent two schools 
and it is impossible for them to properly represent both 
schools without input from the local school councils. The 
distance is too great for one person without them. I have 
heard that they will also be a thing of the past in your 
super-divisions. 

 
I heard on the radio last week that your government is 
consulting with school divisions regarding the 
restructuring. I haven’t seen or heard of any consultation. 
Would it not be wise to consult with the rural taxpayer 
also? After all, isn’t it the rural taxpayers who are going to 
benefit from this forced amalgamation? Show us your plan 
and maybe then we could pass judgment in your favour. 
Up until I can see a plan that shows me how you’re going 
to save enough money to reduce my taxes other than 
forced amalgamation, I will not believe [you]. 
 
Your government has spent millions already on the 
volunteer amalgamations, especially in the second round. I 
understand the first round amalgamations didn’t receive 
near what the second round did. You have commissions 
that have added to the cost and because the results weren’t 
exactly what you wanted to hear, you are just going to toss 
all that aside . . . do exactly what you want anyway. 
 
Now you have a task force, and I understand a 
restructuring coordinating committee, a foundation 

operating grant external reference committee, and 
probably many more committees before this is all done. 
How long, or will you ever recoup the money already 
spent and the money you are about to spend? 
 
We want what is left of our rural way of life and you are 
taking that away from us. There are several young couples 
who have moved back to our area. They like it here and 
want to stay, but when they have families, how far are 
their kids going to have to travel to school? 
 
My daughter and her husband were married last winter and 
just moved back here. She drives to Moose Jaw every day 
to work and . . . helps me on the farm. If these people are 
forced to move, you can bet your bottom dollar that won’t 
be anywhere in Saskatchewan. They’re fed up and won’t 
stop until they cross the border. Is that what your 
government wants, more people leaving this province? 
 
Mr. Thomson, it is not too late to say you made a mistake. 
Do like you did with the Boughen Commission, throw it in 
the garbage and forget about it. I respect a man more if he 
admits to a mistake when he has made one than one that 
doesn’t. You may be gone in four years, some of us may 
still be here, and we will have to live with the results of 
your thoughtless decision forever. 
 
I am not against continuing with the voluntary 
amalgamations. I think it is healthy if you can seek your 
own partner and form one. But you’re going about it the 
wrong way. It will not work in Saskatchewan. Please 
reconsider your decision. 

 
Those are some of the concerns out there about the school 
amalgamation, the forced school amalgamation. Most people 
agree that there had to be some changes, but why so drastic, 
why 5,000 students? I think there was a study done in the 
United States that said around 2,000 students was the best 
school division, was the best size that presented the best, could 
present the best programs and still had the one-on-one work 
with the students, plus the division and the trustees. Because 
you start getting too huge, there is mistakes that are going to be 
made, or people are going to fall through the cracks with her. 
And that is a huge concern. There is different ones out here. I’ll 
just quote a little bit from another letter: 
 

I’m writing to you with urgency, requesting that you 
SUSPEND or STOP the planned, forced school division 
amalgamations until the full impact of the proposed 
changes can be evaluated! I understand that the 
government is anxious to rush through the proposed 
changes to SUPPOSEDLY free up more funds for the 
large urban school divisions and perhaps also for political 
reasons. Please let more rational minds prevail, at least for 
a period of time. 
 
The proposal leaves me with several major concerns — as 
yet unanswered. Briefly they are: 
 
BIGGER is NOT always BETTER! In some cases there 
are economies of scale, yes; but at what costs? A large 
high school may be able to offer more class choices than a 
smaller school but please take a close look at the number 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

of credits held by grade 12 grads from small town schools 
compared to large city collegiates! You could also 
compare the success rate of students from rural schools to 
students from city schools at post secondary institutions. 
Look at the percentage participation of students in school 
sports in small compared to large schools . . . tell me 
honestly that BIGGER is BETTER. 
 

And it goes on to write: 
 

whether there will [be] in fact be any financial savings. 
Some administrative positions will be eliminated saving a 
few dollars but I would suggest that these savings will be 
more than used up with the increased time and money 
spent in travel by Directors and other roving personal as 
well as student transportation costs, capital expenditures, 
etc. PLEASE review Manitoba’s recent experience to see 
if there REALLY WILL BE ANY SIGNIFICANT 
SAVINGS over all. 
 
the proposed LARGE school divisions WILL result in 
MANY school closures in the next few years. DO YOU 
NOT THINK THAT RURAL RESIDENTS ARE TOO 
NAIVE TO REALIZE THIS or to soon forget the cause! 
This will likely result in large capital expenses on some of 
the schools remaining open. Also, the increased distances 
many students will be forced to travel will not only be 
costly but WILL RESULT IN UNACCEPTABLE 
TRAVEL TIMES AND DISTANCES FOR MANY 
STUDENTS, ESPECIALLY YOUNGER STUDENTS. 
Perhaps you and those suggesting that [the] 100 km each 
way each day is acceptable should actually ride a school 
bus on an actual route for a few days just to experience it 
for yourselves. A 100 km ride on a school bus run will 
take at least one and a half hours — more likely 2 hours! 
Do you feel that is acceptable for children 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 . . . 
years old? [to be riding a bus for that long?] . . . 
 
closing schools in rural Saskatchewan will help hasten the 
depopulation and death of rural Saskatchewan! Is that 
what your government actually wants? Perhaps so. (Yes, I 
know that the NDP support base is largely urban!) What 
businesses will want to or be able to establish themselves 
in rural areas if there are no schools, no hospitals, poor 
roads, and as a result no people around to employ? Please 
give this some careful evaluation in light of your 
government’s talk about trying to . . . [revitalize] rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand that there are other very workable solutions to 
leveling the education mil rates across the province 
without forcing unwieldy and undesirable large scale 
amalgamations. Please stop and consider these other 
alternatives. 
 
Finally, why are Ile-a-la-Crosse and Creighton School . . . 
[divisions] not being rolled into the Northern Lights . . . 
[school district]. I see that Ile-a-la-Crosse receives 
government grants of . . . [four and a half million] for 515 
students while Davidson . . . [school district] receives 
$900,000 for 688 students. Yet, Davidson is being forced 
into amalgamation . . . [why not] Ile-a-la-Crosse is not! 
What gives? 

I would be interested to know if the Premier himself 
actually sees this letter. Thank you for letting me know 
either way. 

 
Those are the concerns that are out there. And that’s every town 
and every rural community that’s out there, Mr. Speaker, that 
goes on that. There are major, major concerns with this. And I 
think with these school divisions and the trustees, it’s going to 
an ongoing problem that I think this government hasn’t solved 
yet, and there’s going to be a problem there. 
 
And the big thing is funding. The way this government funds 
things, there’s going to be probably less money and these 
school divisions are going to have to try to survive with less 
money. That’s what some of the trustees told me they don’t 
want to run. They don’t want to face their problems out there. 
They actually believe that there’s going to be less money 
coming from this government. And in the past years of 
watching this government operate, you know, I believe that too, 
that it’s going to be the students that are going to be suffering 
with these decisions. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to adjourn debate on Bill 80. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 80, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 90  
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 90 — The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve reviewed the 
notes that have been prepared for this particular amendment, 
Bill No. 90. I’ve listened to the minister as he introduced the 
second reading. And it would appear to me that there is not a lot 
of detail in here that anybody is going to take exception to 
because I think it’s moving in a direction that needs to be done. 
 
The first reaction I guess when I first reviewed this is, these 
amendments, are they really important? But the more I thought 
about it, the more I reviewed the notes and the actual 
amendments, I think it is. I think it is very important because, 
although it pertains to a very narrow section or sector of the 
contracting or contracting in the economy, if you’re ever into a 
situation like this then of course it becomes very important. 
 
One of the things that have become more and more important in 
our daily dealings with one another is the fact that we do have 
to deal with contracts, and we have to deal with formal 
agreements. One time we would just shake hands and that was 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

good enough. But it seems now that it really does go back in 
focusing on these contracts. 
 
And in this particular case, the amendment is addressing a 
situation where maybe somebody has entered a contract and as, 
I think as the minister described it, that the person may not have 
been in full capacity or full facility. And there has always been 
an opportunity to take advantage of a person such as that. 
 
So in this particular case, these amendments — and I would 
have to agree with them — is trying to protect a situation where 
instead of having that potential for abuse of somebody that 
hasn’t got the full capacity to understand the agreement or in 
fact has a guardian appointed to make sure that the agreement is 
in effect, the onus now becomes on that person to show that he 
believes that the person did have full capacity at the time of 
signing. And this would apply if a guardian was appointed 
within the 12-month period. 
 
I think, like I said, it’s a very narrow aspect of the contracting 
and a narrow aspect of the people that it might affect. But if it 
does affect it, then I certainly would support moving these 
amendments in place so that there is no confusion. 
 
The personal property portion of contracts becomes a real 
concern because it’s in fact the basis of what most of the 
economy is based on. Property becomes the agent that 
agreements and, therefore, opportunity is built on. And to 
protect that integrity of that section of the agreement or that part 
of the economy, I think it’s very important. 
 
So has advantage been taken in that case? And why is this 
amendment put forward? Well I’m not sure. I suspect there was. 
And because of this, these amendments are trying to put in 
place a condition so that anybody that is responsible and part of 
that agreement is not allowed to take advantage. And the onus 
then becomes that person’s responsibility to prove that he had 
. . . to his best belief, the person had full capacity when he 
signed it. 
 
It’s a very short amendment. And I would at this time move that 
we amend . . . I mean, adjourn the debate so that further 
discussions can be had with different sectors of the community. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Lloydminster that second reading debate on Bill 90, The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 91 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 91 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to speak today on Bill 91, The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2005. And this Bill is a very short amendment 
to The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
What this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is that it adds cadastral parcel 
mapping system to the 2000 Act. And ISC [Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] has been offering an 
enhanced version of the cadastral parcel mapping since 
mid-2003, and this Bill will put it into legislation. 
 
The cadastral version is designed for simpler use and cadastral 
data provides more information such as who owns the property, 
also its shape and relationship to adjacent property, all the while 
reflecting the actual subdivision, including metes and bounds 
subdivisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure when the taxpayers hear the words 
Information Services Corporation, they are reminded of how 
much money it has cost them so far. ISC was originally 
projected to cost $19.7 million, but the costs have skyrocketed 
to over a $100 million. And every one of those, Mr. Speaker, 
are taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
[16:00] 
 
What remains to be seen is how much financial damage this 
NDP government can do with this one page of new legislation. 
Mr. Speaker, ISC was supposed to be a paperless system. And I 
remember not too long ago when the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and myself went to an oil company in our 
area, and we were told that they had contacted ISC for some 
information. ISC did respond to them but instead of sending 
them the one required page of a document, ISC faxed them 120 
pages of information that was of no value at all to them. They 
were very concerned about the cost-efficiency and the 
effectiveness of this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had many calls from individuals who 
are buying property, whether it be real estate in town or farm 
land, stating that their involvement with ISC was nothing less 
than nightmarish, very expensive, and extremely confusing. 
And I think we should be mindful to do a thorough job but not 
be wasteful, time wise or money wise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not know the financial details, but what we 
do know is this NDP government’s sorry record as far as being 
efficient and effective. And with ISC already 500 per cent over 
budget I hope for the taxpayers’ sake, that the financial bleeding 
is over at ISC. So, Mr. Speaker, with that I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Estevan 
that second reading debate on Bill No. 91 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 92 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2005 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 92 — The 
International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act/Loi de mise en oeuvre de la 
Convention de la Haye sur la protection internationale des 
adultes be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again this Bill 92 is 
a very short . . . has not a very extensive set of amendments. 
But in fact it does try to cover an area that I think is becoming 
more and more relevant and important all the time. And 
listening to the Minister of Justice in his note and reading the 
notes from his second introduction at second reading it . . . I 
think it applies more and more all the time. Because as the 
world becomes in fact smaller and smaller in relation to how 
people move around in different countries, it becomes more 
important that it is a . . . It’s important for people to be treated 
with respect, dignity, and with consistency in each of the 
particular countries. 
 
And so the understanding is that the . . . An Act respecting the 
Application to Saskatchewan of the Hague Convention on the 
International Protection of Adults should be reviewed and 
should be brought into relevancy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s noted that this Hague Convention, passed in 2002 — no, the 
year 2000, sorry — that there was some inconsistencies, 
particularly with people as they travelled and moved from 
country to country, and in particular those people that moved 
and were disadvantaged in some way. Maybe they were . . . 
didn’t have the full capacity to be able to look after their own 
affairs, and what this Bill does, it makes it consistent then as 
they move from one country to another. 
 
Because there is more and more opportunity for people to 
recognize the things that have happened in other countries and 
what is going to be becoming a problem in others, I think this 
kind of a convention, and putting the consistencies in place, was 
a very timely and an important aspect. There is, always seems 
to be in situations like this where people will take advantage of 
particularly the disadvantaged, or as the minister called it, 
insufficient faculties to be able to respond to these particular 
situations. 
 
Something comes to mind as I was reviewing this, that in fact in 
the recent tsunami crisis where there ended up to be a lot of 
homeless people, there was unscrupulous people that actually 
tried to take the orphaned children and abscond with these 
children and move them into a situation where they were 
abducted from their local region. 
 
I think, not that this will apply in this case, but it just shows that 
unless there is a convention in place that has consistency, this 
behaviour will continue, I’m sure. And the amendments that are 
being put forward here is to bring Saskatchewan into that 
convention so that it in fact would comply with what they have 
put forward in these amendments. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would propose that . . . I move that we 
adjourn debate so that further discussion can be had. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that second reading debate on Bill No. 92 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 93 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 93 — The 
Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise and speak to Bill No. 93, an Act to amend the 
Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. trust fund amendment Act. 
And that is the Christian Community of Universal Brotherhood. 
 
The proceeds of the trust referred to in this agreement are to be 
utilized to celebrate and support the culture and heritage of the 
Doukhobor people. This Bill addresses the functioning of the 
trust in that it addresses how the appointments are to be made to 
the board that are charged with administering this trust. 
 
The makeup of the board is to be four nominees from 
Saskatchewan and British Columbia and one nominee from 
Alberta. All nominees will be approved by the minister rather 
than by the Attorney General as was provided in former 
legislation. 
 
We see this Bill as legislation that will assist in this board’s 
ability to continue in its mandate of administering the trust 
fund. We recommend therefore that Bill 93 be referred to the 
appropriate committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 93, The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — I move that Bill No. 93, The Doukhobors 



April 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation that Bill No. 93 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Committee on Human Services. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the House now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that this House be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:10.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2361 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2361 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2361 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2361 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2361 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2361 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2362 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2362 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Bills 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2362 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2362 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................2362 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2362 
  Hagel ..............................................................................................................................................................................2363, 2373 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2372 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 First Granddaughter for Sergeant-at-Arms 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2363 
 First Nations University of Canada Powwow 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2363 
 Kenaston and District Dinner Theatre 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2363 
 Celebrate Saskatchewan On Ice 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2364 
 Fishing Lake Hockey League Champions 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2364 
 Seniors Walk Length of Province to Celebrate Centennial 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2364 
 Lac La Ronge Indian Band Elects New Chief 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2365 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Timing of Memorandum of Agreement Regarding Health Care Workers 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2365 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2365 
 Strike by Emergency Medical Technicians in Yorkton 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2367 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2367 
 Guidelines for Waiting Lists for Medical Procedures 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2368 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2368 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2370 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2370 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2370 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2370 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2371 
 Bill No. 94 — The Apiaries Act, 2005 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2371 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2372 
  
 



 

 Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2373 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2374 
 Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2375 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2375 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2376 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2378 
 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2379 
 Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2380 
 Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................2384 
 Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2385 
 Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi de mise en oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection internationale des adultes 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................2386 
 Bill No. 93 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................2386 
  Beatty (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................2386 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


