
















































Hansard: November 21, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 9B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2005, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 317 
 November 21, 2005 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
now submit supplementary estimates accompanied by a 
message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for a message 
from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits the supplementary 
November estimates of certain sums required for the 
service of the province for the twelve months ending 
March 31, 2006, and recommends the same to the 
Legislative Assembly. [Signed] Lynda Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor, Province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today I am tabling 
supplementary estimates to reflect the additional expenditures 
for the 2005-06 fiscal year, that is to say, the current budget 
year made possible by the additional revenue available in the 
current fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recently had more good news for 
the people of Saskatchewan. Significant additional revenues 
were identified in the release of the mid-year report last week. 
The mid-year report updates the province’s fiscal and economic 
situation and also updates the current year budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mid-year report reveals an $873 million fiscal 
improvement in the General Revenue Fund; $873 million, Mr. 
Speaker, is excellent news for Saskatchewan. This year’s 
improvement is largely attributable to oil and gas. About 
three-quarters of the overall improvement, Mr. Speaker, is due 
to stronger oil and gas revenues. 
 
This province is also seeing a big drop in interest cost, reducing 
our overall interest payment this year by $30 million. The 
government now forecasts a $135.1 million surplus in the 
General Revenue Fund and a $207.1 million surplus on a 
summary basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what exactly are we doing with the money? 
Mr. Speaker, our strong bottom line allows us to invest directly 
into our main priority — Saskatchewan people. We strive to 
continue improving the lives for those that call this great 
province home. This government will cushion high natural gas 
rates for the people of Saskatchewan. We will dedicate funds 
towards education capital and debt reduction. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are investing in important social and economic 
programs for the people of this great province. 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan. We’re acting on our 
commitments and fulfilling promises. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
addressing immediate needs of this revenue. We’re acting on 
commitments and advancing strategic plans. We’re continuing 
on our path of sound financial management. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, we are putting $139.5 million into the 
Energy Share plan to help make Saskatchewan an even more 
affordable place to live. We will assist people with unexpected 
higher energy costs to heat their homes this winter. 
 
We’re providing money for disaster assistance, Mr. Speaker, for 
those individuals suffering uninsurable losses due to flooding, 
windstorms, and the like. 
 
We’re topping up CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] for the 2005 crop year at a cost of $84.2 million, 
bringing total additional CAIS funding in this fiscal year to 
$159.2 million. That is additional CAIS funding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re advancing strategic plans for the future. 
We’re carrying through on the Action Plan for the Economy 
with $59 million being allocated for northern transportation 
corridors, $700,000 for enhanced immigration efforts, 600,000 
for First Nations and Métis economic development grants, and 
400,000 for Aboriginal employment development program. Mr. 
Speaker, the latter two programs will spur the economy and 
jobs for First Nations people. 
 
We’re also carrying out key Action Plan for Saskatchewan 
Health Care actions, Mr. Speaker, such as the $100 million for 
the academic health sciences centre at the University of 
Saskatchewan and $108.1 million for regional health 
authorities. 
 
Through other strategic actions we are fulfilling commitments 
that show compassion for people in desperate situations. Mr. 
Speaker, we are providing an additional $2.9 million for the 
provincial alcohol and drug strategy tied to Project Hope. We’re 
also providing close to $1 million to Justice to pay for more 
police officers and a crime strategy aimed at missing persons 
and gang suppression. Mr. Speaker, while we are addressing 
needs and acting on commitments, we’re also continuing on a 
path of sound financial management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The GRF [General Revenue Fund] 
is balanced with no transfer from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
And, Mr. Speaker, government debt is being permanently 
reduced by $76.1 million. We are being fiscally responsible for 
future generations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I would also remind members of 
this House, Mr. Speaker, that this is the second significant 
permanent debt reduction in the space of one year — $255.4 
million in total since mid-year of last year. This is a significant 
achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have much 
good news to celebrate. We are in good financial condition. Our 
economy is performing well. In fact Saskatoon’s economy is, 
quote, “the hottest in the country” according to the Conference 
Board of Canada. We have a surplus in the General Revenue 
Fund and the summary financial statements. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to emphasize the debt is falling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The budget forecast government 
debt at March 31, 2006, to be $7.6 billion while the mid-year 
projection is $7.4 billion, a drop of $244.3 million. We’re 
showing an $11 billion total provincial debt projection at 
mid-year — the lowest level since 1988-89. 
 
We’re also reporting a total provincial debt to GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratio of 25.4 per cent, the lowest level since 
1982-83, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve struck a fiscally responsible balance 
between new spending and debt management. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re confident Saskatchewan people will benefit directly from 
these initiatives. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move, and 
seconded by the member for The Battlefords, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the supplementary 
estimates be referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member 
for The Battlefords: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the supplementary 
estimates be referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me great pleasure to enter into the debate about the 
supplementary estimates. In fact, Mr. Speaker, these 
supplementary estimates, to me they have an uncanny 
resemblance to that of the old, famous western from the 1960s 
called The Good, The Bad and the Ugly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to start with what I think is good news in 
this mid-term financial report. For starters, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
good news that the oil and gas revenues are up by $638.2 
million — a whopping 76 per cent over what was projected, Mr. 
Speaker, just six months ago — as a result of the rising oil and 
gas prices. When the associated taxes are included, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s about $720 million in extra revenue, a number I 
seem to have heard about six weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. And 
what did the NDP [New Democratic Party] have to do about the 
rising oil and gas prices, Mr. Speaker? What did they have to 
do? They take credit for it, but they had absolutely nothing to 
do with it, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also good that potash revenues are up $11.2 
million because of stronger than expected potash prices and 
markets, Mr. Speaker. And what did the NDP have to do with 
that, Mr. Speaker? Well at least this NDP government hasn’t 
attempted to nationalize the potash mines like they did in the 
1970s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s also good that the NDP has finally, finally 
made good on the promise for the academic health sciences 
centre. Mr. Speaker, five years late and five years after the 
Saskatchewan Party had made the commitment to build the new 
academic health sciences centre at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan], the NDP is finally putting up $100 million 
towards the project. 
 
The only problem, Mr. Speaker, is because of their dithering, 
five years of dithering, the amount of money is not enough. 
Five years of dithering has caused the cost of the project to 
double. It’ll be some $200 million when they finally get around 
to announcing the project, Mr. Speaker. If they took that money 
instead of putting it into the phony baloney Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, when they did that, if they took that money and actually 
put it into the academic health sciences centre, it would be built, 
Mr. Speaker. And this province would have saved $100 million, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
At least, Mr. Speaker, the government has finally taken the 
Saskatchewan Party up on Saskatchewan Party resolution no. 
HE05-4, passed at our 2005 annual convention and included, 
Mr. Speaker, it was included in the 2003 election platform. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ll refer to a document that has been 
referred to in this House many times. Item number 2 on the 
Saskatchewan Party’s 100 Ideas to Get Saskatchewan Ready for 
the Next 100 Years that was introduced by the Leader of the 
Opposition in the spring session. Idea no. 2, Mr. Speaker: 
“Build a new integrated health sciences facility at the 
University of Saskatchewan.” Well finally five years later. It 
reminds me about a promise of police officers in this province 
some seven years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Item number 9, incidentally it’s on the same page. I want to 
refer to it. It says, “Establish a Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon 
utilizing an existing acute care facility.” Where is that in the 
supplementary estimates, Mr. Speaker? It was in the Throne 
Speech, but it’s not in the supplementary estimates, Mr. 
Speaker. I guess we are waiting till we are in election mode. I’ll 
guess we’ll continue to wait, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m glad to see that the NDP has adopted some of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s ideas. I’ll change the page here and we’ll 
look at no. 18 on page 3. And it says, “Partner with the 
Government of Canada to build three new all-weather roads in 
Northern Saskatchewan to facilitate sustainable northern 
communities and sustainable northern economic development.” 
It’s a great idea, Mr. Speaker, indeed it is. It’s idea no. 18 in the 
Saskatchewan Party list of 100 great ideas, Mr. Speaker. But we 
are happy to see the NDP has at least said they will act on our 
idea with $59 million for a new northern all-weather road. 
 
There’s also a commitment to act on behalf of this government 
on the Sask Party’s idea, the plan for addressing the scourge of 
crystal meth in our province, Mr. Speaker. Another good idea 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

that couldn’t have been acted upon soon enough. 
 
And there’s a commitment, Mr. Speaker, from this government 
to act on the Sask Party proposal to increase funding to 
community-based organizations that deliver social services in 
our cities, towns, and villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course these NDP commitments to Sask Party 
promises are only words from an NDP government and a 
Premier that most people in Saskatchewan have learned not to 
trust, Mr. Speaker. As the Premier and the Finance Minister and 
this NDP government have demonstrated, talk is cheap, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So I and members on this side of the House, we will reserve 
judgment, Mr. Speaker, on the commitments made by the NDP 
in these supplementary estimates until they are backed by 
actions, Mr. Speaker. An important point. Actions speak louder 
than words and we are waiting for the actions of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move from what may be the good in 
these estimates to talk about the bad and then, Mr. Speaker, the 
downright ugly. 
 
Let’s talk about the bad, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve talked about this 
before in this House. Saskatchewan has the highest corporate 
capital tax rate in the country, the highest corporate tax rate in 
the country, the highest small-business tax rate in the country, 
the highest property taxes in Canada. How is this even 
defensible by this government, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s not 
defensible, Mr. Speaker, it’s deplorable. 
 
This represents a lack of vision, a profound lack of knowledge 
about how the economy works and worse yet, Mr. Speaker, it 
appears that this government just isn’t all that concerned. If it 
was, Mr. Speaker, it would lead; this government would show 
some leadership. If it was concerned, Mr. Speaker, this 
government would act. But the best the NDP can do, Mr. 
Speaker, is to react. 
 
Here’s a good example that I want to share with you. This 
government says in its documentation that in potash alone, the 
incentive package established in April has triggered more than 
$570 million in investment intentions. Mr. Speaker, two things 
—and I’m glad that the hon. members opposite are listening — 
two things really jump out in regard to this statement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
First it is notable that the NDP government didn’t create a 
favourable investment climate because they led the way. No, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact for years this government quite visibly 
illustrated that it either didn’t understand or didn’t care about 
what the potash industry needed in order to expand. Only when 
pressured, Mr. Speaker, only when forced into a corner, only 
when pressured did this government do what it should have 
done years before. We could have had this investment and these 
jobs long before this spring, Mr. Speaker. But that would have 
meant the NDP taking action — that this NDP government, 
even though it’s not in election mode, would have to take 
action, Mr. Speaker. That delay indeed is bad. 

Secondly on this issue, the wording is interesting and it explains 
so much about what is wrong with this NDP government. The 
NDP government refers to the potash industry and it says, its 
investment intentions. Herein lies the difference, Mr. Speaker, 
the difference between members on this side of the House and 
members on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
about the industry. 
 
The industry, once it had a reasonable royalty environment, it 
acted. And it did so immediately, Mr. Speaker. Potash mines 
expanded. The companies spent and immediately they hired. 
They created jobs. Mr. Speaker, that’s the way the private 
sector works. That’s the way the rest of the world works, Mr. 
Speaker — quickly and decisively. Opportunities to improve 
the provincial economy slip by this government day in and day 
out because they dither. And that indeed, Mr. Speaker, is bad. 
 
Saskatchewan is one of the largest producers of oil and gas in 
Canada. And in case the NDP hasn’t noticed, we’re in the 
middle of an oil boom. So why is oil and gas drilling activity in 
Saskatchewan down overall from last year? Why, Mr. Speaker, 
is oil and gas production flat when we’re in the middle of a 
worldwide — and I emphasize a worldwide — oil and gas 
boom? 
 
Could it be for the same reason that Alberta has three times the 
population of Saskatchewan and 10 times the economy of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Could that be the reason? Could it 
be because Saskatchewan has been saddled with CCF-NDP 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 
Party] governments for most of the past 60 years — two parties 
that according to their founding documents, the same 
documents that you will indeed find on the website of the party 
represented opposite, Mr. Speaker, that they are committed to 
the elimination of capitalism? Unbelievable. Unbelievable. If 
there’s any staff from the NDP watching today, get rid of that 
off the website, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? That’s their bible. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well we’d have less to talk about, 
granted, on this side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the job creation record. The 
job creation record of this government would suggest that the 
fault lies with this NDP government and its long-standing 
policy of getting rid of entrepreneurs and killing private sector 
businesses. Mr. Speaker, we’ve all heard the statistics. We all 
know what Statistics Canada had to say about the job numbers 
in Saskatchewan — down 6,200, October ’04 over October ’05. 
Job numbers in Saskatchewan down 6,200, during a boom. 
Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again according to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan has lost 
3,300 people over the 12-month period ending September 30. 
Where did they go, Mr. Speaker? More importantly, why did 
they go, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Worse, Statistics Canada also reports that Saskatchewan’s 
population continues to decline as people, especially young 
people, continue to leave. And yes, Mr. Speaker, that’s bad. 
And it could get ugly if this NDP government lasts much 
longer. But fortunately, Mr. Speaker, the polls say otherwise. 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

Polls like the Environics poll of last Friday . . . And I know the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow’s smiling so she must 
have maybe not read the poll yet but I suggest that she should 
do it because it says this government, their days are limited, Mr. 
Speaker. That poll speaks of a government that will be thrown 
out of office sooner rather than later. 
 
You know, everyone’s starting to speculate: when’s the election 
going to be? Is it going to be in ’06, ’07, or — heaven forbid — 
’08, Mr. Speaker? But with polls like this I suggest that it’s time 
that this government either change their actions or call an 
election very quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time to talk about indeed what’s ugly. What’s 
ugly about these supplementary estimates? That $244 million 
that the NDP is claiming the debt is being reduced by when 
$185 million of that money, Mr. Speaker, is being transferred 
into the NDP’s election slush fund. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is 
indeed ugly. The fiscal stabilization phony-baloney NDP slush 
fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also ugly that this Premier, this Finance 
minister, and this government has decided to fill the NDP 
government’s bank account with an additional $45.9 million 
from the operations of our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it happens at the same time as SaskPower is 
asking for a rate increase that will add $60 million to the power 
bills of Saskatchewan families and businesses in 2006, Mr. 
Speaker, that is indeed ugly. It’s an ugly financial situation for 
families across this province to be in because of this NDP 
government. 
 
And here is something else, Mr. Speaker, that’s pretty ugly 
about the latest statement of NDP priorities. With almost $1 
billion in unexpected revenue from oil, gas, and potash, there is 
not a single dime, Mr. Speaker, not a single dime for tax relief 
for low- and moderate-income Saskatchewan families, many of 
whom — and I’ve said it many times in this House — many of 
whom who pay the highest personal tax rates in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact there is not a single dime in these latest NDP 
budget estimates for personal tax relief for anybody, for 
anybody in the province. Not one dime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve said this many times over the last week or so: 
if not now, when? If now is not the time to do it, when is the 
time to do it? Mr. Speaker, that’s a question that people across 
this province will be asking this government. If not now, when? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s ugly that with almost $1 billion in 
unanticipated revenue from non-renewable resources, there is 
not a single dime for revenue-sharing grants for Saskatchewan 
cities, town, villages, and rural municipalities, with no 
commitment to a new revenue-sharing agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while there is $100 million of new funding for health 
regions, virtually none of this money, Mr. Speaker — and this 
is an important point for everyone listening to understand and 
everyone in the House to understand — that virtually none of 
this new money, Mr. Speaker, is going to strengthen front-line 
services, Mr. Speaker. That’s a real shame. 
 
So where’s all this money going? Where is it going? Who’s 

come up with the creative ideas on where to actually put this 
money — almost $1 billion, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
this is indeed the ugliest part of the whole story. 
 
And it gives me no pleasure to be able to talk about this because 
I believe it’s fundamentally the wrong thing to do in this 
province, the wrong thing for this government to be doing, not 
from a partisan perspective solely but to enhance the economy 
of this province. 
 
They’re going about it in the wrong direction because this 
Premier, this Finance minister, this cabinet, and all members on 
that side of the House, they support this idea of the government 
tucking away $750 million, Mr. Speaker. Not a mistake — $750 
million into an NDP slush fund, the so-called Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
One of the members says, what? I guess he didn’t get the 
memo. He didn’t read the email. He didn’t notice $750 million. 
Yes, Mr. Member, it is there for the run-up to the next 
provincial election. 
 
Now I know it’s going to be a huge task for members opposite 
in the next election. Three-quarters of a billion dollars. They 
think it may help them. They know they need the help if they’ve 
been reading the polls lately, Mr. Speaker. But the 
phony-baloney Fiscal Stabilization Fund is not going to help 
anybody. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we know it will be spent. We don’t 
know if it’ll be spent tomorrow, or a month from now, or a year 
from now, or 2008 when the NDP might have to call an 
election. But it will be spent, Mr. Speaker. You mark my words. 
It will be spent. 
 
Whenever this government decides that they’re in the so-called 
election mode, that money will be spent. It should have been 
spent building the academic health sciences centre five years 
ago, but it wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what’s bad. That’s 
what’s ugly about these financial statements for this province. 
 
Has it been spent on health care, Mr. Speaker? As I said earlier, 
apparently not because there is virtually no new funding for 
front-line services. Now if there is, show me where it is. But I 
haven’t found it in here, Mr. Speaker, in these supplementary 
estimates which we’re being told the NDP has $873 million in 
unanticipated revenue. That’s a lot of zeros, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no tax relief for low-income families, Mr. Speaker, 
because there is not a dime allocated in these supplementary 
estimates for personal tax relief of any kind. This situation is 
indeed ugly for people in Saskatchewan. Not one dime for low- 
and medium-income individuals. And, Mr. Speaker, not one 
dime for permanent property tax relief. 
 
Again the question is begged: if not now, when? When will this 
government see fit first of all to keep its promises from the last 
election, and second of all to move forward on changing some 
taxes that will actually benefit the economy of this province for 
the long term? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely clear from the NDP’s proposed use 
of the almost $1 billion in unanticipated revenues that this 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

government’s priorities lie in solely one area, one area alone — 
building an election slush fund worth more than three-quarters 
of a billion dollars to spend in a blatant attempt to buy the 
support of Saskatchewan people with their own money, Mr. 
Speaker. Well Saskatchewan people aren’t buying what the 
NDP is selling, Mr. Speaker. They’re not buying any of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to ask people of 
Saskatchewan a couple of questions. We all know that the NDP 
government is doing well. We all know that very well. We’ve 
seen the financial statements. We’ve heard about the $873 
million. But I ask Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan 
taxpayers: it’s your money, and how well are you doing? Mr. 
Speaker, I hear other members who want to enter the debate, 
and I certainly hope they do. 
 
I have a second question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, to ask you 
and to ask all members of the Assembly and all people tuning in 
this evening. And the question, Mr. Speaker, is this: has there 
ever been a reason, has there ever been a better reason to get rid 
of this tired, old NDP government? I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
there hasn’t. I suggest that the time is now. And I thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader, the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very happy today to join the debate started by the Minister of 
Finance tonight in placing on the table the supplementary 
estimates. I am seconding the motion to place these on the table, 
Mr. Speaker, proudly seconding these motions. 
 
And while I’m thinking about that, Mr. Speaker, I’m also proud 
to be a colleague of the Minister of Finance here on this side of 
the House, in the New Democratic Party government. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity and the occasion to work with 
the Minister of Finance pretty much from the day I got elected, 
Mr. Speaker. I’ve been fortunate enough to work with the 
minister as he’s developed two budgets and has presided over 
two sets of supplementary estimates brought into the Chamber 
here, Mr. Speaker. And in each and every case, the needs, the 
interests, the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan have been 
addressed in a fiscally prudent manner, addressing their needs 
while balancing the fiscal needs of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a colleague of the Minister of 
Finance, proud to be a New Democrat, proud to be a member of 
this government. And I look forward to the development of the 
next budget, Mr. Speaker, as we look ahead to the future of 
Saskatchewan, a plan set out by the Premier in the Throne 
Speech brought forward just two short weeks ago and a plan, 
Mr. Speaker, that set out in September by the Premier and the 
Minister of Industry and Resources, the Action Plan for the 
Saskatchewan Economy. Mr. Speaker, a plan that recognizes 
the development potential of this province, a plan that 
recognizes the ability of this province to create and support new 
jobs and support the proud Saskatchewan families who are 
making this wonderful province their home. 

Mr. Speaker, today as we are going forward with the 
supplementary estimates which, as the Minister of Finance 
correctly said, were additional estimates for additional 
expenditures as a result of additional revenues brought forward 
for the people of Saskatchewan, we are looking at a further 
investment in Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to discuss a few of those points as I go forward. 
 
But I’m also intrigued by comments made by the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs just a few moments ago in this House, 
Mr. Speaker. And it reminds me of many of the things that I 
thought about through those miserable days in the 1980s where 
we had a government led by then Premier Grant Devine which 
thought nothing, Mr. Speaker, thought nothing of taking 
resources from the people of Saskatchewan, spending them 
without due care and attention, and building up what was then 
the largest per capita debt of any province in the history of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these comments made by the member of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs reminds me of some of the comments 
he made earlier this year when we were discussing the spring 
budget of this government, comments that seemed to indicate 
that this province had billions and billions of extra dollars to 
spend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, what the supplementary estimates are 
doing for Saskatchewan people here today, Mr. Speaker, are 
recognizing that there are additional revenues available to us on 
a short-term basis, Mr. Speaker, because those revenues come 
from the resource revenues of the province. Roughly 80 per 
cent of the new dollars are subject to the volatile revenues of oil 
and gas and to a certain extent potash and uranium prices, 
subject to that cyclical marketplace where the prices can be high 
one day and lower, and in many cases much lower, the next. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we examine the ability of the province to 
provide for the needs and priorities of our people, we have to 
think of as government. We have to think in terms of balancing 
the ability of the province to meet current needs with the ability 
of the province to have certainty in revenues over the long term 
for long-term needs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we have in front of us today primarily 
are a recognition of a one time . . . I think it’s about 84 per cent 
of the expenditures recognize the revenues we have are 
one-time revenues. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it should also be pointed out and I think it’s 
clearly represented in the numbers that the members opposite 
haven’t quite figured out yet, but we’re not . . . different from 
the federal government, Mr. Speaker. What the province of 
Saskatchewan has in front of us in terms of additional revenues 
are not surplus tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. We have not collected 
too much tax from the people of Saskatchewan, but rather we 
have additional revenues that come from the resource base. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we can’t go back to that practice of the 
’80s of spending short-term money for long-term goals, and we 
can’t continue to deal with the issue of addressing tax issues 
until we have some long-term certainty. 
 
The Minister of Finance correctly pointed out when he did the 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

interim financial statement earlier this month, he said he didn’t 
want to be in the position of lowering taxes today just so that he 
might have to increase them tomorrow or the next day, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s difficult for governments to deal with those types 
of issues in that way. And as a result this government, Mr. 
Speaker, is moving forward on a very balanced approach to the 
provincial economy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what is it that we are doing for the people of 
Saskatchewan with the additional resources that are available to 
us today? Well first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
people of Saskatchewan said to us as government, Mr. Speaker, 
they said to us it appears that the cost of home heating fuel is 
rising. The price of natural gas is increasing. The price of 
providing natural gas to the home is increasing. The province is 
getting additional revenues from that natural gas resource, and 
the government should use some of the revenues from natural 
gas to subsidize the home heating of Saskatchewan residents. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this government has 
turned around to do. Roughly $140 million, Mr. Speaker, of 
these additional revenues are being used to provide energy cost 
relief to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, over the course of the last year and the 
year before that, families throughout Saskatchewan have talked 
about the need to provide additional support for agriculture. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you are aware that in each and every budget, 
based on this government’s approach to balancing the budget, 
we have been able to provide about $100 million per year in 
each of the last two budgets to address the CAIS program, Mr. 
Speaker, the program that we share the costs with the federal 
government on. In each of those years, Mr. Speaker, it has been 
indicated that the cost of that program — and again this was an 
argument brought forward very strongly by the Minister of 
Agriculture — this was a program in which Saskatchewan is 
unfairly providing the dollars for our residents compared to the 
agriculture residents of other provinces. So, Mr. Speaker, we 
put $100 million of money available to farm families through 
the CAIS program in our budget. And last year, Mr. Speaker, 
we recognized with additional revenues we could put more 
money into the CAIS program. And we did so. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, earlier in the year we indicated that we 
would fully fund the 2004 CAIS program. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
the Throne Speech of the other day, in addition to the 100 
million that was already in the program, this government 
committed to fully fund the CAIS program for 2005. What that 
turns out to be, Mr. Speaker, is since we budgeted for the CAIS 
program of $100 million, we have of the new-found revenues 
— the resource revenues that the people of Saskatchewan asked 
us to share with farm families in Saskatchewan — we’ve 
identified close to $160 million worth of new money for the 
agriculture sector in Saskatchewan through the CAIS program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very responsive to families in their 
homes, farm families on the farm with substantial revenues 
coming out of these new-found dollars. Mr. Speaker, that’s just 
the beginning. 
 
The members opposite talked about the need for doing more 
and more and more. And of course, we know from the member 
from Silver Springs earlier that of course he’s spent these 

dollars three and four times over already, Mr. Speaker — 
something that we’re not able to do because we believe in 
sound, prudent management. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at what else we’re 
doing, he talks about not finding any new money for health 
care, Mr. Speaker. And yet from this pool of additional 
resources that are part of these estimates, Mr. Speaker, $108 
million worth of additional money for funding for regional 
health authorities . . . that means health authorities like Prairie 
North Health Region in my area will have additional monies to 
help them meet the needs of providing for specialists and 
reducing diagnostic times and providing additional time 
throughout their surgical rooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are very important dollars because the 
people of Saskatchewan said to the members of this government 
we need a more responsive health care system. The health care 
system is in need of additional dollars. And of course we moved 
forward some money in that regard. 
 
Also at the same time, Mr. Speaker, this government was very 
responsive to those people who are active in the 
community-based organizations who are in many cases working 
with our communities most . . . people who are most in need of 
special care and attention, people who live in residential care 
homes throughout our community. And they’ve had difficulties 
over the years, Mr. Speaker, in retaining staff because of the 
difference in wages paid between the community-based 
organizations and the health care people who are doing much 
the same work. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re addressing that issue in the additional 
resources that we have available. And, Mr. Speaker, 
community-based organizations I expect will respond to the 
supplementary estimates and the work that this government is 
doing and announced through the Throne Speech with great 
enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been asking us for this 
assistance; we’re very responsive as we were to Saskatchewan 
families and Saskatchewan farm families in this regard. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance provided quite a 
number of other examples. I only want to discuss one other 
example, Mr. Speaker, before I discuss permanent debt 
reduction which I think is a hallmark of the work that this 
government has been doing. What I want to mention, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think everyone recognizes that I’ve been 
doing a lot of work with municipalities over the course of the 
last two years, these estimates, Mr. Speaker, are bringing 
forward the federal funding that flows through the province of 
Saskatchewan under the new deal for the use of federal gas tax 
money in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these 
estimates are recognizing about $18 million worth of money 
that was collected by the federal government and is by 
agreement moving through to Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the municipal leaders will know, but not too 
many people throughout the province of Saskatchewan will 
know, that this agreement that the province of Saskatchewan 
has signed with the federal government was worked out in 
consultation with our municipal leaders. The deal we have in 
Saskatchewan is different than the deal we have in the other 
provinces — more flexibility in Saskatchewan and a greater 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

ability to meet the needs and priorities of Saskatchewan 
communities as a result of the work that we did together. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is very significant money for the 
municipalities throughout the province of Saskatchewan, and I 
just wanted to put on record what some of these numbers mean 
to the people who live in some of our communities. 
 
And I just use the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, for an 
example. I mentioned that these estimates are flowing through 
about $18 million. But, Mr. Speaker, by the time five years roll 
through, this province will be dealing with about $147 million 
worth of additional money yearly to municipalities. The city of 
Saskatoon, these brand new dollars, Mr. Speaker, will 
ultimately result in, at the end of the five-year period, Mr. 
Speaker, $12.3 million worth of brand new money annually to 
the people of Saskatoon as a result of the work that has been 
done by the municipalities, the provincial, and the federal 
government. 
 
[19:45] 
 
My own city, the city of North Battleford, will be receiving 
almost $14,000 . . . or pardon me, $253,000 this year ramping 
up to almost $900,000, Mr. Speaker, in year number five. The 
town of Battleford with a population of under 4,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker, will be receiving close to $240,000 per year. And a 
little community like Biggar, just south of the Battlefords with a 
population of around 2,200 people, will see about $140,000 per 
year flowing through. Mr. Speaker, these are significant new 
dollars available to our municipalities for the delivery of very 
important infrastructure and other services in those 
communities. We are very pleased with the development of 
these new deal dollars. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance had indicated that a 
big part of what is in front of us . . . not a big part, Mr. Speaker, 
but a part of the dollars available to us here have resulted in 
debt reduction in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 
think we know that the most significant debt ever run up in the 
history of this province was run up by the Conservatives in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And by paying down that debt, Mr. 
Speaker, we now have, as the Minister of Finance indicated, the 
lowest debt we’ve seen since 1988-89 in this province 
currently, Mr. Speaker. That means that the cost of providing 
services to the people of Saskatchewan is less today than it was 
previously. It means that the cost to the taxpayer of this 
province to provide for the services, for additional services, for 
additional support for infrastructure and that sort of thing is less 
than it would otherwise have been, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is a major initiative on behalf of government to not just 
provide new spending, Mr. Speaker, but also to address the 
issue of debt. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s part of balancing the 
needs of the province — dealing with debt, reducing costs, 
dealing with new programs, increasing the ability of the people 
of Saskatchewan to recognize and realize an improvement in 
their quality of life. The Minister of Finance has taken a very 
cautious approach to these matters. It is exactly the type of 
approach which has led to increased credit upgrades, Mr. 
Speaker, and will continue to hold Saskatchewan in high regard 
across North America and the world by those to whom we still 
must rely on for borrowing, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we have 

the money available to provide the types of services that people 
have come to count on. 
 
Just one last comment before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, because 
as I indicated in my remarks earlier, the majority of the dollars 
available to us, additional dollars available to us, come from 
resource revenues — volatile, cyclical resource revenues. Mr. 
Speaker, if we are to rely on these types of revenues for 
long-term programs obviously you can see the problem we get 
into, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t have long-term certainty, if we’re 
funding long-term programs with short-term money. 
 
So this province needs more than anything the support of the 
Saskatchewan people, the support of the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party, the support of others, Mr. Speaker, in 
finalizing our energy accord with Ottawa to ensure that we have 
some certainty in our long-term revenue base, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re compared frequently to the province of Alberta by the 
members opposite, members across the way who believe that 
their colleagues in Alberta can do so much better than we can in 
Saskatchewan. But let’s take a look at what Saskatchewan is up 
against when we’re facing the same circumstances that the 
province of Alberta faces. Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
ability of Alberta to retain the oil and gas revenues for their 
own purposes, we see a couple of things. Number one, Mr. 
Speaker, on the natural gas side of things Alberta gains almost 
25 times what Saskatchewan gains from an increase in natural 
gas prices. On the oil side, Mr. Speaker, Alberta gains almost 
four times what Saskatchewan gains from an increase in 
benchmark oil prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the system is completely unfair to the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan. Our ability to 
provide the same level of services that the province of Alberta 
does is impeded by this unfair process of not being able to 
retain and have access to the resource revenues to the same 
extent that the province of Alberta does. 
 
I haven’t started to address the other issues about how unfair it 
is compared to Newfoundland and Labrador, and Nova Scotia, 
even our friends next door in the province of Manitoba. The 
ability of this province to deliver long-term programs, necessary 
long-term programs, for the people of Saskatchewan is impeded 
by these matters. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at the revenue base 
for the province of Alberta, I mean, it’s incredible, Mr. Speaker. 
The resource revenue alone in the province of Alberta, the 
current budget for resource revenues in Alberta is $7.6 billion 
or roughly the amount that Saskatchewan collects from all its 
revenue resources. And of course the surplus declared by the 
province of Alberta this year is greater than the entire budget 
expenditure for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are huge differences between our two 
provinces. The province of Saskatchewan however is doing a 
very good job of providing the developmental support for 
industry. 
 
The Minister of Finance has provided the incentives necessary 
to spur oil and gas investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
The Minister of Industry and Resources has clearly indicated 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

that the outside investment in the province of Saskatchewan 
will be roughly 12 per cent in the course of the next 12 months. 
This is double the investment that we will see anywhere else in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are some incredible opportunities that have presented 
themselves in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re able to 
table advantage of these opportunities. And, Mr. Speaker, these 
estimates in front of us today are just an indication of the 
benefits that the people of Saskatchewan will be able to reap as 
a result of the work that’s being done by a strong, solid, 
balanced, prudent approach to delivering a financial package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to second this motion today. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise this evening and join in the debate about the supplementary 
estimates that have been put on the table by the Finance 
minister this evening. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, all of us I think in this House from time to 
time have some frustrations with the job. And I would like to 
share one of my main frustrations tonight and that is how long it 
takes for the government to have anything sink in that makes 
sense. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected a decade or so 
ago, one of the very first initiatives that I heard of in this House 
that made sense to me was the initiative about advertising the 
dangers of fetal alcohol syndrome and effect on the packaging 
that was sent out from the liquor establishments in this 
province. And I heard with dismay the government of the day 
sort of saying, it can’t be done; this is silly; what good is that 
going to do — because it was proposed from a member of the 
opposition, the member from Kelvington-Wadena. And it was 
frustrating to hear the government members take what was a 
very good and important idea that was raised by an opposition 
member and sort of discount it as being trivial and not worth the 
effort. 
 
And yet today, this evening when I was watching the news, 
there was an ad on television warning people about the dangers 
of consuming alcohol while they’re pregnant or breastfeeding. 
Makes a whole lot of sense. But the point was we had to take 
this government kicking and screaming from making a very 
simple decision to finally getting to the point we are today. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, over the years there’s been numbers of 
instances of this type where it is just absolutely dumbfounding 
why this government takes so long to understand a very simple 
and good idea and implement it. 
 
I recall it becoming very obvious to the official opposition in 
1999 that we were facing an imminent crisis in the health care 
system; that unless we did something pretty dramatic about the 
looming shortage of professionals — nurses, doctors, licensed 
practical nurses, technicians, and technologists — we were 

going to very quickly get into a very difficult position where we 
didn’t have enough health care professionals to meet the needs 
of the system. And the government ignored all of these 
concerns that were raised, not only by ourselves as the official 
opposition, but from the Registered Nurses’ Association, from 
the Union of Nurses, from the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons. All of the health care professional organizations were 
saying that this is exactly true; it’s a problem. 
 
And one of the problems that were identified at that time is that 
in order to meet the challenges of providing enough health care 
professionals, you couldn’t do it in ATCO trailers at the 
University of Saskatchewan because they didn’t have the 
physical space in which to conduct this extra training programs. 
And also that it was important to develop a collaborative 
approach to the health care delivery system. That it would be 
very, very important as an initiative by the University of 
Saskatchewan to build an academic health sciences facility, and 
to make sure that this moved forward quickly and in concert — 
not only just as a building, as we see the money that’s allocated 
today of approximately $110 million — not only is that not 
enough compared to what there was, but because this 
government has dithered for five or six years, the cost of the 
project has doubled. So that it’s going to take twice the 
commitment by the people of Saskatchewan in order to live up 
to our share of the commitment, and in five or six years in the 
making until we’re finally getting an initial commitment in a 
fiscal way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the meantime we’ve wasted several years of 
training opportunities because you don’t educate health care 
professionals overnight. It takes time for these professionals to 
go through their training program, to go through their 
residencies and to be available in the job market to provide for 
the services of much needed patient care in this province. And 
in the meantime all we get from the minister is talking about 
websites that keep track of our abysmal, long waiting lists in 
almost every category, and some kind of vague responses of 
saying, we’re going to improve this somehow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen in additional monies for health care 
$114 million. Of that, $110 million is for the academic health 
sciences facility and it certainly is an important project . . . Oh, 
I’m sorry, it’s out of the Learning budget — $110 million is for 
the regional authorities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the speaker just before me, the member 
from Battleford, said this is going to go to provide needed 
health care professionals, doctors and nurses and those sorts of 
individual resources to be available for the health care system. 
Well I think that if the member reads the budget document on 
the supplementary estimates that were tabled, it says it’s going 
to primarily provide for joint job evaluation adjustments — 
which are well and good by themselves, but they don’t provide 
an extra nurse at a bedside. They don’t provide an extra 
specialist when they’re needed. It doesn’t provide for the kind 
of people that are needed to make sure that there’s an ongoing, 
viable stem cell transplant program in this province. It isn’t 
providing for any of those health care essential services. It’s 
being used to provide for joint job evaluation adjustments that 
the health districts are going to have to face. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s frustrating to see that this 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

government so badly doesn’t understand what’s actually needed 
in a timely way so that the actual health care system can be 
improved to provide more timely care for our residents. And 
instead this money is being used in a way that doesn’t provide 
that kind of care. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you happen to look at some of the health care 
facilities’ budgets that have been recently tabled, many of them 
have been tabled and posted on the Internet and you can 
actually see individuals’ names. And I believe anyone who has 
received remuneration from the health authority in excess of, I 
believe, $50,000, their name and the amount of money that 
they’ve been paid by the health authorities have been posted on 
the Internet. 
 
And again it’s very interesting because you will see that there 
are a number of health care professionals, nurses, licensed and 
registered nurses who are actually putting in obviously way in 
excess of a 40- or 44-hour workweek. And they’re doing that 
obviously at double time or double time and a half rates of pay. 
And at the same time, many of our graduating health care 
professionals, nurses, etc., are not able to get full-time job 
equivalent positions at regular rates of pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an example of the short-sighted vision of 
this government in providing an adequate number of health care 
professionals and also making sure that there are available 
full-time, permanent positions that are available for these 
people that are entering the workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting as well that there’s a quarter of a 
million dollars being spent on executive management which is 
again in some ways very frustrating. Because what we’re 
getting from this government . . . And I would like to remind 
the House that this is the government that closed Whitespruce 
Treatment Centre. It’s the government that dismantled the 
SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission] 
program for addictions. This very same government now makes 
$250,000 available for the creation of a new ministry, and it 
doesn’t create one more treatment bed for people that are 
addicted to drugs, particularly the scourges of drugs like crystal 
meth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I point that out as an example of how this 
government’s spending priorities are fairly inappropriate, given 
the fact that they’ve come into these windfall dollars. And they 
claim that this is one-time money. Well if they would do any 
planning, if they would do any programming to understand 
what is really needed in this province, these monies are needed 
to provide long-term, permanent positions in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly we would commend and suggest that 
expenditures in Health of $3.4 million for the funding of 
Herceptin is a very worthwhile expenditure. But how can it be 
considered one term? This is essential money that should be in a 
permanent way going into the base funding for the drug plan 
because this treatment is very much needed for women 
suffering with breast cancer conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see the extra money that’s being spent on 
health care, and we certainly recognize that the money is being 

spent in needed areas. But it’s too bad that it takes so long for 
the government to recognize the importance of these 
expenditures and therefore we’re not getting the kind of value 
that we should out of the money that’s being spent. 
 
I would like to also speak very briefly about the expenditures 
that are being projected and promoted in the field of learning. 
Mr. Speaker, we see a total budget of about $120 million — 
$114 million of that, almost $115 million, is being spent for the 
academic health sciences at the University of Saskatchewan and 
I’ve touched on that addition, on that issue. In addition there is 
almost 2 million being spent on additional K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] education school capital transfers. 
It’s a little vague as to what they might be, but I worry that we 
might be getting into again a problem with the implementation 
of the amalgamation plan that was announced previously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time we said that amalgamation was 
something that was progressing very well on a voluntary basis 
where it made sense by school divisions, and we were told that 
there were going to be three main benefits or three main reasons 
why we should support amalgamation. 
 
The first stated reason was administrative efficiency. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it also seems to be very frustrating for me to realize 
that this government will not seek the counsel and wisdom of 
neighbouring jurisdictions or other jurisdictions in Canada to 
see if they’ve been through this same experience and to see if 
there’s any wisdom that can be learned. And certainly we heard 
from our neighbouring province to the east, Manitoba, who 
went through an amalgamation process and to their dismay they 
found out that the cost of this process didn’t result in any 
administrative efficiencies. In essence it added cost to the whole 
process. 
 
And what we’re seeing, although this is all in transition right 
now, is a concern about how we’re going to make sure we deal 
with capital for our office buildings and things of that nature, if 
there has to be renovations to the central office location. We’re 
seeing a whole new tier of administration being created in this 
whole system and we also suspect that the administrative 
remuneration on these larger districts is also going to creep up. 
 
So we’re going to find I believe that our situation is not going to 
be a whole lot different than what was experienced in Manitoba. 
It’s not going to be a whole lot different. The minister opposite 
is shaking his head as if this isn’t going to happen. But I’ll stand 
in this House and I will bet the minister that when this is all 
over we’re going to see that the administrative costs for these 
amalgamated school districts are not going to save the people of 
this province one red cent. The new structures are going to be 
every bit as expensive, if not more expensive, than the old 
structures. And they are going to be less efficient because we 
now have huge distances and huge amounts of time that are 
going to be spent behind the wheel of a car driving to these 
locations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a balance between ideological sort of 
blindness and practicality. And the school boards of this 
province were finding that. They were doing the practical things 
on the basis of what made sense for their ratepayers and for 
their communities. And we believe that that was achieving the 
kind of results that we were looking for. 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we also see that there are some 
concerns being expressed about how the program of the early 
childhood, early learning program are going to be implemented. 
Mr. Speaker, we think in principle the idea of making sure that 
there is early learning in child care in the educational system is 
a good idea in principle. The question will always be, are these 
extra funds to provide this program going to be adequate for the 
school boards to initiate the programs and to sustain them long 
term? We think that’s important. 
 
We’re concerned that we’re hearing from school boards that 
there has been very little consultation in a meaningful way as to 
how it’s going to work and what their roles and responsibilities 
are going to be in this program. It’s very much being generated 
from the Department of Learning as opposed to real bottom-up 
needs identification that says something needs to be done in this 
area. And again these are concerns that are being expressed to 
us at this time. And we certainly believe that they need to be 
paid attention to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in and by themselves, these expenditures are 
going to benefit the province. Our concern is, is that they could 
have benefited an awful lot more if this government had the 
vision to look forward and to anticipate these needs and to 
respond in a timely way when we could have had some cost 
efficiencies. 
 
It’s too bad that after all these years this government doesn’t 
learn from their mistakes, is unwilling to learn from the 
experiences of other jurisdictions, and is only being able to 
come with any ideas in a second-hand way from, by and large, 
the official opposition’s initiatives. And at least they’re copying 
some of those initiatives, so something’s getting done in this 
province because if it was left to their devices, we would be 
accomplishing very little, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m disappointed in the priorities that this government has 
outlined in the supplementary estimates. I think we need a lot 
more vision than has been exhibited by this government. But I 
suspect that we’re only going to get that to change after another 
election. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to 
participate in the debate and discussion this evening. When I 
saw that there was supplementary estimates coming down, I 
thought that this was going to be an opportunity for the NDP 
government to try and demonstrate some leadership and try and 
demonstrate some of the things that they talk about as being 
near and dear to their heart. 
 
And frankly, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen when we’ve looked 
through that is a lot of disappointment, a lot of things that aren’t 
particularly beneficial, and unfortunately far too many things 
that are mop ups of problems that ill-advised policies have 
created before. 
 
I’d like specifically to deal firstly with the issue of Corrections 
and Public Safety estimates. On their spending, an additional 

$2.535 million for adult corrections facilities, managing high 
inmate counts in adult correctional facilities . . . Mr. Speaker, 
the fact that we’re spending more money and we’ve got more 
inmates is probably a sign that our police officers and 
prosecutors are working hard and doing what they are paid to 
do. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, having a high incarceration or a 
higher incarceration rate is an indication of the failure of the 
other policies that should have taken place before — things like 
early intervention programs for children, better educational and 
training programs, better probation follow-up in with young 
offenders, and more programs that create actual and real jobs. 
 
And unfortunately by the time they become a statistic in the 
Department of Justice as an incarcerated inmate, it’s often too 
late for that individual to be restored to being a valuable 
participating member of society. Mr. Speaker, funds should be 
committed early on to childhood issues; should be committed 
early on to other issues to try and prevent other issues that have 
come up. 
 
I see as well $14.65 million to provincial disaster assistance 
program. This is going to cover payments for the program of 
widespread flooding and windstorms earlier this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] received large numbers of phone calls from 
dissatisfied citizens who had had to deal with this program. In 
particular we had flooding in Saskatoon, and we got people that 
were phoning their MLAs. They were phoning the city. The city 
of Saskatoon put on educational seminars to try and explain to 
people how the storm sewer system worked, how it was 
separate from the sanitary sewer system, and dealt with it in an 
upfront, businesslike manner. The various Saskatoon MLA 
offices on the NDP side were of absolutely no benefit to their 
constituents because we ended up helping them from all the 
way across the city. 
 
Unfortunately that happens too often that the Sask Party MLAs 
do the work for the NDP MLAs, and it appears to be something 
that’s ongoing. But I want to tell you something, Mr. Speaker; 
the MLAs on this side of the House are going to continue to do 
that because we value the citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation with our corrections facilities is 
likely going to continue to get worse because of some of the 
other things that the NDP are not dealing with. We have huge 
problems in this province with addictions to crystal meth. The 
Education minister sat in this House last year and told us the 
issue with crystal meth was no big deal, was nothing more than 
the flavour of the week. And it wasn’t until the entire North 
American continent rose up and said this is an international 
problem, this is something that has to be dealt with, that all of a 
sudden the light came on for that minister and for that 
government. And now they’ve decided to do something. 
 
And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They decide they’ve got 
enough money, that they can spend money to appoint a minister 
to look at the issue. That person goes out, does a study, does a 
review. All that person needed to do was to pick up the phone 
and phone some of the people that were working in some of the 
NGOs [non-governmental organization] or in some of the 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

health care facilities or talk to a police officer to understand the 
reality, the severity, and some of the issues that need to be 
addressed. But they chose not to do that. 
 
Instead they’ve spent tens of thousands, if not hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, to create a ministry. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that ministry has not yet created one additional bed, one facility, 
or anything that’s going to help the citizens of this province — 
not a bit. 
 
Unfortunately what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is the young 
people of our province are going to continue to become 
addicted to crystal meth and to other drugs because that 
government is more interested right now in building an airport 
for cabinet ministers and doing other issues, other priorities — 
paying for the entire caucus to become a cabinet minister and 
with the sad exception of one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a damning indictment of that caucus, and 
unfortunately the NDP has a very poor record on crime, and as 
taxpayers we will paying the cost in increased incarceration 
costs. 
 
[20:15] 
 
I would like to read a quote from the Premier: 
 

We are a government that dreams of a province where 
women and children and men can live and walk in their 
communities and walk on the campuses of our province 
without fear, without fear of violence . . . We dream of a 
new society without the fear of violence, and we say why 
not? 

 
Well he might have borrowed the gist and tone of that from 
Martin Luther King, but unfortunately for that Premier, you 
can’t walk safely in his constituency and in his backyard. 
Unfortunately he lives in one of the most dangerous places in 
this province and one of the most dangerous places in this 
country, and it’s right in the Premier’s backyard. 
 
And when we make an issue about it, they accuse us of playing 
politics. They can make all the accusations in the world because 
we will continue to pound away at that problem until that 
Premier, that Justice minister, and the members on that side of 
the House decide that that’s something they want to do with it. 
 
I’d like to talk about some of the crime statistics, Mr. Speaker. 
In 2004 Saskatchewan’s 15,159 Criminal Code offences per 
100,000 people was the highest of any province in this country. 
Saskatchewan’s violent crime rate was the highest in the 
country and more than double the rate of violent crimes in 
Ontario per 100,000 people. 
 
Saskatchewan had the highest provincial rate of property crime 
in the country, only behind British Columbia, and had the 
second highest homicide rate in the country. 
 
Saskatchewan continues to have the highest youth crime in the 
country with 19,185 charged and cleared per 100,000 youth. 
Mr. Speaker, that is, almost one child in five goes through the 
Justice system on an annual basis — a troubling and very 
discouraging statistic. I’m wondering whether that was a topic 

of discussion last weekend at the NDP convention, and I 
wonder whether there’s a willingness on the part of any of the 
members over there to try and deal with that. Mr. Speaker, there 
are an estimated 1,315 members of youth gangs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan’s NDP government has the worst crime record in 
Canada over the past 10 years. They have the worst violent 
crime record in Canada over the past seven years. That’s from 
crime statistics in Canada dated 2004. Violent crime under the 
NDP is 25 per cent higher than the next highest province. Mr. 
Speaker, that is from a government that tries to pride itself on 
caring and being committed to the residents of this province. 
 
The NDP failure to address the causes of crime is something 
that this government should take seriously. And they may enjoy 
their laughs. They may enjoy the jokes over there this evening 
but, Mr. Speaker, we’re here because of serious problems in this 
province. And we want to address those problems, and we want 
to raise them with that government, and it’s troubling that they 
don’t take any notice of the problems that are there. 
 
I’d like to talk briefly, Mr. Speaker, about poverty. Child 
poverty has grown since 1998. By 2002 almost 19 per cent of 
children in Saskatchewan lived in poverty. Strange statistic, Mr. 
Speaker — that’s almost exactly the same number of youth that 
get in trouble on an annual basis. Food bank usage has 
increased from 1998 to 2002. The food bank, Mr. Speaker, is in 
the Premier’s constituency, and the Premier will not visit the 
food bank. Half of all First Nations and Métis children in 
Saskatchewan live in poverty. 
 
I want to comment briefly on addictions, Mr. Speaker. It is 
estimated that 90 per cent of all crime in Saskatchewan has drug 
or alcohol involvement. Addictions are a major cause of crime, 
and Saskatchewan’s crime rate has increased by 41 per cent 
since 1995. The Premier’s cuts to addiction services over the 
1990s has contributed to Saskatchewan’s rising crime rate. 
 
In 1993 the member from Riversdale who is now the Premier, 
as associate minister of Health, closed SADAC. In 1996 that 
same member who was at that time minister of Social Services 
was part of the cabinet that closed the Whitespruce youth 
addiction treatment centre in Yorkton. The member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place who was then Health minister was also 
part of that same troubling, flawed decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fetal alcohol syndrome, the NDP delayed 
releasing their FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] plan for 
more than a year. When they finally announced that plan, there 
was too little funding for the program and no commitments to 
build a dedicated facility in the province. Unfortunately that 
issue remains unaddressed by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to comment just very briefly on the disaster 
relief funding. While the Saskatchewan Party agrees that more 
money is necessary to assist individuals and communities 
devastated by flooding and caused by the storms in 
Saskatchewan this summer, it is important to note that the 
government took $1 million away from the provincial disaster 
assistance program in the last ’05-06 budget. Surprisingly it’s 
roughly a similar amount to what they want to spend on a 
hangar for themselves. 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move on now and talk briefly about the 
Department of Justice and the supplementary estimates for the 
Department of Justice. We note an increase in expenditure of 
$110,000 for public prosecutions. And I go back to my earlier 
comments, Mr. Speaker, on the reason for the increase in 
prosecutions is because of failure to address root causes of 
crimes. 
 
And another expenditure of $1.1 million increased for 
community justice, law enforcement services to implement 
Project Hope, gang suppression, and establish a missing persons 
task force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that there is some successes come 
out of that. It is probably a situation unfortunately of too much 
done too late to be of any real benefit. Unfortunately they’ve 
gone ahead and chosen to make the announcement without the 
consultations that they should’ve done with Child Find, etc. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we note with no great surprise that we are 
going to spend an additional two point million dollars on the 
Milgaard inquiry. We’re troubled that that process is taking as 
long as it is and appears to be a difficult process. 
 
I would like to compliment the commissioner that is 
participating in that and commission counsel. It’s a difficult and 
arduous task. And I’m wondering whether the minister might be 
willing to try and have some meetings and decide . . . work with 
these people to determine whether there’s things that can be 
done that will shorten the process or reduce some of the costs 
that’s there, whether things can be agreed to. 
 
I understand that Mr. Milgaard is not terribly interested in 
participating in the program. So I wonder, I’m having some 
questions and reservations about some of the benefits that are 
going to come out of this inquiry if the person that’s the subject 
of it is not willing. And we as a province have to make hard 
decisions about what benefits are going to be reaped from that 
inquiry. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my hope that the minister 
would certainly have some consultations with the people 
involved in the commission to determine what can be done to 
salvage some benefit from that. We’ve spent a significant 
amount of money now and certainly don’t want to waste what 
we’ve done. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve commented when I was 
commenting on Corrections and Public Safety on the sad, sad 
statistics that we have. And I don’t want to reread those, but the 
same situation applies to Corrections and Public Safety and also 
to Justice in a broader sense. 
 
I think this is a government that is running on its last legs right 
now. They know that this is a problem that they cannot address. 
They’ve decided they will not address and what we’re seeing 
now is a government that’s doing nothing more, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, than window dressing because they are unable and 
unwilling to address that. 
 
They made a commitment to the province in 1999 for 200 new 
police officers. It was probably not enough at that time and now 
we have announcements, pronouncements, re-announcements. 

Every time another police officer retires, another one comes on 
stream. 
 
But no matter whose numbers you use — the minister’s 
numbers, the Federation of Police Officers — this is a promise 
that has not yet been kept. This is a promise that was made 
more than two elections ago and, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
promise is a myth and it’s busted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it is difficult to find 
words that are appropriate when you go through an election 
promise made over two election cycles, a series of NDP Justice 
ministers, and they’re unable to fulfill that promise. And with 
the large amounts of additional revenue that were there, I would 
have thought that this would have been something that this 
government would have made a priority on. But frankly, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s something that they’ve 
given up on and aren’t willing to deal with. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, part of this was funding for Project 
Hope. We will await with anticipation and probably some hope 
that there will be some benefit that will come out of this 
program. Frankly, from what we’ve seen so far there is little in 
the program that we’ve seen other than some hollow promises 
and some plans or intentions. But so far we haven’t seen 
anything that has produced any tangible treatment programs, 
anything directed towards the development of a facility. 
 
We have however seen a government opposite that is quite 
willing to spend a lot of time planning the parking spaces in 
their new hangar. And I guess when they rise above things, as 
they fly here and around the province, they may not be as 
concerned with justice and justice issues as the people that are 
on the ground that see these things on a day-to-day basis. And 
my advice to them, Madam Deputy Speaker, would be to get 
out of the plane and go for a walk on the ground, perhaps in 
Saskatoon Riversdale, and see if they can benefit from that, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
delighted to rise on behalf of the people from 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency to comment on the way the 
government has decided to spend the extra $750 million or so 
that they received this year so far. 
 
I think the people of my area and in Saskatchewan were hoping 
that they would see something that would make a difference to 
their lives. They’re hoping that when they went to sleep at night 
that there’d be something that they could say, gee we are part of 
the windfall revenues that’s happened to this province. We own 
this province and we’ve paid our dues here so let’s see how 
we’re going to make a difference. 
 
I’m going to tell you to start off, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
one of the things that I’m waiting with anticipation to see what 
the government will do about and that is midwifery. It’s 
something that we’ve talked about and the government has 
talked about for a number of years. And they’ve made some 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

veiled promises in this Throne Speech and I’m waiting to see if 
the government actually will deal with it. We’re the only 
Western province in the country that’s failed to legalize 
midwifery. 
 
And the statement that I think that is most telling is that it’s 
utterly unrealistic to imagine that midwifery can thrive without 
funding. Have you ever heard the Minister of Health suggest 
that physicians should provide their medical services free of 
charge or that they should seek payment directly from their 
patients? I think that the people that would be involved with this 
issue are waiting to see the government actually will do 
something for them. 
 
The other issue that I am very passionate about and I think 
members in the House are aware, that is the crystal meth and 
the Project Hope that the Premier talked about the last . . . half 
the year. I am aware that in the near future there will be an 
announcement made about this. And the only thing that I can 
hope for the people that have family members directly affected 
by an addiction that’s so utterly devastating to not only their 
family but their community is that whatever this government 
has decided to do, they’ll do it quickly. 
 
We’ve been talking about the issue for two years in the House. 
And the Minister of Health has indicated in this Assembly that 
he’s known about it for six years. It’s just not good enough to 
say that we’ll do it later on, Madam Deputy Speaker. It has to 
be dealt with now. When we can turn on the TV at night and 
hear them talking about the drug on a fiction show as easily as 
we talked about alcohol a couple of years ago, we know it’s not 
an issue that’s going to leave this province. It’s something that 
every one of us hear about. 
 
I have a grandchild in grade 4 that can tell you that the name on 
the street for this drug is jibb. It’s not too many grade 4 people a 
few years ago would have known that. So what I’m saying is 
that it’s infiltrated our society to a great extent, and we have to 
deal with it. 
 
The information that we have about crystal meth is dealt with in 
many different departments. Health people look at it, Social 
Services, Justice. The police look at it. And one of the problems 
we have is there’s no umbrella organization that actually 
collects all the information so that it can be . . . statistics can be 
made so the extent of the problem can be verified. 
 
I know that in my own area, there has been a couple of deaths 
involving this drug but it was marked up to death by drowning 
or heart attacks or that type of thing. There’s no information to 
show that basically crystal meth was the problem. So I know 
that meth isn’t the only drug that we have to deal with in this 
province, but I do know of the addictions. It’s one that people 
are scared of. 
 
[20:30] 
 
A lot of people have heard of what they call old cokeheads or 
people who have used heroin for a long time. They’re old drug 
addicts. You won’t hear of an old meth addict because they 
won’t live that long. The very longest that they can live if they 
were using it to any great extent is seven years. So we don’t 
have the time to put off any longer. We’ve already known about 

it in this province for six years. The time has come. 
 
I’m very disappointed that with the addictions issue we have 
failed to recognize the value of CBOs [community-based 
organization] in this province. SABAS [Saskatchewan 
Association of Boards of Addiction Services] has dealt with 
addictions and they basically are winding down or dissolving 
right now because the benefit they had to this province is not 
seen. 
 
We put it under mental health and everyone is aware that of 
course there is a mental health issue to this drug but it’s not the 
only part of it. We’ve got to be able to deal with addictions as 
an addiction. It’s a disease. And when the Minister of Health 
has indicated that we can no longer use the words disease or 
abstinence, it sends a message that we have to deal with it 
differently. And the organizations that are working in other 
provinces are saying that we have to look at people on the 
ground, people that deal with it on a daily basis to deal with the 
issue. 
 
I believe we need a foundation to deal with the addictions issue 
because the addictions workers have this one issue that’s 
important to them. Mental health workers have very many of 
them. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when SADAC first came into place, 
they used to be 1 per cent of the health budget. I’m hoping that 
the Minister of Health can tell us how much money is spent on 
addictions at this time. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the other issues that people in 
my constituency are concerned about again is agriculture. And I 
had a call the other day from a young man who had been 
waiting to hear about his crop damage from wildlife and he 
learned, much to his shock, that if you get paid for a crop that’s 
been damaged by wildlife you get paid less than you would if 
you were paid for it under crop insurance. And the numbers are 
really quite startling. 
 
If you get paid for a field ruined by deer or animals, under 
wildlife you’ll get $2.61 a bushel. Under crop insurance it’s 
$3.61. This is the same crop. This is adjusted by the same 
people. This is by the same government, and it’s $1 a bushel 
less. To this family it makes $9,000 difference. How we can 
justify saying that there is a difference in it is beyond me, and 
it’s especially beyond the farmers that are being affected by this 
issue. 
 
I have one specific issue that I think this falls under the Minister 
of Culture’s domain, and it’s regarding a development that was 
trying to take place around Last Mountain Lake. A young 
family had decided that they were going to put up a 
development, and they found, when they started to do the work, 
they found out that there was some tepee rings that were 
situated on four of the prime areas along the ridge. And when 
heritage resources came out to look at it, they were given a bill 
for $2,800 for just looking at the project. We think that if it was 
something that had a cultural, a positive influence on this 
province, it would be something that would be picked up under 
the Minister of Culture’s purview and not something that was 
expected to pay for by a developer who had no idea that they 
were getting into this area and that it was going to end up 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

costing this money. 
 
But in the long run they found out that to excavate the tepee 
rings, it would have to be done . . . the material would have to 
be sent to Calgary, and the actual work would be $30,000. This 
landowner had no idea that they were going to get involved in 
the expense of $30,000 — something they hadn’t planned on, 
something they didn’t want, and something that’s really going 
to be no benefit to the province because out of all the material 
they dug up so far, there really isn’t anything interesting or 
historic that’s going to make people want to come out to their 
area. It’s just going to be an additional cost. And I’m hoping it’s 
something that the ministers . . . that they will look at. 
 
The two areas that I am responsible for in my portfolio, the first 
one is the First Nations and Métis Relations. And on October 18 
I was delighted that the government put forward a news release 
saying that they were going to have a program to boost 
Aboriginal participation in the economy. Basically what they 
said is they were going to have a four-year $5 million package 
that was going to help Aboriginal business entrepreneurs start a 
business. 
 
Now this is exciting because we all know that to get a business 
started it takes some money and the leverage is important to go 
to the bank. But as late as Friday when I phoned this 
department, Madam Deputy Speaker, there was still no program 
details for this program. We’ve announced the program. They 
made a big press release, a big fanfare about the money that 
they were going to be spending for First Nations people, but 
there is no details to a program. Yet we have the spending 
announcement in this budget. We’ve got people that are willing 
to talk about it but they can’t help the people. 
 
Now think of how many First Nations people there are in this 
province. To have it run through a department that still doesn’t 
know what they’re doing, we’d be better off to write them all a 
cheque. This isn’t the kind of thing that’s helping First Nations 
people. If the department is willing to stand up and say we 
know they need something but we’re not sure what yet, but we 
will do a press release and we will talk about it, what we have 
from this government is a whole lot of talking and not much 
action. And it’s not helping the First Nations people that need it 
desperately. 
 
The other area, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is of great concern 
is the money that has been given in supplementary estimates for 
culture operations support, $3.033 million, up from about 
$711,000 in the budget. This money is more than quadruple 
what this government had actually talked about earlier. Now 
what we have to know, what is this doing to help the people of 
the province? Is this already spent? Is this going to be going to 
something specific? How are we going to see that this is 
actually making a difference to the people of this province? 
 
And even more frustrating is the centennial spending increased 
by about $50,000 from the budget . . . 50 per cent from the 
budget. It’s up $3.95 million. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we all took part in the 
centennial operations this summer. We all saw our children 
come home from Alberta and BC [British Columbia] and 
Ontario to celebrate with people who used to call their 

homefolk. They’re no longer here but they were quite happy to 
come home and celebrate. But we have just about $4 million 
above what the government talked about in March and it’s 
gone. Where did it go to? What was it spent on? We put in 
written questions ever since this House came back into session 
and way more than three-quarters of them have been . . . We’ve 
been asking the government to be accountable and they’ve 
ordered the replies to our questions. 
 
We have no idea what this government decided to do in the 
backroom when it comes to spending money for this centennial 
and this cultural support. Where did the money go to? How can 
you decide over a four-month period that we’ve got a lot of 
extra money so we’ll give one project 50 per cent more than 
they asked for and another one four times more than they asked 
for. 
 
We’ve got individuals in this province who are crying for help 
to do what they need to do just to survive during the day. And 
we’ve got a group of 29 people over there have decided that 
they should control just about $1 billion and put it in some way 
that’s going to make them happy. What about the people of the 
province that this money belongs to? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is one of the areas that is of great 
concern because we know last year that the centennial spending 
jumped dramatically because the NDP spent $614,000 on a 
movie about Tommy Douglas. 
 
Now that really helped the farmers in Saskatchewan. That really 
helped the cancer victims on the waiting list. That helped 
people who were trying to lower their taxes when it came to 
education tax on their property. 
 
This is the type of thing that is so frustrating when we see 
people who think they know better than the people who gave 
the money to the government. 
 
This is not the NDP money. This is the money that belongs to 
the people of this province. And it’s time that we started seeing 
it and not in something more than a glossy brochure that the 
government gives us and says, we’re going to be out of here in 
a couple of weeks and just sign your name to it, and we’ll go 
home. And that’s the way this government may want to operate, 
but that’s not the way we would operate, Madam Minister. 
 
There has got to be some accountability, and people have to see 
a difference in their life or they’re not going to be here. We 
already know about the 6,200 fewer jobs, that population that’s 
decreased. What are we going to do to make sure that our 
people are going to see a future in this province? $3.95 million 
more for the centennial didn’t make a difference, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. I don’t think it did to people on this House or 
the people over there. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter this 
debate. I want to echo some of the comments that was made by 
my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena. 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

When you do go around the constituency, they talk about the oil 
and gas revenue being higher this year, more money being 
taken in. But one of the things they’ll mention is that, my life 
isn’t any better. What’s happening to the waiting lists out there? 
Long-term care beds, we’re still have waiting lists for that. 
 
The money isn’t going to the people where it came from. The 
member that just spoke from here is totally right. It’s not going 
back to the people that paid it, the taxpayers. They’re not 
getting any benefits from that. And when I will go around in the 
constituency there isn’t one good word said about the 
government with this extra money. 
 
You’d think that they would be happy. They’d say you know 
like, seems like we’ve got budgeted for more money this year 
that’s coming in. You know, my life should be a little better, 
maybe a little tax relief. Or the hospital should be a little better 
or better in the waiting list. Or my life should be a little better. 
And that’s what they’re saying. 
 
They’re angry out there, Deputy Speaker. They’re very angry 
out there. They’re angry with the government. This government 
has taken in a lot of money in oil and gas revenue this year, and 
probably through no help of the government, because I can 
remember them always talking about how evil the oil 
companies were. 
 
You had a convention, this present government had a 
convention last weekend and I think one of the resolutions on 
that was to nationalize the oil and gas revenue — to nationalize 
the oil and gas companies. Didn’t your party learn anything at 
all from the ’70s when they did that? What kind of message 
does that send? 
 
One member from North Battleford talked about Alberta and 
how much money they had and it’s hard to compete with that. 
Well that’s because they’ve worked with the oil and gas 
companies. They’ve worked with their natural resources, have 
turned them into other resources. And that’s what this 
government should be doing. 
 
It should be working. We should be expanding in Saskatchewan 
the oil and gas revenue. This should be coming in. Our budget 
should be growing every year with that. If you take the spinoff 
that comes from the oil and gas, would help rural Saskatchewan 
— would help it greatly, Madam Deputy Speaker, would help it 
greatly. 
 
You take rural Alberta, the pipelines that go through. And I’ve 
got in the towns of just . . . I know in Kenaston, Hanley how 
many people go in the wintertime — and Bladworth and 
Dundurn — go to work in the oil fields in Alberta. I could 
probably, if I sat down and wrote the names down, I could 
probably come up with 30 names just like that, that go to 
Alberta, take their money there — take, make their money there 
and spend their money there and that. 
 
And the spinoff from that . . . Just when I was home, there was 
a 23-year-old kid I was talking to. He worked in Davidson. This 
winter he got his A1 licence. He’s going to drive, going to drive 
a water truck in Alberta because they’re just . . . And he got that 
job just reading it in the paper. 
 

He says that they’re — and they are, you look in Western 
Producer — they are crying for workers in Alberta. They’re 
expanding. The towns are growing. The businesses there are 
thriving in them towns — the spinoff from the hotels to the 
restaurants, to the gas stations. 
 
And yet in rural Saskatchewan that’s not happening here. And 
the potential here is just as great as in Alberta. And this 
government still does not get the idea. It talks about the oil and 
gas revenue, but it still does not work expanding it. 
 
I mean, I still can’t believe that they would have a resolution 
from one of their members to nationalize the oil and gas 
companies. That’s all their people, a lot of their grassroots 
people think about is basically just, how can we take something 
from somebody else? Even though they got no idea how to 
develop it or do anything with it, how can they look at . . . 
basically they look at it and say, what can we take from them? 
This province hasn’t suffered enough and they want to start 
even talking about something like that at their convention. 
 
[20:45] 
 
You know that, you think that word spreads. It does, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, it spreads to Alberta, spreads to Manitoba. 
Even the NDP in Manitoba they don’t even talk about 
nationalizing there, that particular government. But this 
government, yes in the back rooms it talks about nationalizing 
it. 
 
And then we wonder why that they’re always worried that this 
revenue isn’t going to last. They keep talking about a short 
term; it’s very short-term. Well yes, you keep talking like that, 
you keep acting like that and yes it’s going to be a short term 
for a very long period of time. It’s not going to be here if you 
keep talking like that in front of the companies and to the 
businesses. You keep chasing them away. 
 
You talk about the money that is coming, this money that is 
coming in on this particular estimates. It’s not helping out in 
rural Saskatchewan. It’s not helping education tax which this 
government promised to do years ago. 
 
The farming crisis is large out there in rural Saskatchewan. Is 
there anything in this particular supplementary estimates to help 
rural Saskatchewan? No there isn’t. They talked about in the 
Throne Speech they funded 2005 CAIS. Well why didn’t they 
say that they’re going to fund 2006? Because right now that’s 
when the planning is going on for 2006. Now the farmers that 
are going to be able to stay out there and survive are starting to 
plan for next year and it would be nice if they knew that this 
government was going to step up to the plate and fulfill a 
commitment that they had made that they were going to fully 
fund the 2006 CAIS. If they want to do something for farmers 
in these supplement estimates, they could have did that, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
Long-term care beds in my constituency, there’s a waiting list. 
There’s a waiting list on that. Is it addressing that in these 
estimates? I don’t see where. And it’s getting worse out there. 
In fact most of the towns you go through, the seniors are 
growing. They’re worried out there in rural Saskatchewan as 
they’re worried in the cities. I’ve got some relatives in the cities 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

here. There’s waiting lists here too and we have an older 
population, Saskatchewan. And what’s going to happen to them 
if you’re not going to expand the beds? This is a government 
that closed 52 hospitals. Are they planning on closing more? 
They closed a wing last year in my hometown of Davidson, you 
know, and right now there’s a waiting list to go to that, you 
know. So where is the government’s priorities on that? 
 
I can look through the estimates . . . I want to talk about a little 
bit about the Rural Development estimates. I see that they 
mention that there’s money coming to it. Executive 
management — I would take it that means salaries; central 
services — I think that means supplies; and accommodation 
services, which means buildings and leases. Where else is this 
going to help the rural Saskatchewan? 
 
The Rural Development office isn’t any different than the Rural 
Revitalization office. I can remember when it first came out 
that’s all it did was spend money on some office space and 
some help. I can look back and I can . . . they said it was 
supposed to help at the farm gate. And one of the things it said 
was improving or including emergency assistance out there for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I tell you what, there’s an emergency out there. I don’t 
know if this government realizes it, but I don’t see anything in 
the Throne Speech and I didn’t see anything in these estimates 
that are going to deal with that emergency. And yet they’ll put 
that stuff out on their website and their nice little pamphlets 
they send out — yes we will step up to the plate. Well it’s time 
to step up to the plate and get something going out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With the Rural Development estimates I don’t see anything 
that’s going to help out there in rural Saskatchewan. Not one 
little thing. I just see stuff going to either management or 
accommodations, to leases, different things like that. I don’t see 
any plans. I’ve yet to hear a good plan of how they’re going to 
get rural Saskatchewan going. We’ve lost jobs. We’ve lost 
population and our numbers have been going like that slowly 
over the years. And if we don’t address this problem and 
address it now, we’re going to be in trouble. We’re in trouble in 
there right now throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
You look at the towns. My major towns aren’t growing. I mean 
you take like the Wynyards and Watrouses and Outlooks of the 
country — if they’re not growing what do you think the smaller 
towns are around them are, with the shrinking population? 
 
The cities are facing the same thing. You talk to the businesses 
here. This province is going downhill and this government, I 
don’t know, either doesn’t seem to realize it or doesn’t have any 
idea how to address the problem. I’ve yet to see any vision here 
except to stand up, they’ll stand up and say how great things 
are. Well I know and I think they know that things aren’t that 
great. 
 
I know that at their convention they had people from rural 
Saskatchewan and I don’t think they told them things were that 
great and rosy out there. I think they told them that they either 
have to address some problems; they’re going to have to do 
something out there. And time and time again I get up here and 
I never hear once just say, you know we have some challenges 

out there. We have to do some things out there maybe a little 
different. I never hear that from the members. 
 
All they’ll just say is, man how great things are and how great 
things are going to be and how great things have been. And 
they’ll make some announcement that they made five years ago, 
that they made four years ago and re-announced it three years, 
and two, and this year again. But there is no change out there 
that’s growing this province. There isn’t one thing out there. 
 
And you can say, well we’re just saying it on this side, but you 
get there — all you got to do is look at the statistics — you get 
and look and talk to the people. And I know that at their 
convention that that came across either from some of the cities 
and a lot from rural Saskatchewan, but even some of the bigger 
towns from there — North Battlefords and Melvilles and 
Yorktons, that they had delegates from. I know that they told 
them that things aren’t that rosy out there right now. I know that 
they got that at their convention and if things don’t change in 
this province, it’s going downhill and it’s going to keep going 
downhill. 
 
And that’s a shame because of the potential of this province. 
It’s a shame that it would be in this kind of shape, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. So when I see these estimates I really don’t 
see a lot that is really going to help Saskatchewan grow at that 
end of it. 
 
I would like to see some of the priorities in agriculture. I would 
like to see some more long-term beds opened throughout 
Saskatchewan in the cities and rural Saskatchewan, because it’s 
a troublesome spot in both centres. That goes right across the 
board — is long-term care beds, is hospital waiting lists. 
 
We’ve heard stories in here of cancer patients that are on the 
priority list having to wait eight months before they can get a 
biopsy or before they can get an MRI [magnetic resonance 
imaging]. I mean that’s shameful. As a government, if I was 
sitting on that side, I’d be ashamed of myself if people are 
waiting that long. I don’t even know if I could look myself in 
the mirror in the mornings if I had that and knew I didn’t have a 
plan that I was going to address that. 
 
Because since I was here in ’99, them lists and them eight 
months to two years haven’t changed. So I’ve been here almost 
six years and it hasn’t changed. And if in six years, if you, 
government, can’t change anything like that, maybe it’s time 
you just stepped aside and got out of the way and let somebody 
else have a go at it because I tell you what, it’s shameful. 
 
And it’s coming next election. It’s coming into the cities 
because I’m getting it even when I’m up here, that they’re 
disappointed hugely in this government and the vision and the 
lack of vision of this government, such as everybody is and that. 
 
When you talk about health care, I mean that’s just shame. 
You’d think them waiting lists would be in countries that are a 
lot poorer than Canada — a lot poorer — that have no natural 
resources like we got here in Saskatchewan. Nobody should 
have to wait a year for a test when you’re on a priority, 
emergency list, on a cancer waiting list. That’s absolutely 
shameful that you have to wait that long in a province like this. 
 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

So with that I said a few comments on these supplementary 
estimates. And with that, Madam Speaker, thank you. But I’ll 
just reiterate again that I am very disappointed in the priorities 
this government has put forward. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance, 
the member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, for this opportunity to close debate on the 
motion that’s before us. 
 
I guess I should never expect more from the opposition than 
what I have seen, Madam Deputy Speaker. And again today, I 
should not be disappointed because I shouldn’t expect it. But 
again, we see what we always see from the opposition, is on the 
one hand — and if we just go to the last speaker — is a plea to 
invest more, to spend more in certain areas of government. And 
that’s, you know, a complaint that I guess I would have about 
all of their members. 
 
And then other members say, but you should tax less at the 
same time. But never, never, never will you hear them talk at 
the same time about the words debt or balanced budgets. Never, 
never, uh-oh, uh-oh — we’d all better watch out, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, because you know that is just so reminiscent, 
so reminiscent of another period in our history when you had a 
government that was intent on spending, cutting taxes, never 
worrying about debt, never worrying about the economy, and 
running this province into the hole. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to deal with a couple of 
issues that were raised, specific issues that were raised. One is 
the question of the projection of revenues. On October 16 the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party opposition put out a press 
release and indicated that the government would have available 
to it from additional oil and gas revenues at the end of the 
mid-year, which is the end of September . . . So this is a couple 
of weeks after the end of the mid-year. And having tracked oil 
prices and natural gas prices every day, every day, they said that 
the government would have an additional $720 million in oil 
and natural gas revenues available to it. Well they’re out by $96 
million, out by $96 million. They said oil and gas revenues. But 
when you add it up, they’re out $96 million. 
 
Now you know, it’s one thing, it’s one thing in this era of 
volatile resource revenues to try to predict. But to have the 
actual prices every day speaks to a level of incompetence, Mr. 
Speaker, that I have never witnessed before — that you would 
have the actual information every day and be out by that 
amount. Well that’s just a lesson. That’s a lesson for the 
opposition to not put your spin doctors in charge of financial 
calculations but to actually get competent people that can do 
that for you. 
 
And I might say they had, they had no projection when it came 
to income tax, no projection with respect to corporate tax, no 
projection with respect to sales tax, and no projection with 
respect to a $30 million interest saving this fiscal year. So if 
they can’t estimate, you know, revenues, looking back, what 
confidence, what confidence should we have in their ability 
going forward? None at all. 
 

Now another interesting comment was by one of their speakers 
about that they didn’t know where things were. When it came to 
financial reporting, they weren’t clear. They just couldn’t say 
where things were at. Well, Mr. Speaker, this year the mid-year 
financial report had 76 pages, 76 pages in this year’s mid-year 
report. 
 
How many pages do you think there were, how many pages do 
you think there were in the mid-year report in the last year of 
the Devine administration, Mr. Speaker? How many pages 
would you think there were? This year 76 pages. How many 
pages in 1991-92? How many pages . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . A big fat zero. And that member is correct because it was a 
big fat zero. Why? No mid-year reports. Why? No quarterly 
reports. 
 
In fact there was one year, Mr. Speaker, that we actually had to 
take the government to court to get them to release the public 
accounts which accounted for how all the taxpayers’ dollars had 
been spent. Had to take them to court kicking, screaming, 
dragging. 
 
And here they say well we can’t find it. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
when you plead ignorance, then in fact what you’re doing is 
you’re showing your ignorance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to deal with this issue of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund that the opposition Finance critic calls phony 
baloney fund — phony baloney. That’s notwithstanding the fact 
that since the 1920s, since the 1920s successive governments in 
Saskatchewan have had some mechanism for a rainy day fund 
to take in surplus revenues, to hold them until such a time as 
those surplus revenues might be required. 
 
Why? Why? Because Saskatchewan has always had great 
volatility, volatility in oil and gas. Oil and gas has gone up 
tremendously in the last year and a half. But there may also 
come a time, as it has in the past, where those oil and gas 
revenues will also plummet precipitously, and therefore 
governments have always found it prudent to have some rainy 
day fund set aside in case you get a downturn in your revenues. 
Or, or you have an increase in expenditures because of a major 
challenge that you . . . occurred for example in agriculture 
where again this year where we see that we’re expending funds 
over and above what had been calculated by the federal 
government for the CAIS program, a need to set aside 
significant millions of dollars extra, Speaker. 
 
[21:00] 
 
So you know we’ve always had, always have had some 
mechanism whether it’s the old liquor authority reserve, 
retained earnings, or the Saskatchewan gaming and liquor 
authority. To my mind, to say that there should be no 
mechanism in Saskatchewan, no mechanism, is reckless — 
reckless, simply reckless. 
 
And it’s curious, and it’s curious that this is their prescription 
for government. But when it comes to their own caucus, their 
own caucus, they’re quite prepared to run a surplus one year, 
carry it over and use it some future year. But when they say . . . 
when it’s government, oh no, you shouldn’t do that. But when it 
comes to their caucus fund, they say, oh well that’s appropriate 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

and that’s good budgeting. But no, when it comes to 
government, no, no — you shouldn’t do that. 
 
But again, the people of Saskatchewan who are watching this 
have to ask themselves, why is it that when we’ve had some 
mechanism since the mid-1920s that’s . . . now it’s wrong? 
Especially, especially in a time of very volatile energy 
revenues. 
 
Speaker, they also say it’s an election slush fund, and he says 
the total amount of money that’s allocated for the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund . . . And if the people of Saskatchewan want 
to get the true accounting, I’d certainly advise them to go to the 
Government of Saskatchewan website, go to Finance, download 
the mid-year report. On page 14 it’s all reported where every 
cent is proposed to go in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And they 
will see that a fair number of those dollars are in fact set aside 
for mid-year commitments that we’ve previously made, 
including property tax reduction and funds . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes it’s hard to speak when they just . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. The Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — So the public, the public can go to 
the website. The public can go to the website, download the 
report, look at the report. 
 
And they will see in that report that there are significant dollars 
allocated both because of provincial commitments such as 
property tax relief and also because we have a peculiar situation 
with respect to the federal government where they say, we want 
to provide you funding for a period of five years for a program, 
but here it is — all of it — today. What do you do with it? You 
allocate it to a Fiscal Stabilization Fund so that you can draw on 
it as and when required pursuant to the agreement with the 
federal government. But that’s not something the member 
would say. 
 
Then the question is, is the $255 million, roughly, unallocated 
in a budget of $7 billion? And looking at historical allocations, 
is that an election slush fund or is that prudent budgeting? That 
is the question. That’s another word that you’ll never hear from 
them, Mr. Speaker, is the question prudent. 
 
Now it seems to us when you listen to the members opposite 
that they’re ready to commit permanent increases in spending, 
permanent tax cuts by one, adding to the debt. Now they have 
indicated that they would take $174 million out of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund and put it towards spending on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when, you know, when I heard the comments of 
the opposition Finance critic when he was interviewed the day 
that the mid-year report was put forward, and he was asked by a 
reporter on the radio: this is the government’s plan; what would 
you do different? The very first thing he said, well I wouldn’t 
put any money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. So in other 
words he would increase the debt immediately by $175 million. 
How typical, Mr. Speaker, that their very first action would be 
to increase the debt of the province to improve spending. Well 

we expect no less. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, they seem ready to commit to 
permanent increases in spending, permanent tax cuts by basing 
future revenue projections on the high price of oil today. They 
say oil is at 57, 58, $60 a barrel. It’s going to be like that 
forever, and therefore we can spend forever on that basis. Less 
than two years ago, less than two years ago the price of a barrel 
of oil was less than $30 a barrel. And today it’s nudging 57, 58. 
And they say well if it’s come that far in less than two years, we 
should be prepared to commit that level of revenue forever and 
base ongoing decisions on that. 
 
That is something that worries us and should worry the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. How certain are we that oil will 
be sustained at that level? You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
that one can budget in those ways. Can we have confidence in 
their proposal? Again, again, Mr. Speaker, when faced with a 
situation of calculating what had taken place, estimating actual 
oil revenues, they couldn’t do it. They were out significantly. 
Can we party as they suggest? Can we afford everything that 
they suggest? Should we be concerned about another debt 
hangover in Saskatchewan? Wasn’t that their approach in the 
1980s, Mr. Speaker? We should all be concerned that, given an 
opportunity to display fiscal responsibility, they choose again 
fiscal, fiscal recklessness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we expect no less. Mr. Speaker, our plan 
balances immediate needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Whether it’s home heating assistance, whether it’s support for 
our farmers through increased support for the CAIS program, 
our plan provides support for ongoing actions and strategies that 
we have to improve the economy and health care including a 
$100 million allocation for a health sciences complex in 
Saskatoon. Our plan includes a prudent factor to set funds aside 
for future eventualities. It includes a prudent factor by paying 
down on permanent debt — again something they never talk 
about. We are committing 86 per cent of all these additional 
funds — 86 per cent — to non-recurring, one-time items. We 
believe that’s responsible budgeting. It’s a good plan, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance, the member for 
Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for The 
Battlefords: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and supplementary estimates 
be referred to the Committee of Finance. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
seek leave of the Assembly to move several motions to refer the 
supplementary estimates to various policy field committees. 
 



November 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave of the 
Assembly to make several motions with respect to referral to 
committees. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
 vote 1, Agriculture and Food; 
 vote 23, Industry and Resources; 
 vote 43, Rural Development; 
be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 1, Ag and Food; 
vote 23, Industry and Resources; 
vote 43, Rural Development; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 77, SaskEnergy; 
vote 13, Saskatchewan Property Management; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

The Speaker: — Moved by the member for The Battlefords, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 77, SaskEnergy; 
vote 13, Saskatchewan Property Management; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 73, Corrections and Public Safety; 
vote 27, Culture, Youth and Recreation; 
vote 32, Health; 
vote 3, Justice; 
vote 5, Learning; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 73, Corrections and Public Safety; 
vote 27, Culture, Youth and Recreation; 
vote 32, Health; 
vote 3, Justice; 
vote 5, Learning; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 25, First Nations and Métis Relations; 
vote 30, Government Relations; 
vote 16, Highways; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the following supplementary estimates being: 
vote 25, First Nations and Métis Relations; 
vote 30, Government Relations; 
vote 16, Highways; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2005 

Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:13.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Van Mulligen .....................................................................................................................................................................317, 333 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................318 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................321 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................324 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................326 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................328 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................330 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Committee 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................335 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


