

















































Hansard: April 19, 2005


 

Legis

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII 
 

 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

lative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
NO. 94B  TUESDAY, APRIL 19, 2005, 7 p.m. 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2593 
 April 19, 2005 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It being 7 o’clock and the business 
before the committee is being estimates for Learning. I 
recognize the member from Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for 
the opportunity to enter the proceedings and ask questions of 
the minister. I had a series of questions regarding capital needs 
and expenditures in SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology]. 
 
Last time we spoke in estimates, we talked about the needs at 
the Kelsey Campus. I believe the estimate at the time was 
around $21 million for shop space, shop classes, new lecture 
theatre, and a new day care facility. I’m just wondering if the 
minister can let us know on the progress that has been made at 
Kelsey Campus and the funds that have been attributed from 
this budget towards Kelsey Campus itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The numbers that the member has 
identified are the numbers that we have as well. The project is 
around $22 million. There is still discussions ongoing about 
how we would undertake that project, and as such we were not 
in a position to fund it at this point in the budget. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — So has any money been allocated from 
this budget specifically towards capital at SIAST for Kelsey? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Okay, Mr. Minister, well let’s talk about 
. . . I was under the impression that these were fairly serious 
needs last year, so I was expecting some progress to be made. 
Palliser Campus, Moose Jaw — I understand there is office, 
library, audiovisual, recreation, and classroom areas that needed 
addressing, also occupational health and safety concerns and 
National Building Code issues at Palliser Campus to the tune of 
$4 million. Has any money been allocated from this year’s 
budget towards Palliser Campus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — SIAST is working through their capital 
plan, and part of what we will need to determine is what will be 
funded by government and what will be funded on its own by 
SIAST. As the member knows, this is a common practice with 
the universities, and it is a practice that SIAST has expressed 
interest in. 
 
So we will need to sort through what the capital plan looks like, 
what the potential borrowing may be, what we would fund 
through provincial sources. And that set of discussions is still 
ongoing. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would that 

then be the same answer, I guess, for Woodlands Campus in 
Prince Albert and Wascana Campus in Regina? I understand 
that the total bill on the capital needs from SIAST — and I 
obtained this information from talking to administrators at the 
different campuses — that we’re talking about needs in the area 
of $35 million here. 
 
So maybe the minister could just expand upon the plans and 
where this rates in his priority list for capital expenditures 
within the whole department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Those numbers sound about the same 
as what we would have, that the total capital project for the four 
campuses in terms of their wish list is somewhere around $35 
million. Part of what we’re working through with SIAST is a 
prioritization exercise and then, as I had indicated, some 
determination as to what needs to come from provincial funds 
and what portion may be able to be self-financed by SIAST. 
And that issue has not yet been resolved. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My 
understanding is that the SIAST Act calls for a formal five-year 
review to take place at some point. Could the minister just let 
me know when that review is due to take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I anticipate that the review will be . . . 
we’ll be in a position to launch the review, including the terms 
of reference, sometime in the next six weeks or so. We’re just 
working through what the terms of reference would look like. It 
is also at this point that we are looking at doing the five-year 
review with the regional colleges, which are also up. 
 
The thinking at this point on my part is that we would probably 
want to do a complete training sector review and take a look at 
combining both SIAST and the regional college review in with, 
possibly also apprenticeship and trade certification into that 
discussion so we can figure out what the overall training needs 
are. The only caveat I would put on to a review of that nature, if 
we go with the sector-wide review, is I would be reluctant for 
us to open up governance issues specifically in that if it’s a 
sector-wide one. 
 
That’s not to say that we wouldn’t necessarily welcome 
governance changes if SIAST wanted to pursue those or the 
regional colleges, but I wouldn’t at this point contemplate 
putting them into a combined review if we ended up moving in 
that direction. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
moving towards the University of Saskatchewan and the 
academic health sciences facility, it’s something that we’ve 
discussed many times, and I think all members of the House 
understand the needs and the importance of that facility. Again 
it’s a capital need and have heard very little about it, so could 
the minister just bring the House up to date? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, notwithstanding the 
stated wishes of the opposition to continue with estimates this 
evening, it appears there’s insufficient numbers of the 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

opposition to constitute a quorum. And therefore I ask that a 
quorum be called. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Lock the doors. Could I ask the officials 
to leave? I would ask the Clerk to do the count for the quorum. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’m sorry. We have to proceed with the 
count. Can we raise your point of order later? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’d like to raise a point of order before 
the count, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — No, I’m sorry. We will go ahead with 
the count. 
 
Van Mulligen Hamilton Thomson 
Elhard Cheveldayoff Stewart 
Eagles Morgan Huyghebaert 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Chairman, including yourself, the count of 
members in the House is 10 members. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Unfortunately there being no quorum, 
the committee may rise and report progress. Open the doors. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would wish to report that 
there is no quorum. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of committees has 
indicated there is no quorum, so please tile the doors. We’ll do 
a quorum call. 
 
Van Mulligen Thomson Hamilton 
Iwanchuk Elhard Stewart 
Eagles Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Morgan   
 
Clerk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number of members in the 
count is 11, and Ms. Draude came in after the doors were tiled. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There being not enough members for 
a quorum, this House stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 19:13.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2593 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2593 
  Van Mulligen (quorum)..........................................................................................................................................................2593 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




