
















































Hansard: November 22, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 10A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 337 
 November 22, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
again today to present a petition on behalf of many of my 
constituents and individuals from outside the constituency of 
Cypress Hills as it relates to their concerns of the condition of 
Highway 321 from the Alberta border through the community 
of Burstall in to Liebenthal. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
321 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 

As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, these four pages of petitions 
are signed primarily by individuals from the community of 
Burstall, but there are also signatures from Leader, Medicine 
Hat, Cabri, and other communities in that immediate area. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today on behalf of people who have cabins at the resort of 
Barrier Lake to bring forward the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to develop a long-term lease to 
Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout for access to the 
marina, a place for boat trailers to be stored, and the seven 
seasonal camping spots be maintained, to ensure the safety 
of this area continues. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Archerwill, 
Quill Lake, Veregin, Tisdale, Bjorkdale, and Melfort. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition with citizens concerned about the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Colonsay, Bruno, 

Meacham, Englefeld, Saskatoon, Humboldt, Watson, Spalding, 
Guernsey, Viscount, Lloydminster, Preeceville, Quill Lake. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of 600 children under 
six years of age, and their parents, in the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituency regarding a much needed elementary 
school in the Arbor Creek neighbourhood of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Kenderdine Road, Kutz Crescent, 
and Eastman Cove in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with the closure of the SaskPower office in Davidson. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the SaskPower office in 
Davidson remains open at its current level of customer 
service and available to all SaskPower customers from the 
Davidson and surrounding service area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from residents of Biggar opposed to possible 
reductions of health services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance service is maintained 
at the very least at their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district, and Landis. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
with a petition today from the people of Batoche constituency 
on the condition of Highway 368. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed completely by people from the town 
of Annaheim. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received pursuant 
to rule 14(7) as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 2, 4, 5, 7, and 22. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 13 move the first reading of Bill No. 203, An Act 
to raise awareness of Prostate Cancer in Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: has there been an increase in 
the number of long-term care beds in the Heartland Health 
Region, year 2005? If so, how many and what facilities are 
they located? Or are there a decrease in beds and which 
facilities are they located? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: at any time did DCRE employee Grant 
Matheson have supervisory or management status over 
DCRE employee Evelyn Hynes, and did he approve any of 
her payments to the Social Services clients? 
 
Was DCRE employee Grant Matheson placed on leave 
with pay at any time during his employment with the 
Government of Saskatchewan? If so, why? 
 
If DCRE employee Grant Matheson was placed on leave 
with pay at any time during his employment with the 

Government of Saskatchewan, what was the date that he 
was placed on paid leave? Was he still on leave as of 
November 20, 2005? And if not, what date did he cease to 
be on paid leave and return to active work? 
 
If DCRE employee Grant Matheson returned to active 
employment with the Government of Saskatchewan 
following a paid leave, what is his salary, job title, and 
name of the department or agency that currently employs 
him? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: the 
portion of Highway 35, 15 kilometres north of the US 
border, was recently converted to gravel. When will this 
portion of Highway 35 be repaired? A commitment was 
made by the government to repave at least 3 kilometres of 
Highway 35 in the 2005-2006 budget. Has this been 
completed? If not, why? When can it be expected that 
these 3 kilometres will be paved? 

 
And further: 
 

To the Minister of Health: is the police investigation into 
the misappropriation of funds at MACSI completed? 
What, if any, charges have been laid and against whom? 
Have the funds that were misappropriated been recovered? 
If so, on what date? How much has been recovered, and 
who repaid the funds? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad to have the privilege to introduce to you today 35 grade 10 
students from the Melville Composite High School 
accompanied by their teachers, Perry Ostapowich and Gloria 
Lipinski. And Mr. Ostapowich should be commended that 
every year he has a class in here — I think for the last six or 
seven years; he hasn’t missed — and really has taken a great 
interest in what happens in the legislature. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood where I believe some of the students 
actually reside in, and myself, I would like to ask all members 
to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the legislature 13 students 
from the Discovery Learning Foundation in Regina Lakeview 
constituency. They’re sitting in the west gallery and they’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Melitta Bosse and Krista 
Milliken. And the chaperones that are with them are Jamie 
Hopkins and Jim Hopkins. I ask all members to welcome them 
to the legislature. 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
Minister Responsible for SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], it’s my pleasure today to introduce two guests who 
have joined us in support of The Traffic Safety Amendment 
Act, 2005 which will certainly aid us in the fight against 
impaired driving. I’d ask them please to both rise as I introduce 
them. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Inspector Don Ross and 
Sergeant Alvin Knibbs, both from the RCMP’s [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] “F” Division traffic services here in 
Regina. 
 
The RCMP and other law enforcement agencies in the province 
are of course important partners in working to address traffic 
safety issues. We are honoured to have both Inspector Ross and 
Sergeant Knibbs representing our law enforcement partners 
here today. So please join me in welcoming them both to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming our guests, the guests Inspector 
Ross and Mr. Knibbs, to the Assembly. The issue of impaired 
driving has been an issue that we have faced in Saskatchewan 
as every other jurisdiction has faced. It takes a lot of lives every 
year, and everything that we can do to prevent those needless 
deaths is greatly appreciated. And so I would like to welcome 
them here and thank them for the many hours of work, many 
years of service to the province, to reduce the impaired driving 
incidents that we see in our province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the House, I’d like to 
offer a welcome to a number of people sitting in the west 
gallery. First off Gunnar Passmore and Terry Parker. Gunnar is 
a fairly, oh regular visitor I would guess, pops in the odd 
afternoon just to watch the proceedings of the House. Gunnar is 
an organizer with the sheet metal workers. 
 
And Terry Parker, I think this is one of his first visits which I’m 
sure will be happening on a more regular basis. Terry was about 
two weeks ago hired as the business agent for the Saskatchewan 
provincial buildings and trades council. So while he’s getting 
accustomed to his new job, I’m glad he took time to stop in this 
afternoon. And I’d like all members to welcome both of these 
gentlemen. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, another gentleman 
that’s in the west gallery; Kirby Benning is here this afternoon 
to watch the proceedings. Kirby is the vice-president with the 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association. I’m very 
pleased that Kirby could join us this afternoon. And I would ask 
the House to welcome each of these folks this afternoon to the 
House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

National Addictions Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, November 26 is National, in 
Saskatchewan, Addictions Awareness Week and provides an 
excellent opportunity to profile the great work that is done to 
act against substance abuse in our province. 
 
There are many organizations across the province that are 
dedicated to treating and preventing addictions. They use this 
week to share information and hold various types of 
addiction-related activities. We applaud the efforts of all who 
provide these vital services. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is 
also committed to fighting addictions in the province. The 
Premier’s Project Hope, which includes the addition of 10 
million to the 4.7 million already budgeted, builds on the 
excellent foundation laid by dedicated substance abuse 
professionals, counsellors, and services. 
 
Project Hope is about treatment that is accessible and flexible. It 
is about coordinating our efforts and improving our knowledge 
so that communities can get the best tools available to fight 
substance abuse. It is about making it more difficult to 
manufacture and sell drugs in our province. Finally it is about 
equipping people, especially our young people, with the 
knowledge to make healthy choices so substance abuse does not 
get a chance to infiltrate their lives. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing National Addictions 
Awareness Week and to applaud all the dedicated people 
involved in providing these vital services. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest . . . Southeast. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Saskatoon Fastball Team Wins World Masters 
Championship 

 
Mr. Morgan: — That’s okay. I’ll fill both spots, Mr. Speaker. 
This past July Edmonton, Alberta hosted the 2005 World 
Masters Games. For ten days, more than 21,000 athletes from 
88 countries participated in many sports, including track and 
field, swimming, basketball, volleyball, hockey, and fastball. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate one 
athlete in particular for her participation in these games. My 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

constituency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett, had the opportunity 
to compete in both women’s volleyball and fastball, playing 
against teams from the countries of Brazil, Russia, Australia, 
USA [United States of America], and Canada. 
 
I am pleased and proud to say that Rita and her teammates from 
the Saskatoon Fatigues fastball team were very successful at the 
championship. And I’d like to congratulate them for capturing 
the world championship gold medal. Now this doesn’t relieve 
my obligation from co-operating with her in answering phone 
calls. I do genuinely offer my congratulations. 
 
The fastball team went undefeated 9 and 0 at the games. It is 
my pleasure to acknowledge and congratulate Rita Flaman 
Jarrett and her teammates as world champions, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Weyburn Carbon Dioxide Storage Project 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, today in member 
statements, I’m very pleased to advise this Assembly that the 
carbon dioxide sequestration project in the Weyburn oil field is 
now being recognized far beyond our own provincial borders. 
 
This project brings together partners from the Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre here at the University of Regina 
with industry — EnCana and now Apache — and with the 
Government of Saskatchewan in one of the largest climate 
change research projects in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a win-win for our province and for our 
globe. Not only will this technology allow us to make more 
efficient use of our own oil resources; it will also help us win 
the fight against global warming. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity this spring to meet with 
the Secretary of Energy of the United States, Mr. Samuel 
Bodman. Last week Secretary Bodman said, quote: 
 

The success of the Weyburn project could have incredible 
implications on reducing CO2 emissions and increasing 
America’s oil production. 

 
He went on to say that if the process were used in all the oil 
fields of Western Canada, quote: 
 

. . . we would see billions of additional barrels of oil and a 
reduction of CO2 emissions equivalent to pulling more 
than 200 million cars off the road for a year. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been 
fully supportive of the Weyburn project from its beginning. It’s 
an outstanding example of Saskatchewan innovation. It 
demonstrates what can be done when  the partnership between 
government, research, and industry. One more time, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan is on the global map. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

ABEX Award Winner 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud to 
stand in the House today to talk about a recent ABEX 
[Achievement in Business Excellence] award winner from my 
constituency. Wendy and Darryl Perry, owners of Perry 
Industries in Hawarden have received the 2005 Achievement 
for Business Excellence Award in the new venture category. 
 
Perry Industries was also nominated for two other categories 
under ABEX created by the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce. The company was recognized especially for its new 
innovative product lines for household and agriculture use. 
Fresh-air bin ventilators and easy deck adjusters are among the 
two most popular products sold through a western Canadian 
network of approximately 300 dealers. 
 
Attending the award ceremony held in Saskatoon, Wendy Perry 
was in shock at the good news. “It was a surprise to us,” she 
said, since the couple launched its company a year ago. “The 
business has been going well,” she added. As the company 
grows she expects to hire more people from the local area. Perry 
Industries currently employs 10 full- and part-time staff. She 
has plans to distribute its products to the rest of Canada and 
export to the US [United States] and overseas. 
 
Perry Industries has proved that doing business in rural 
Saskatchewan can be successful, despite the challenging odds 
of making Saskatchewan small-business profitable and lasting. 
 
On behalf of all the members, I would like to personally 
congratulate my constituents on receiving the 2005 ABEX 
Award. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Pelican Narrows Boxers Win Championships 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, about six months ago the 
Sunshine and Raine Society introduced an amateur boxing 
program to communities in the North, including Pelican 
Narrows. 
 
Wesley Sunshine of Regina, a three-time Canadian senior 
boxing champion, and Russ Matthews, one of the founders of 
Regina’s outdoor hockey league, run the program. 
 
Two weeks ago four members of the Pelican Narrows Boxing 
Club — Dawson Michel, Tyler Custer, Thomas Ross, and 
Edward Custer, known as Opawikoscikan Warriors — travelled 
to Regina to take part in the Saskatchewan Boxing Association 
championships. 
 
And I’m very pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that although two 
members couldn’t compete for medical reasons, 17-year-old 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

Thomas Ross won the bantamweight championship and 
12-year-old Dawson Michel won the Cadet B flyweight 
championship. Dawson was also named best boxer in the Cadet 
B division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all the members of the 
Warriors boxing team as well as recognize the fine work being 
done on behalf of young people in this province by the 
Sunshine and Raine Society. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Eston Physician Honoured 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my distinct 
pleasure to make this Assembly and the province of 
Saskatchewan aware of honours bestowed upon a distinguished 
resident of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. 
 
Dr. Stewart Holmes began his general medical practice 50 years 
ago in Eston and continues to serve his beloved community as 
its only doctor. 
 
Back in 1955 Dr. Holmes joined his father who also practiced 
medicine in Eston. Over the last 50 years he has been witness to 
many changes. The most devastating change occurred when the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] closed the Eston Hospital, but 
that didn’t stop the doctor. The community credits Dr. Holmes’s 
determination to continue the operation of his solo practice as a 
fundamental reason Eston has maintained its acceptable health 
care for its citizens. It is most fitting that the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association has named Dr. Stewart Holmes as its 
Physician of the Year for 2005. This award was celebrated at an 
appreciation dinner on November 4 at the association’s fall 
representative assembly. 
 
Then on November 12 the community of Eston honoured its 
esteemed doctor with a tribute attended by more than 200 
people at the Legion Hall. The event was a fine way to say 
thanks for 50 — and counting — years of dedication to the 
people he serves. The tribute also gave opportunity to make the 
20th anniversary presentations of the Dr. Holmes Scholarship 
Fund. Over 70 individuals from the Eston area have benefited 
from the scholarships over the past 20 years. 
 
Dr. Holmes expressed appreciation to his wife, Colleen, for her 
support in providing a solo medical practice to the community. 
Colleagues, I know we all appreciate Dr. Stewart Holmes’s 50 
years of service and worthy selection as Saskatchewan’s 
Physician of the Year in this our centennial year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Film and Television Productions Win 
Gemini Awards 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s film and 

video industry is among the best in Canada and I think that’s 
true because of the quality of the people who work in the 
business here in Saskatchewan and because of the quality of the 
economic climate and the production facilities that are available 
here. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s because we’re getting better 
and better at telling our own stories. It speaks volumes about 
how we view ourselves and how we value the artistic 
community and the cultural industries of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week at this year’s Gemini Awards, five 
Saskatchewan-made shows were nominated for a total of 13 
awards and this resulted in four Gemini Awards. Two went to 
Corner Gas, one went to the youth drama renegadepress.com 
which had received seven nominations, Mr. Speaker, and which 
currently runs on SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 
Network] and APTN [Aboriginal Peoples Television Network]. 
The documentary Two Worlds Colliding received the Canada 
Award honouring excellence in mainstream television 
programming that reflects the racial and cultural diversity of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all the winners and nominees from 
Saskatchewan for the quality of their work and the success that 
is symbolized by the prestigious Gemini Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Availability of Medical Specialists 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, Curtis Schaan of Watrous was 
like many other kids his age. At 18 he was an avid hockey 
player with a future in that sport playing with the triple A 
Moose Jaw Warriors. This summer Curtis started to lose his 
peripheral vision. In July he was diagnosed with a pituitary 
tumour and now his hockey career and his life is on hold. 
 
Right now this tumour causes loss of vision, extreme 
headaches, and depression, but left untreated could have much 
graver implications. He has seen an endocrinologist and is now 
undergoing drug therapy to shrink the tumour. 
 
Curtis would like to continue his treatment here in 
Saskatchewan but, Mr. Speaker, he can’t because there are no 
endocrinologists available to see him in Saskatoon and the wait 
list to see a specialist in Regina is more than a year. Mr. 
Speaker, to the Minister of Health: how could he let a shortage 
of specialists jeopardize this boy’s health? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of providing 
specialists in Saskatchewan is always difficult because we end 
up having to keep recruiting people. We’re doing this on a 
number of different levels. As it relates to the endocrinologists, 
we know there’s a shortage here and that there are two people in 
recruitment and are coming for next year. This has taken some 
longer time than we anticipated. 
 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing locally is we’re looking at how 
we can provide training for our own people but we’re recruiting 
nationally. Later this year we will be bringing forth our 
province-wide health human resource plan. All of these things 
relate to that. 
 
But I am concerned about individual patients and when they 
can’t get the care here we’ll work to try to make sure they get 
treatments in our neighbouring provinces or other places where 
it’s necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, this family is being forced to 
leave this province to get timely treatment for their son because 
of extraordinary circumstances resulting from the minister’s 
inaction. Curtis must now go to Edmonton for therapy and an 
MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] to check the size of the 
tumour every other month. In a recent letter to me, Curtis’s 
parents wrote, quote: 
 

This has been a very trying time for us and trips to 
Edmonton are going to create extra stress in our lives. But 
these trips must be made to ensure our son can recover and 
live a normal life. 
 

At the very least this family would like some financial 
assistance to get their son to Edmonton for his next treatment in 
January. But if this minister had done his job, this family 
wouldn’t even be here today. Why is the minister forcing this 
family out of province to get the much needed treatment for 
their son and why isn’t he recruiting specialists to fill in for 
those who are retiring or are also on leave? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll work to provide the 
specialists that we need in the province and we’re continuing to 
do that. And there will be situations where our Saskatchewan 
people require services which aren’t available in the province 
and we’ll make sure that they have the reciprocal arrangements 
with our neighbouring provinces or in some instances have 
them go to the United States. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the great questions always in our 
province is how to deal with the extra cost over and above the 
actual medical or health cost. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not in a 
position to fund all of those costs. We make choices. That’s 
what it’s about to try to run the system. 
 
At this point, we have not funded travel and other expenses for 
patients and families to go to other places. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the last week and a half we raised a number of cases the same as 
what was raised again here today. And day in and day out, the 
minister complains that he hasn’t had enough advance notice. 

In most of the cases, in almost every case that we have raised 
over the last week and a half, he’s had advance warning because 
the families have sent him letters. Well this case is no different. 
The family wrote the minister more than a month ago and 
haven’t heard one word from his department. 
 
Curtis is scheduled for health care in Edmonton on January 23, 
health care that he cannot receive in this province. He needs to 
make three more trips after that. Curtis’s family wonders why 
they’re living in Saskatchewan when they can’t receive the 
health care they need here. 
 
But more importantly, why would the minister not have the 
decency to return the letter with some information that he 
received more than a month ago? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we respond to the 
correspondence that’s received from patients in a timely 
fashion. Sometimes it requires more information. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my understanding that the letter to this individual has gone 
out. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk more here again about the basic 
premise of that member opposite around how we provide care 
within our system. Mr. Speaker, we’re spending this year over 
$3 billion in the health care system, and we are meeting many, 
many of the needs. But we have made some choices around not 
funding travel out of province at this point. That is something 
that we continue to look at because we know that it does place 
some burdens on families, and that’s very much a concern. 
 
But it’s very important that we actually provide the medical 
services, and in this case we’re doing that, Mr. Speaker. And we 
will continue to do to that. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 
family, there are three endocrinologists in the Saskatoon area 
that could help Curtis. Curtis’s endocrinologist is on maternity 
leave. The second endocrinologist in the Saskatoon area is just 
about to retire. The third is on a year’s leave of absence. So 
what’s he to do? 
 
He looks to Regina. The waiting list in the Regina Health 
District for such a specialist is over a year. They have no choice 
to find care in this province. They have to go out of the 
province for proper care. 
 
How could the minister . . . He’s talked about that there are two 
being recruited now. A maternity leave, a year’s leave of 
absence, and a retirement just don’t happen. And he’s talking 
about two more specialists coming in about a year. That is just 
absolutely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. How could this minister 
let the health care system get in such dire straits? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, from time to time, in various 
specialties, we have some special problems of getting the 
continuation of the care. And in this area, it’s very hard to 
recruit endocrinologists. 
 
And we have been working at this and I know the Saskatoon 
Health Authority has been working at this. It also relates to the 
College of Medicine. All of these people work together with 
staff in my office and we continue to do this. 
 
Now let’s also remind ourselves that the members opposite 
have a certain attitude about them, about the health care system, 
which isn’t reflected when we go out and check with people in 
how the system provides care to people. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
member opposite I know has many, many stories of people that 
will come to him and tell him about how good things are. But in 
this place, it’s again and again negative, negative, negative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the last week and a half 
the minister has stood up and blamed everybody else, including 
ourselves, for the shape of his health care system. He likes to 
blame doctors and hard-working professionals for the problems 
in the system. The other day, he accused patients for not taking 
the right procedures when the patients jumped through every 
hoop that that minister put in front of them and still couldn’t get 
timely hip surgery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he loves to go out in the rotunda and blame the 
opposition for all his problems. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s review. 
There were three endocrinologists in Saskatoon. One is on 
maternity leave, one is on a leave of absence, and a third is 
retiring. He has done nothing to retain and recruit these 
specialists for the Saskatoon Health District. 
 
When will he start taking responsibility for the lack of health 
care, the lack of health care system in this province instead of 
blaming everybody else? When will he start shouldering some 
of the blame himself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again that member 
wants to pretend that he’s the friend of the civil servants and 
others. But day after day we get attacks on our civil service, on 
people that are within the health system. Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
appropriate. 
 
What we are doing is working together with the health 
professionals, together with the regional health authorities, with 
our universities and colleges and technical institutes to get staff 
that we need within our health care system. 
 
The endocrinologists are some of the most highly trained people 
in our society, and we will continue to recruit them as to the 

best of our ability. But from time to time we won’t have all of 
those people available. And when that happens, we will make 
sure we get access to service in other parts of the Prairies. That 
is one of the arrangements that we have made between our 
provinces around how we provide care. We have 1 million 
people here. We’re going to provide the best care possible. And 
if we have to go outside of the province, we’ll go there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Measures to Combat Addiction 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today this government is finally 
going to introduce measures designed to help families with 
children that have addictions. I introduced similar legislation in 
a private member’s Bill last session, but that effort was scuttled 
by this government. In fact from the very beginning this 
government ridiculed opposition efforts to raise awareness 
about crystal meth and addictions. 
 
The Minister of Learning compared us to drug dealers, and he 
didn’t think there should be a separate strategy. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

I have yet to see any convincing argument as to why this 
drug is more important for us to fight than any other drug. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had to literally drag this government 
kicking and screaming into any action they’ve taken. Why in 
the world has it taken so long for action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, January 1 I was appointed as Legislative Secretary 
serving on addictions. My report was to be issued in about six 
weeks from now. Since that time we’ve issued interim 
recommendations. The Premier has hosted the four Western 
Premiers and three territories within Regina. We’ve had a final 
report in August. We’ve already moved on precursors to crystal 
meth. We’ve lobbied the federal government and got that 
changed. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud that today we’ll be 
introducing a Bill to deal with the last issue that wasn’t covered 
in Project Hope, and that is those children that are hardest to 
reach on an involuntary basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved very quickly. We’re moving as 
fast as humanly possible, and we’re ahead of schedule, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker the minister isn’t 
right. The last issue they have to deal with is treatment beds and 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

the skilled personnel to help the people that have the problem. 
That’s the issue that we have to deal with. But instead of 
treatment beds we have the creation of an expensive new 
ministry. Instead of legitimate concern and action for families, 
we’ve had ridicule and delays. 
 
This government has never shown any independent initiative 
when it comes to fighting addictions. This government is so 
busy borrowing many of our ideas, they should be called Sask 
Party lite, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the only thing this 
government has done, the only thing this government has done 
on its own is shut down Whitespruce and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order 
please. Would the member put the question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing this government 
has done on its own is shut down Whitespruce and dismantle 
SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission]. Mr. Speaker, if this Bill is good enough to 
introduce today, what was wrong with debating and passing the 
Sask Party Bill last spring? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition likes to say 
that there’s no treatment facilities, that there’s nothing going on 
in Saskatchewan. There’s nothing further from the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have more than 250 treatment beds right here 
in Saskatchewan. We have over 50 RHA [regional health 
authority] and community-based outpatient facilities. Mr. 
Speaker, we have had 15,000 outpatient admissions. We’ve had 
over 65,000 residential patient days. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this past spring the Alberta Bill was passed 
in Alberta. The proclamation isn’t until spring of ’06, pardon 
me, July ’06 of next year. Mr. Speaker, we’ll be introducing the 
Bill this afternoon and we expect the support from the 
opposition and proclamation will happen before the first quarter 
of next year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Project Hope brings no new beds on line until 
2008. The addicted children of today will have to wait three 
years. That’s 36 months; that’s 1,872 days. Do you think 
they’re going to make it, Mr. Speaker? Every night there’s a 
chance that some child will not wake up in the morning. And 
that’s what I worry about in my office, Mr. Speaker. Here’s 
what the Premier said in 1987. 
 

If . . . [I] could sit in the office that I’ve sat in for the last 
number of years and see what happens to [the] families in 
this province who have young people trapped in [a] drug 
and alcohol abuse, now that will [would] make your hair 
curl . . . 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it just makes me cry. This government had 
an opportunity two years ago to deal with this issue. Little has 
changed since 1987. This government has waited and waited to 
introduce yet another Bill. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition again likes 
to go on and say that nothing is happening in Saskatchewan. In 
fact just last week the Leader of the Opposition said that there 
were no treatment for two young people in Swift Current that he 
met with. Mr. Speaker, I think that’s news to the people of . . . 
the addiction workers that I met with in Swift Current. There’s 
over five people that are working in Swift Current, helping over 
400 people last year; two and a half of them are youth addiction 
workers in Swift Current alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know — I’ve been around politics long 
enough — that politics 101 says that if the opposition has 
nothing to criticize, they’ll criticize the pace of introduction, 
Mr. Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, they may not agree with 
what the government is doing, but I’ll believe what the 
Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse said. They said there’s an 
articulation of a clear strategy at a provincial level with clear 
goals, expectations, money putting towards it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s at the forefront of this issue. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Sask Party lite talks about 
numbers. The real Sask Party talks about people. That’s what 
we’re . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — This government has been pressuring the 
opposition for immediate passage of the Bills introduced in this 
session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only assume this government will try and tell 
the Saskatchewan people that they’re trying hard to get the 
opposition to immediately pass this Bill. They’ll pretend that 
they’ve been out in front of this issue, not being pushed. But 
people in this province will see what really is happening, Mr. 
Speaker — cheap political theatrics. That’s what it’s about. 
 
This government has delayed and delayed and ridiculed and 
delayed some more. The question is, Mr. Speaker, why did the 
Premier wait so long? Why did he put his ego and his political 
gain first and not the lives of addicted young people in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, Project Hope contains a 
tripling of youth treatment and stabilization beds in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, it contains a family 
treatment centre, something that is completely new in Canada, 
where individuals who are addicted can actually bring their 
children with them. That is being implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, we’re working with First 
Nations and the federal government in implementing a 15-bed 
treatment centre in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan we will have in the first 
quarter of next year mobile treatment centres where the entire 
community becomes the treatment centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition Bill is very quick and based on 
what’s being done in Alberta for five days. Our Bill balances 
the rights of the individual but it also recognizes the very real 
fear of parents that they want to be able to do all that they can 
for their children. We give them that option, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Prohibition on Wearing Gang Colours in Licensed 
Establishments 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this government has announced 
amendments to The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 
Act that would ban the wearing of gang colours from licensed 
establishments. Mr. Speaker, what consultation was held with 
bar owners prior to the introduction of these proposed changes, 
and what resources are being allocated to assist bar owners with 
this initiative? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the government will not 
be relying upon bar owners to enforce this legislation. This is a 
tool that has been given to the police in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have the support of the association of police 
chiefs of the province. They look forward to receiving this tool. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Southeast, the Justice critic, the 
Leader of the Opposition’s talkfest on organized crime, has 
continually mocked these tools that we have given to the police 
to fight organized crime in this province, and this is consistent 
with his approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, controlling gang activity is a 

laudable goal, and it is supported by members on both sides of 
the House. However this government leaves the onus on bar 
owners to report this type of activity and to determine what kind 
of criminal organization exists and what is not. 
 
I would like to ask the minister, Mr. Speaker, what constitutes 
wearing colours, and what is freedom of expression? Mr. 
Speaker, what has the minister done to ensure bar owners and 
police officers have the proper information to make these 
judgments about what is and what is not a gang colour? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll be pleased to 
discuss all the member’s concerns and the concerns of any other 
member in committee when this legislation gets to committee, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member had some very interesting things to say in 
committee on May 17, 2005 about other tools that we wanted to 
give police to fight organized crime. And specifically in respect 
to The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act, as well as making 
the statement, I don’t think we want to give these tools to police 
chiefs, Minister, he said: “I likened this Bill to using a chainsaw 
as a fly swatter.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the fly in that metaphor? The fly is 
organized crime. We have here a leader of a talkfest on 
organized crime who’s going to recommend what, Mr. 
Speaker? A can of Raid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Collection of Fines 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the 
House will always point out flaws and inadequacies in the 
legislation and will continue to do so regardless of the 
accusations by the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government’s financial house is in 
disrepair. The foundation is weak and the roof is caving in. This 
government does not care where taxpayers’ money goes 
missing. The only concern that they have is whether there’s 
enough money to build them an airport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, money from uncollected fines has doubled since 
1998. That is inexcusable, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: how 
much money is outstanding right now and for how long has that 
money been outstanding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I take it we’re done 
discussing legislation that the hon. member from Saskatoon 
Southeast called — in the response to the Throne Speech, he 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

called the legislation that we brought in about seizure of 
criminal property, he called the legislation we brought in about 
suppressing criminal enterprises — bizarre, odd, and strange, 
Mr. Speaker. These are their comments on crime. 
 
And they say, and he says in committee on that legislation, I 
don’t think we should give these tools to the police chiefs in 
this province. That’s his priorities on crime. We are designating 
new officers to fight gangs. We are designating prosecutors to 
fight gangs. If they want to be concerned about collections and 
speeding fines, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. We know where our 
priorities are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have not had an answer from 
that minister as to how much money is owing and what steps 
that minister is capable of collecting. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve better. They deserve a fair and properly 
managed justice system. They deserve to know that when fines 
are levied by our hard-working police officers and prosecutors, 
that there’s a mechanism in place to ensure that those fines are 
collected and the people of Saskatchewan aren’t shortchanged, 
and that we do not bring the justice system into disrepute by 
ignoring fines and measuring their uncollectability by the 
number of filing cabinets that they’re sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the minister act to determine how much 
money is owing, for how long, and what’s he going to do to 
collect it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, despite suggestions that 
may have been communicated in the media, the people of 
Saskatchewan should know that if they do not pay a fine, they 
are liable to go to jail for not doing so, Mr. Speaker. That is the 
policy of my department and that is what people of 
Saskatchewan should know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite, he supports these police officers. He says 
to me on May 17, 2005 in discussion of these Bills to fight 
organized crime, what are you saying, Mr. Minister, that we 
should trust the police, that we should trust the courts? Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, we on this side of the House do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it goes down to a matter of basic 
competence. When you’re elected to form government, you 
have a justice system that works, that people have confidence in 
that justice system. In this day and age with computers what 
they are, it is impossible to have such a mess. There is no 
excuse to have outstanding fines that cannot be even 
categorized or determined — the amount, the date, the extent of 

it. Why, in the days when computers are at the point they are 
now, do we have a minister that refuses to answer a question of 
how much is owing? And what’s he going to do to collect it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister undertake today to implement a 
computer system that will date and track these fines so that they 
get brought back forward so the courts can deal with them in a 
timely manner, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the record-keeping 
system at the Department of Justice tracks the individuals who 
owe the fines and what they owe. So when you go up in front of 
a court, Mr. Speaker, that information is available to the court. 
Categories, statistics, those may be of some interest to members 
opposite. They are of no use to a judge who has an individual in 
front of him and wants to know what the record of that 
individual is and whether he is following a court order. That’s 
the information that we can provide, we do provide, Mr. 
Speaker. And no one should believe otherwise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 

Suppression of Gang Activity 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps 
timely. Keeping communities safe is a top priority of this 
government and making Saskatchewan inhospitable to 
organized crime and gangs is an important part of that strategy. 
 
Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I announced the next step in our 
ongoing commitment to the fight against gang activity in our 
province. Our government will invest $745,000 this year with 
an ongoing funding of more than $2 million annually to expand 
suppression of gang activity. The funding will provide 14 new 
policing positions and two new prosecutions positions. The 
funding will also support stepped-up activity relating to wiretap 
surveillance, execution of search warrants, and other types of 
surveillance and intelligence gathering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that these resources are in 
addition to the 29 new policing positions that I’ve asked the 
RCMP and municipal police services to start recruiting to be in 
place in 2006-2007. This new funding is the province-wide 
implementation of an initiative piloted by Criminal Intelligence 
Services Saskatchewan in Regina beginning in early 2005, 
following release of the CISS [Criminal Intelligence Service 
Saskatchewan] report on gang activity. 
 
During the pilot period, Mr. Speaker, 50 search warrants were 
executed, resulting in 112 persons charged with 361 criminal 
code offences. And more than a half a million dollars in drugs, 
cash, and stolen property was seized. Mr. Speaker, this is proof 
positive that this strategy works and why we are committed to 
implementing it province wide as soon as possible. 
 
While we are putting more resources into enforcement and 
prosecution of gang activity, I want to emphasize that it is also 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

important to identify and understand the causes behind it, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that youth face a wide range of social and 
economic issues that make them at higher risk of being drawn 
into gangs. Our government is working hard to prevent young 
people from becoming involved with gangs and helping youth 
and adults in custody exit gang involvement, which can be very 
challenging. Our government is committed to combating gang 
activity in all fronts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that our gang suppression 
initiative responds to the recommendation of the Commission 
on First Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform to 
address Aboriginal street gangs in our province. I am confident 
that our efforts regarding gangs, disrupting gang activity 
through enforcement and prosecution, preventing young people 
becoming involved in gangs, and helping them break free of 
their gang affiliation will help keep our streets and 
neighbourhoods safe for families and communities across the 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the opposition critic, the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, after months of pressure from 
the Saskatchewan Party to take action on the problems of gangs 
and crime, it would appear that the NDP has finally decided to 
listen to the worried citizens of Saskatoon and Regina, in 
particular the citizens of Saskatoon Riversdale, and to start to 
take action to suppress organized crime. 
 
While we are encouraged about the nature of the activities 
involved in this strategy — specific use of teams that will result 
in increased co-operation between police, analysts, and 
prosecutors — and initial results of the pilot project conducted 
in Regina, today’s announcement calls into question an obvious 
point. Why has this approach been in effect for . . . hasn’t this 
approach been in effect for the past decade in our province? 
Why did this government wait for pressure from the 
Saskatchewan Party and worried citizens before finally acting? 
Why did we wait till our crimes statistics were the worst in 
Canada? 
 
The minister correctly points to the successful results of a pilot 
project undertaken by CISS as proof that there is a need for an 
integrated anti-gang strategy. As his office indicates, during the 
pilot period 50 search warrants were executed, resulting in 112 
persons charged with 361 Criminal Code offences. More than 
500,000 in drugs, cash, and stolen property was seized. 
 
The question I have, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 
Saskatchewan have is to ask, what could have been 
accomplished had the government been taking the gang 
problem seriously years and years ago? What could have been 
accomplished in this province in terms of crime reduction if this 
government had devoted the necessary financial resources to 
keep the citizens of Saskatchewan safe? 
 
I would guess that part of the problem lies in the government’s 
attitude towards crime. When the Leader of the Opposition 
stood on a street corner in the Premier’s own riding this summer 
and called on the government to take action against gangs, the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana called it fearmongering. 
 
Today’s announcement suggested the opposition’s concern 
about increased gang activity in our province was warranted — 
just as our concern about the fact that this NDP government has 
the worst crime record in the country is warranted. 
 
We have long urged this government to fulfill the promise it 
made in 1999 to hire 200 new police officers, a promise that has 
remained unfulfilled through two election cycles. While today’s 
announcement goes some way to fulfilling this commitment, I 
would remind the government that it should not take continued 
pressure from the opposition to keep a promise, particularly one 
that involves the safety of its citizens. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, we have to realize that crime is a 
symptom of other issues and other problems within our society. 
We have to deal with the root problems of crime. That deals 
with things like lack of education, social problems, schooling 
issues, job creation, job training, and other issues within our 
inner cities, particular substance abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a government to leave a promise unfulfilled 
through two election cycles is unacceptable. Mr. Speaker, we 
will be watching with some interest to see whether the 
initiatives work. And if they don’t work, we will be calling on 
the government to amend and to change those initiatives and to 
ensure that they supply sufficient funding so that the desired 
results of reduced crime and safer streets can be fulfilled in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, 
The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005, be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 25, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

Bill No. 27 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and 
Stabilization Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, 
The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Healthy Living Services that Bill No. 27, The 
Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today and am very pleased to order on behalf of the government 
questions 464 through 542 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 464 to 542 have been ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, before I move into second 
reading of The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act, I want to 
introduce a couple of people that have joined us for the second 
reading this afternoon. 
 
Jonathan Felton, president Conseil culturel fransaskois; 
Monsieur Siriki Diabagaté, representing Assemblée 
communautaire fransaskois; Ms. Sophie Charbonneau; Division 
scolaire francophone; Monsieur Gilles Groleau, Division 
scolaire francophone; and Monsieur Florent Bilodeau, director 

of Office of French Language Coordination. I would ask 
everyone to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 14, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Act, 2005. As Provincial Secretary, I am pleased to be 
recommending legislative amendments that will create three 
new provincial emblems — a fish emblem, a food emblem, and 
official status for the Fransaskois flag. These amendments will 
also update the descriptions of insignia for three provincial 
honours. 
 
The last time The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act was 
amended was in 2002 in order to establish the Saskatchewan 
Protective Services Medal and the Saskatchewan Centennial 
Medal. Prior to that, in 2001, needle-and-thread grass became 
our province’s grass emblem, the white-tailed deer our animal 
emblem, and curling was adopted as Saskatchewan’s official 
sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s heraldry and emblems from 
nature have been very successful. With the adoption of these 
new emblems, our province will have an even more 
comprehensive set of visual imagery. This visual imagery 
includes heraldry such as our coat of arms, flags, and other 
traditional emblems, and emblems representing nature and 
natural resources. 
 
The inclusion of the Fransaskois flag as one of Saskatchewan’s 
emblems recognizes the contributions of Saskatchewan’s 
francophones to our heritage and culture. The Government of 
Saskatchewan has increasingly recognized the status of French 
as one of Canada’s official languages. This flag is currently 
used by Saskatchewan’s francophone community and meets 
their heraldic standards. 
 
As we know, Saskatchewan is known worldwide for its great 
fishing and, Mr. Speaker, this past summer Saskatchewan 
Environment ran a contest to get a sense of which fish the 
public would prefer to see as a provincial emblem. The walleye 
won hands-down. Out of almost 10,000 votes received from 
Saskatchewan citizens through email and mail-in submissions, 
the walleye received 7,400 votes. 
 
The addition of the saskatoon berry as one of the province’s 
emblems makes sense as it is a provincial food that is 
recognized provincially, nationally, and internationally. 
 
Members know our province is also fortunate to have a highly 
regarded family of honours and awards programs including the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit, the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal, the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal, and of 
course the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. 
 
The current amendments to the description of the insignia for 
the Saskatchewan Order of Merit stem from the new design of 
the medal. The Saskatchewan Order of Merit was implemented 
in 1985. The centennial year is appropriate time to add to the 
medals Saskatchewan’s motto: Multis e gentibus vires, “from 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

many peoples, strength.” 
 
Many members attended the 2005 investiture on November 9 of 
which 12 recipients were invested, each receiving the newly 
designed medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the incorporation of the inscription of the insignia 
for the Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal and the 
Saskatchewan Centennial Medal are housekeeping measures. In 
2002 when the legislature adopted these two honours, the 
insignia had not been finalized. It is now an opportunity to 
accurately reflect these two honours in the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I say how appreciative the Saskatchewan 
people are of you and all members for the support given to the 
provincial honours and awards program. The honours are a way 
to celebrate and recognize the contributions and 
accomplishments of our citizens in Saskatchewan. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, it is important to citizens of 
Saskatchewan to have emblems that appropriately reflect our 
identity. Saskatchewan’s centennial year is an opportunity to 
celebrate our province’s past and to look forward to our future. 
I believe that all of these amendments would be seen as 
progressive and celebratory. Accordingly I move second 
reading of Bill No. 14, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial Secretary 
that Bill No. 14, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
speak on Bill No. 14, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act. As the minister pointed out, there are a 
number of changes and additions too that the Act includes. 
 
And certainly it’s interesting to note that the Bill adds new 
emblems to the provincial list of designated emblems — the 
Fransaskois flag, walleye as a provincial fish emblem, and 
saskatoon as the provincial fruit emblem. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it’s important to have these types of 
emblems and recognitions of our heritage and our landscape. 
It’s something that people in the province are very proud of and 
people around the world will recognize as being part of 
exclusive to Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister also spoke about the Order of Merit description to 
include the provincial motto and also adds the word “Royal” 
before the word “Crown” and similar changes to the description 
of the Volunteer Medal. Also, Mr. Speaker, new provisions in 
the Bill to include descriptions of the Protective Services Medal 
and the Centennial Medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
shared this year in nominating and participating and also 
receiving the Centennial Medal. And it was very gratifying to 
be able to do that as a Member of the Legislative Assembly to 

recognize people in our constituency that has contributed to our 
constituency and our province and our country through the 
years. 
 
I know in my case I nominated people kind of on different 
categories. Some people were community leaders, have worked 
tirelessly at more of a governmental end or as mayors or reeves. 
And also I nominated people that worked behind the scenes as 
volunteers in the community. And many of them that I 
nominated actually always work behind the scenes and didn’t 
want recognition or the spotlight, and some of them were 
actually a little embarrassed to get the award. And without an 
exception these are the types of people that certainly deserve 
that type of recognition in our centennial year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that many other members will want to 
speak about their Centennial Medal recipients in their 
constituency. As I had mentioned, our ceremony that our 
Lieutenant Governor presented Centennial Medals took place 
on October 4. There were three constituencies that included in 
that ceremony that day — Kindersley, Rosetown, and Biggar. It 
was a very nice ceremony and the people very much 
appreciated the recognition. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 14 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and members. 
I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Traffic 
Safety Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, administered by 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, outlines the laws 
regarding road use here in Saskatchewan. It will replace The 
Highway Traffic Act, The Vehicle Administration Act, and The 
Motor Carrier Act and is scheduled to come into effect 
mid-2006. 
 
The first two proposed amendments I’ll outline are designed to 
provide safer roads and to aid the fight against impaired driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are being killed and injured 
because of those who choose to drive while impaired. Alcohol 
is the leading contributing factor in traffic fatalities in this 
province. Last year, Mr. Speaker, I’m sad to report that 53 
people died in alcohol-related collisions and another 786 were 
injured. 
 
The standardized field sobriety test or SFST is considered one 
of the best methods for detecting impaired drivers. It can help 
law enforcement take more drinking drivers off the road, 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

reducing the number of deaths and injuries caused in this 
province by impaired driving. 
 
The amendments establish an immediate 24-hour licence 
suspension for drivers who fail a standard field sobriety test. As 
well, drivers who refuse a field sobriety test will also face 
immediate 24-hour suspension of their driver’s licence. The use 
of SFST information in conjunction with Breathalyzer results 
will give law enforcement an additional tool in providing a 
solid case against impaired driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI has funded a number of field sobriety test 
training courses to educate over 212 law enforcement officers 
and 23 instructors here in our province. 
 
The second amendment that deals with impaired driving adds a 
new section to the Act to allow for a 24-hour driver’s licence 
suspension for drug impairment as a result of failing a field 
sobriety test. Currently there is no immediate suspension for 
drug-impaired driving. A 24-hour licence suspension for 
drug-impaired drivers would help get impaired drivers of every 
kind off our roads. 
 
The next proposed amendment deals with getting tougher on 
repeat offenders. The amendment seeks to strengthen the 
licence suspension for experienced drivers to 15 days after a 
second .04 blood alcohol content violation within a five-year 
period. Currently a driver must have incurred their third .04 
blood alcohol content violation in a five-period before a longer 
licence suspension is imposed. 
 
The amendment is proposed to provide swift, strong, and 
certain consequences for those who choose to drive while 
impaired. The suspension will also serve as a deterrent and send 
a message early in the driving process that impaired driving is 
not acceptable. 
 
That concludes the outline of proposed amendments found in 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005. These amendments 
will enhance the safety of drivers in Saskatchewan and help 
with the fight against impaired driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Saskatchewan Government Insurance that Bill 
No. 26, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 be now read 
a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 26, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act. As 
the minister outlined, many of the amendments that are in the 
Bill . . . And I note the concern over drinking and driving and 
the loss of life and the injuries due to that very unfortunate and 
illegal act that people take part in. And it’s certainly we on both 
sides of the House realize this is something that society must do 
something about to reduce deaths and injuries from drinking 
and driving. 

It also talks about, in the Act, concerning farm equipment and 
the median; also replacing the 90-day residency requirement 
with non-residents; as well as amends various parts of the Act 
dealing with roadside suspensions; and makes the amendments 
to address the problem of illegal street racing. And we know 
that’s an increasing problem across Canada and certainly it’s 
something that we want to address in Saskatchewan so that that 
does not become a problem — and there again keeping in mind 
the safety of individuals in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we’re talking about an 
amendment to a Bill — Bill 26 — that was passed in 2004 but 
still to this date has not been proclaimed. Now one wonders 
why the government is taking drinking and driving and all these 
other illegal street racing issues, taking it so seriously, why they 
have not passed this Bill — passed the Bill in 2004 but not 
proclaimed the Bill. This government has a habit of passing 
Bills and not proclaiming them. And this is very unsettling to 
find that this Bill has not been proclaimed. And here we are 
today standing in the House amending an Act that has not been 
proclaimed. 
 
So obviously we have to question the government about its 
sincerity about many of the issues that this amendment and this 
Act deals with. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be certainly taking this 
to the stakeholders in the province and discussing this issue. 
And certainly we’ll be wondering and asking the government 
why it has not proclaimed the Bill that we are discussing today. 
So certainly we’ll look forward to further discussions on this 
Bill and ask some very hard questions of the government and 
why it’s delaying proclaiming this Bill. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill 26 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
[14:45] 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment 
Act, 2005 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment 
Act, 2005 (No. 2). At the outset, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
declare that this Act will be treated as a confidence vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is introducing an amendment to 
The Corporation Capital Tax Act to increase the threshold 
amount for a small financial institution in order to maintain 
their eligibility for the lower corporation capital tax rate. The 
threshold amount is being increased from $400 million to $1 
billion of taxable, paid-up capital effective for fiscal years 
ending on or after October 31, 2003. This Bill will put 
Saskatchewan on a level playing field with the other Western 
provinces’ treatment of small financial institutions. Mr. 
Speaker, increasing the threshold will address a tax 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

competitiveness concern that was raised by a smaller financial 
institution when examining the tax implications of expanding 
their business in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Corporation Capital 
Tax Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2). 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 23, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2005 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is the Assembly read 
for the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 23, corporate capital tax amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an item that the Saskatchewan Party has 
been talking about and pressing the government to do 
something about for many years. And the reason, Mr. Speaker, 
that we find this so important is because it’s such a deterrent to 
investment in the province of Saskatchewan. Businesses of all 
size, economists have said that Canada in general and 
Saskatchewan in particular has had a big problem with its 
corporate capital tax and the way it really takes away the 
incentive to come to Saskatchewan to invest and create jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill would make changes to the way the 
corporate capital tax is paid by the financial institutions. 
Saskatchewan’s corporate capital taxes are the highest in the 
country and the Vicq commission is currently reviewing the 
structure of the business tax in this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has submitted a proposal to the 
commission. And the Saskatchewan Party proposal calls for 
eliminating the corporate capital tax on new investment for four 
years, reverse decision to impose the resource surcharge on 
income trusts, and phase out the corporate capital tax on general 
corporations and resource corporations over four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the need to do this is of great 
urgency and I believe this government isn’t going far enough — 
as it normally does in these matters. And the corporate world 
and the business world will be looking at this Bill and looking 
at other jurisdictions when they go to make a decision on 
investing. And we believe the Saskatchewan Party proposal will 
create an investment environment that will compete with 
Alberta and British Columbia and most of the American states 
that we are competing with for investment dollars. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will certainly be asking many questions 
about the government’s plan and certainly talk to the 
stakeholders in the province. And at this time, I’d like to move 
to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill 23 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment 
Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 
2005 will allow us to implement The Cost of Credit Disclosure 
Act, 2002. That Act, passed in the spring 2002 session of the 
legislature, is important consumer protection legislation that 
will protect consumers against unfair credit practices and ensure 
that they receive accurate and comparable information which 
will allow them to make better informed credit decisions. The 
provisions in the Act are harmonized with legislation in other 
provinces and territories. 
 
The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 will apply to virtually 
all lending by provincially regulated lenders including credit 
unions and retailers who offer credit to individuals who are 
borrowing for personal, family or household purposes. The Act 
sets out requirements for disclosure of credit terms and also 
restricts the kinds of charges that can be imposed upon 
borrowers. Specifically the Act allows consumers to prepay all 
non-mortgage loans without penalty and provides an additional 
right of refund of certain non-interest finance charges when 
early repayment of a loan is made. In addition the Act contains 
specific requirements governing advertisements for credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, as well as five other provinces who 
have passed harmonized cost of credit legislation, has been 
unable to implement its 2002 Act due to problems arising from 
regulations passed by the federal government which govern 
federally regulated lenders such as banks. The regulations 
passed by the federal government do not comply in all respects 
for the harmonization template agreed to by all jurisdictions 
including Canada . 
 
The federal regulations differ from the harmonized legislation 
in two areas. The federal regulations delete the requirement that 
lenders disclose an annual percentage rate for lines of credit and 
instead require only the disclosure of an annual interest rate. 
This difference is significant in that the disclosure of the annual 
percentage rate under provincial legislation requires that fees or 
non-interest charges be incorporated into that interest rate 
thereby raising the disclosed rate where such charges are 
imposed. 
 
The federal regulations on the other hand allow lenders to 
simply disclose the basic interest rate without incorporating 
these charges resulting in a lower disclosed rate when compared 
to provincially regulated lenders. The second difference is that 
the federal regulations allow mortgage borrowers to waive a 
two-day cooling off period without receiving independent legal 
advice. 
 
Provincially regulated lenders in all jurisdictions including 
Saskatchewan reasonably argue that these differences will put 
them at a competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis the banks. 
 
Efforts by the provinces and territories to get the federal 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

government to amend its regulations have been unsuccessful. 
Accordingly Saskatchewan, along with several other 
jurisdictions, has decided to recommend amendments to its 
legislation to conform to the federal regulation on the two 
points of contention to avoid any further delay in the 
implementation of this important consumer protection 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill removes the requirement for lenders to 
disclose the annual percentage rate for lines of credit. As a 
result the rates of interest quoted by provincially regulated 
lenders such as credit unions will be directly comparable to the 
rates disclosed by the banks. In addition regulations under the 
Act provide that mortgage customers of provincially regulated 
lenders will be able to waive the two-day cooling-off period 
without the need for independent legal advice just as is the case 
of individuals obtaining mortgages from the banks. 
 
The result will be a level playing field for provincially regulated 
lenders with their federally regulated counterparts. Even more 
importantly the amendments will allow us to implement this 
important consumer protection legislation. 
 
The amendments to the Act also include provisions to protect 
consumers with respect to the use of credit cards. These 
provisions are being moved from The Consumer Protection Act 
so that all the credit card provisions are in one statute as is the 
case in other jurisdictions. In addition there are several 
amendments of a technical or housekeeping nature that will 
improve the clarity of this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 24, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 24, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment 
Act. The minister’s basically said it was housekeeping. I think 
it’s a lot of interesting areas that needs a lot of consultation. 
 
As we know, credit cards have become a very important part in 
people’s lives today. And we all hear or we know about people 
who have got themselves into trouble with financing through 
credit cards and the high rate of interest and charges that they 
can incur through the use of or the improper use of credit cards. 
And so it’s very important that we make very clear the rules and 
the rights of individuals concerning credit cards. 
 
And other things around credit cards that are very disturbing, 
it’s really the unsolicited offering of credit cards. Many people 
get themselves in trouble because they’re basically 
pre-approved. And individuals start spending money where they 
wouldn’t otherwise have and get themselves into serious 
financial problems. And these credit problems stay with people 
really sometimes through the rest of their life, and it affects 
their ability to borrow and spend in the future, and it affects the 
welfare of their families if they do not look after their 
creditworthiness. 
 

Interesting to note the minister talking about aligning the rules 
and regulations between the banks and the credit unions, and I 
think those are areas that are long overdue. Certainly the credit 
union system is very important in Canada and particularly in 
Saskatchewan. And we certainly need the credit unions on the 
same level playing field as with the banks in so many areas of 
banking and in credit cards in particular. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe there’s going to be a lot of consultation 
needed concerning this Bill. We will certainly take it to the 
stakeholders and discuss this with them and look forward to 
discussing this and having other members discuss this in 
adjourned debate. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill 24 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading on The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Law Society is established pursuant to The Legal 
Profession Act, 1990 to govern the practice of law by lawyers 
in Saskatchewan. They have recently requested that some 
changes be made to this Act to assist them in fulfilling their 
duties and responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Legal Profession Act, 1990 establishes a 
special fund financed by fees paid by lawyers that is used to 
reimburse members of the public in the case of a lawyer 
misappropriating funds. Law societies across Canada are 
concerned that, with the increased mobility of lawyers, 
provincial special funds should be augmented through the 
development of a national special fund that would be available 
when lawyers are practising outside the jurisdiction in which 
they are registered as a member. Amendments are made to the 
Act to allow the Saskatchewan Law Society to participate in 
this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new . . . [inaudible] . . . legislation contains no 
detailed election procedures for the governing bodies. 
Amendments are proposed in this Bill to remove certain 
election procedures from the Act and expand the rule-making 
powers of the benchers with respect to bencher election 
procedures. 
 
When a complaint is received by the Law Society alleging 
misconduct or incompetence by a lawyer and a decision is made 
following a preliminary review that no further action should be 
taken on the complaint, the Act provides for an appeal of that 
decision to the benchers. An amendment proposed in this Bill 
will allow those appeals to be heard by a committee of 
benchers. 
 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

A further amendment will provide an additional option of 
referring a complaint to the ethics committee if the complaints 
officer or a committee reviewing the complaints determines that 
there has not been misconduct or incompetence but an ethical 
issue is raised. The ethics committee will be able to provide 
guidance to the member on the ethical practice of law. The 
mandate of the ethics committee is to give opinions and make 
rulings on questions of professional ethics for the guidance of 
the profession. 
 
Where a hearing is required with respect to a complaint of 
incompetence or misconduct against a member is heard by a 
hearing committee, with the consent of the member and counsel 
for the Law Society, the hearing committee can impose any 
penalty other than suspension, disbarment, or permission to 
resign. Only the discipline committee which is composed of all 
the benchers can impose those penalties. 
 
The Law Society has requested that the Act authorize the 
benchers to make rules expanding hearing committee 
sentencing powers. Accordingly a further amendment to the Act 
will provide the benchers with the power to make rules 
authorizing hearing committees to impose suspensions, 
disbarments, and permission to resign as disciplinary penalties. 
 
At present, members who are disbarred may apply for 
reinstatement virtually immediately. This Bill provides that, as 
part of a sentencing when a lawyer’s disbarred, the discipline 
committee may fix a period not exceeding five years that the 
former member must wait before he or she may apply for 
reinstatement. 
 
The Law Society may apply to the court-appointed trustee to 
manage legal practice when the member is unable to do so 
because, for example, he or she is disbarred or deceased. The 
trustee’s costs are currently paid by the Law Society. This Bill 
would allow the court to order the costs of the trustee be paid by 
the member or the member’s estate. 
 
If a client is dissatisfied with the lawyer’s account, they can 
make an application to the court to have it reviewed, or as the 
Act says, taxed. The Act provides that if the application is not 
made to the court within 30 days, a lawyer’s bill may only be 
taxed if special circumstances exist. 
 
The courts have taken a fairly narrow view of what constitutes 
special circumstances. It is proposed that the Act be changed to 
allow the courts to allow taxation outside the 30-day limit if it is 
in the interests of justice that the taxation proceed. It’s also 
proposed the term taxation be changed to assessment. 
 
A number of other minor housekeeping changes are also 
included in the Bill, including updating terminology and section 
references. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments have been developed with the 
ongoing input of the Law Society, and I thank them for the 
co-operation and the development of this Bill and their ongoing 
work for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to move second reading of An Act to amend The Legal 
Profession Act, 1990. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that the Bill No. 16, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
able to respond to the second reading of Bill 16, legal 
professions Act. 
 
The minister has just outlined some of the consequences, intent, 
and objectives of the amendments, and from my review of the 
discussion that the minister had and from the materials that I 
had, I would say that it is appropriate and timely that there be 
something done in order to allow the legal profession to be able 
to take a little more accountability for the operation of their 
profession and for the consequences thereof. 
 
[15:00] 
 
One of the problems that we have, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
feel as the years go by is less of a confidence in the people in 
both the judicial system and in the legal profession that 
represents the legal system or helps people into the legal 
system. And I think it’s an appropriate measure that 
amendments are added to be able to raise the confidence level 
of people that they will be able to be treated correctly and have 
professionals serve on their behalf in the legal systems that they 
have to succumb themselves to. 
 
It is important I think that the legal profession has recognized 
that they have to become . . . there has to be some consistency, 
rather, with the law societies in other parts of Canada. As the 
world shrinks, so does Canada and people do in fact travel back 
and forth across Canada and operate actually in several different 
provinces simultaneously. And I think it’s most important 
therefore for the legal profession to be able to have the 
operations and their own requirements consistent across Canada 
so that again the confidence of people being served by the legal 
profession is at a high and consistent standard. 
 
It is definitely a trend to go to both a professional organization 
and almost a self-regulated organization to be able to be 
accountable to themselves, but nonetheless oversight by 
government and government departments and agencies is 
critical. And I think what we see here is a blend starting to give 
more, both consistency and professional competency to the 
legal profession with some overriding conditions. 
 
Those overriding conditions and requirements are important and 
I would like the opportunity to explore those a little bit further 
with others in the law profession and therefore I move the 
debate adjourn on Bill No. 16, The Legal Profession Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Lloydminster has 
moved to adjourn the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to support the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005. 
These amendments codify the law relating to trustee liability 
and the responsibility of the trust fund and trustees in the event 
that a trustee is sued. The current state of the law is unclear, and 
trustees are unable to determine with certainty the extent to 
which they may be personally liable, with their personal assets 
at risk, while acting in good faith. 
 
Pension board members have requested these changes. A lack 
of clarity in legislation gives rise to the question as how 
individual members may be personally held responsible for 
their actions. Trustees essentially volunteer their time, 
knowledge, skills, and abilities to the pension boards. Some 
receive nominal remuneration. Most would incur personal 
bankruptcy should there be a need for individuals to pre-fund 
legal expenses to prepare their defence. 
 
The intent of the legislation is to clarify board member liability 
and to make funds available up front to pay legal costs. If the 
trustee is found not to have acted honestly and in good faith, the 
provisions require the trustee to reimburse the fund. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Trustee Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 19, The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
would like to make a couple of brief comments on the 
amendments to The Trustee Act. It’s a very short Act that I 
think it focuses directly on some of the problems that has been 
experienced in the past, and again there’s an area of uncertainty 
that needs to be corrected. The minister used the word putting 
certainty into the equation, and I think that’s exactly what’s 
needed. 
 
A lot of the involvement on behalf of the people of the province 
is involved with trustees in one way or another. And it needs to 
be made clear what their role is, what . . . to level of their 
accountability, and what the consequences are for their 
non-function of the job. I think there needs to be a uniformity 
and conformity with a kind of a standard code of ethics for the 
trustees, and I notice that in the amendments there is proposals 
to address those kinds of things. 
 
Also it shows, or it mentions in the amendment, how the 
different kinds of penalties can be now referred back to things 
like the legal costs directly from the trust funds. I would hope 
that this doesn’t mean that the trustees are just counting on both 
the support and the funding from the trust fund and not taking 
their jobs equally as seriously as they did in the past. 
 
But I think the intent of the Act is proper. And I would like to 
explore the option to have more input on some of this Act and 
the consequences from trustees and therefore I would move 
adjournment on the amendment to The Trustee Act. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Lloydminster has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
support the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of The Securities Amendment Act, 2005. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, enactment of The Securities 
Amendment Act, 2005 reflects Saskatchewan’s commitment to 
participate fully with other provinces and territories in the 
implementation of the second phase of the passport system of 
securities regulation. 
 
In February 2003 the ministers responsible for securities 
regulation for the provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, 
Ontario, and Quebec met to discuss potential reform of the way 
in which the sale and trading of securities is regulated in 
Canada. Manitoba and Saskatchewan accepted an invitation to 
join these provinces in creating a provincially led initiative to 
make significant reforms to the existing framework of securities 
regulation in Canada. 
 
On September 30, 2004 provincial and territorial ministers 
made a commitment to improve the Canadian securities 
regulatory framework by signing a provincial-territorial 
memorandum of understanding regarding securities regulation 
— the MOU. The MOU has been signed by ministers 
responsible for securities regulation from all provinces and 
territories with the exception of Ontario. Ontario has not signed 
the MOU because it favours a single Canadian regulator. 
However Ontario is committed to working with the 
interprovincial initiative to improve the regulatory environment 
for the securities industry in Canada. 
 
The MOU calls for meaningful and timely improvements to the 
current system including: a passport system for securities 
regulation resulting in a single window of access to capital 
markets in participating provinces and territories; highly 
harmonized, streamlined, and simplified securities laws; a 
council of ministers to facilitate change and ongoing 
co-operation; a review of regulatory fees charged in the context 
of the passport system; and a commitment to explore options 
for further reform. 
 
The guiding principles for the passport system are: ensuring the 
highest level of investor protection, making sure markets are 
competitive, ensuring that the regulatory response is 
proportionate to the need and cost, increasing the flexibility and 
cost-effectiveness of securities regulation, and providing 
sufficient oversight and accountability. 
 
The first phase of the passport system was completed earlier 
this year by the adoption of national instrument 11-101, 
principal regulator system, by Saskatchewan and other 
provinces and territories. These new provisions allow market 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

participants to use the regulator in their home jurisdiction as a 
single window of access to other jurisdictions for prospectus 
clearance and continuous disclosure requirements. 
 
The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 represents a second phase 
of the process which will facilitate an expansion of the passport 
system into other areas where the securities laws in Canadian 
jurisdictions are not fully harmonized. In essence, this 
legislation provides a platform upon which further streamlining 
and simplification of Canadian securities regulation can be 
built. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill which is harmonized with legislation that 
will passed in all Canadian provinces and territories represents a 
significant achievement in the history of securities reform in 
this country. The passport system will allow market participants 
a single window of access to all Canadian jurisdictions by 
dealing with the regulator and complying with the laws in their 
home jurisdiction. 
 
A Saskatchewan corporation wishing to raise capital will be 
able to sell securities in all Canadian jurisdictions simply by 
meeting the requirements of the Saskatchewan Financial 
Services Commission and Saskatchewan’s securities laws. 
 
Similarly, corporations based in other provinces and territories 
will be able to enter the Saskatchewan marketplace by meeting 
the requirements in their home jurisdiction. In addition, 
investment dealers and advisers will be able to deal with clients 
who have moved to another jurisdiction as long they meet the 
requirements in their home jurisdiction. 
 
Specifically, this legislation creates new delegation powers that 
will allow the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission to 
delegate its powers under The Securities Act to regulators in the 
home jurisdictions of issuers based in other provinces and to 
accept similar delegation made of the Saskatchewan 
commission by regulators in other provinces. 
 
The Bill also allows Saskatchewan to adopt or to incorporate 
the security laws of other Canadian jurisdictions and to deem 
compliance with other Canadian, and in some cases foreign, 
jurisdictions as constituting compliance with Saskatchewan 
securities law. 
 
The new provisions also include specific immunity for 
Saskatchewan securities regulators when applying delegated 
powers of other jurisdictions. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, many of the changes brought about by 
the passport system are aimed at facilitating the ability of 
corporations to raise capital and to ease the regulatory burden 
upon corporations that raise capital for the securities system and 
the investment dealers and advisers who conduct sales and 
trades of securities. 
 
The interests of the investor have not been neglected in this 
process. Every effort has been made to ensure that these 
changes do not derogate from existing investor protections. 
 
Consideration is currently being given by the interprovincial 
working group to further amendments that would expand the 
ability of investors to sue companies for misrepresentations in 

the disclosure they make to the marketplace, as well as 
provisions that will allow commissions to levy increased 
penalties and order restitution for investors that have suffered a 
loss as a result of the breach of securities law. 
 
This Bill contains certain housekeeping amendments that will 
allow for the adoption of uniform national instruments and 
includes consequential amendments to The Credit Union Act, 
1990 and The Co-operatives Act, 1996. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these amendments represent an 
important step in the creation of a new regulatory environment 
in Saskatchewan and across Canada that will reduce complexity 
and costs, foster greater investor confidence, and make 
Canada’s capital markets more competitive with markets 
around the world. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 
of The Securities Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 18, The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you again, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
This is a rather important amendment to a pretty important Act 
because it’s very timely now in this 2005-2006 time frame for 
investors particularly to develop the confidence level needed to 
be able to invest in any particular province and in this province 
specifically. We have an opportunity to expedite both the 
potential and also the future returns on the opportunities here in 
Saskatchewan and for that we need investment. 
 
Investment is very critical and we need stability, certainty, and 
consistency of the investor and his confidence that it’s being 
protected under The Securities Act. 
 
From an earlier role I had in the industry, we tried it one time 
— I remember, Madam Deputy Speaker — to put a 
Canada-wide securities Act in place that would apply to all 
provinces. And it’s been debated for a number of years, and 
gradually some of the provinces have joined on, more recently 
others as the minister has indicated. And now finally there is an 
agreement that we can move to a national security Act that 
allows people then to invest both in one province and in another 
one, any other one, and have the same assurance. 
 
[15:15] 
 
There’s some aspect of The Securities Act that I would need a 
little more time, and I think our side of the House needs a little 
more time to confer with some of the people that are actually 
participating in the investment climate in Saskatchewan. And 
for that reason, I move adjournment of debate on Bill 18, The 
Securities Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Lloydminster has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways 
and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of An Act 
to amend The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997. This 
Act contains amendments that will enhance safety and 
economic growth in our province. 
 
Madam Speaker, under the new provision there will be a better 
process to provide clear and effective authority to respond to 
highway blockades. This amendment will simply clarify the 
role of the Department of Highways and Transportation and the 
Government of Saskatchewan by providing a clear and effective 
response in the event of a blockade placed on a provincial 
highway. 
 
Blockade threats or actions are of significant concern to the 
general public, the province, and the forestry and mining 
industries. The amendment does not represent a change in 
departmental policy. It is meant to accommodate policy changes 
to government-wide initiative regarding acts of civil 
disobedience. It also does not conflict with the plan or existing 
policies of the province or with the policies of any police force 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The amendments are consistent with the cabinet decision item, 
Saskatchewan response to incidence of blockades and similar 
illegal acts, presented and approved by my colleagues in 
August, 2005. 
 
The additional amendments are simply housekeeping in nature. 
The department managed and operated the Highways Revolving 
Fund to distribute the cost of equipment, material, and labour to 
department programs. The fund provided a financial mechanism 
to allocate the costs of equipment over multiple years when the 
General Revenue Fund expensed all costs in the current year. It 
also allowed equipment operating and maintenance costs to be 
allocated to the department’s operating and preservation 
programs based on actual use. 
 
The capital assets reporting guidelines implemented by our 
province in 2004-2005 allowed for equipment to be amortized 
over the useful life of the asset. With the changes to the 
provincial accounting practice and amendments in 2004 to The 
Financial Administration Act, 1993, the Highways Revolving 
Fund was no longer required to manage the department’s 
equipment fleet or custom work activities. The fund was 
discontinued as of March 31, 2004. 
 
All capital assets including the department’s equipment fleet 
were transferred to the General Revenue Fund on April 1, 2004. 
Equipment acquisition and custom work activities are reported 
under the machinery and equipment subvote and the custom 
work activity subvote in vote 16. The last amendment will 
enable automatic adoption of federal amendments where they 
are referenced. 
 

I move second reading of an Act to amend The Highways and 
Transportation Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 15, The Highways 
and Transportation Amendment Act be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you again, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and a few comments on Bill No. 15 — comments to the 
minister’s comments on the second reading. 
 
Highways and transportation is a very integral part of the 
economy of Saskatchewan. It’s an infrastructure that everybody 
counts on, and it’s an area that needs to be certainly 
streamlined, looked at in any way that we can make this thing 
work for the betterment of the province in attracting investment. 
Attracting businesses is certainly a good thing. 
 
Some of the remarks that the minister made and the 
justifications for them seem to me to be on the surface 
justifiable. But I’m wondering for instance in his comments 
about barricades and the possibility of barricades on highways 
as threatening as they may be, barricades I would put to the 
minister are only a symptom of some frustration by the people 
of Saskatchewan, some symptom of something that is 
disagreeable with a certain group of people. And I would 
recommend that a lot more focus and attention be placed on 
trying to understand the root of the problem rather than 
becoming more heavy-handed and bureaucratic in terms of 
trying to solve the problem in, like I said, in a very 
heavy-handed way. I think that’s an important part of trying to 
work with the people of Saskatchewan instead of directing and 
dictating to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is another part of the 
amendments that actually refer to rolling back the Highways 
Revolving Fund and putting it into the General Revenue Fund. 
That has happened since, as the minister mentioned, 2004. The 
concern that I have is even though it might be a measure for 
efficiency of accounting, it may not be as profile as need be for 
the average person in the province or for people that want to 
hold this government accountable on specific actions and funds. 
 
And for that reason I think there’s a need to review again that 
concept to see if in fact the government is moving in the right 
direction. 
 
With further consultation, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m going 
to move that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 15, the Act to 
amend The Highways and Transportation Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Lloydminster has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 1 — The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this Act in general terms broadens the existing 
Act to provide police forces with greater latitude and additional 
tools to stifle the activities of organizations involved in crime. It 
defines organized crime in a way that conforms with the 
Criminal Code and includes a limited ban on the wearing of 
gang colours. 
 
This Bill No. 1, Madam Deputy Speaker, The Safer 
Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 . . . 
More specifically, Madam Deputy Speaker, this Act changes 
the language used to define gangs and criminal organizations in 
such a manner that it is consistent with the Criminal Code of 
Canada. Specifically, Madam Deputy Speaker, a criminal 
organization is defined as a group of three or more people that 
has as one of its main purposes the facilitation or commission of 
serious criminal offences. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Act broadens the existing Act to 
make activities undertaken by a criminal organization in the 
commission of a criminal offence or the use of property in the 
commission of a criminal offence by criminal organizations a 
prohibited activity. This may give police and prosecutors the 
ability to clamp down on and, as I understand, to seize gang 
houses, whether or not gang members actually live there. 
 
I take it, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the Act provides for the 
seizure of property and also where an illegal substance has been 
sold to a minor in the context of organized crime or where an 
intoxicating substance has been traded to a minor in exchange 
for assistance in the commission of a criminal offence, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This Act seems to define a gang house as any structure where 
gang members congregate for the purpose of engaging in 
criminal activity, whether or not any gang members actually 
live in the structure. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Act defines gang colours as any 
sign, symbol, logo, or other representation that identifies a gang 
or criminal organization. And this Act seeks to prohibit the 
wearing of such colours in bars or other facilities that are 
licensed or permitted for the purpose of selling alcohol. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Act presumes that any person that 
has been convicted of a criminal organization offence in the 
past remains a gang member. This may be an incorrect 
assumption and may even fall under a Charter challenge. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, the Act may also put bar operators 
into a position where they could be accused of race-based 
decision making in terms of disallowing members of Aboriginal 
gangs wearing colours into bars or by reporting them to police 
when they are found in bars. Certainly bar owners and hoteliers 
need to be consulted on the mechanics of this Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I understand what this Act tries to 
accomplish and generally agree with the direction that it takes. 
But there may be problems with some of the specifics. 
Therefore I move at this time to adjourn debate on this Act 
while members seek consultation on some of the issues 
involved. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 4 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up today to talk on this particular Bill dealing 
with the SAMA, Assessment Management Agency. And out in 
rural Saskatchewan and I think through the cities when you 
mention SAMA [Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency] it can be kind of contentious a bit because the way 
property is assessed in different areas. I mean nobody likes to 
pay taxes and the way the mill rate is paid out and figured out 
through that. And a lot of it deals with the way property is 
assessed in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll just use a couple of examples, talk about. Unfortunately 
with the trouble we’ve been having in agriculture, there’s more 
and more families, some of them leaving the farm. So as guys 
buy farms, they will have a house on them. So what they’ll do is 
they will cut out 10 acres. They will go to the RM [rural 
municipality], the municipality, and get that rezoned and get 
that taken out. And usually they get permission from the RM to 
do that. And then they’ll sell 10 or 20 acres and advertise it. 
And the odd time you’ll have somebody from a neighbouring 
town that will buy one and move out of the town and maybe 
raise, have a horse or cow or just want to be out of the town. 
 
And I know that in some RMs that where there is many, many 
of these small 10 acre . . . we call them acreages. Around the 
city, they call them acreages. And they will use that because 
there’s enough of them. They will use the assessments from the 
larger centres, and that can get into a problem. 
 
I know that they . . . I’ve had a couple of calls in my office that 
were quite irate with the way they were assessed at the mill rate. 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

And the RM says well basically our hands are tied because 
they’re using the assessment from around the cities on what an 
acreage is worth there. And out in rural Saskatchewan 10 acres 
. . . An older home that may be 20, 25 years will still be 
assessed maybe around Saskatoon, Regina for $100,000, 
$80,000. And basically they bought that piece of property for 
maybe 5,000 or $4,000. Just the way things are in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it raises an issue. And I know even some . . . I had one 
business too and it happened . . . the only business that fell in 
that category in rural Saskatchewan. Same thing. They used an 
assessment, then out of the city because then they’ll move to 
another jurisdiction where there is more of these businesses to 
use, I guess, fair-market value. What it would be worth at the 
business value, which is a motel or hotel . . . that we say well 
how much business will they use when an average hotel or 
motel that size . . . What they use for business or what goes 
through them doors they will use for figure out their 
assessment, their mill rate . . . or their assessment I guess at that 
end and that translate it into the mill rate. 
 
But the motel — because it’s not in Regina or Saskatoon or 
maybe even a larger centre, but it’s outside that RM — say well 
we don’t have that volume of traffic that goes through the doors 
that you would in Regina or Saskatoon or maybe even a 
Yorkton or a Melville or North Battleford or Prince Albert. You 
won’t have that volume of traffic. And yet because in that 
particular RM or surrounding RMs there isn’t many motels, 
they will say well this is a 40-unit motel. And a 40-unit motel 
in, let’s say in Melville generates so much business and that’s 
. . . maybe that’s you’re assessed at. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I have gotten calls and then you go through the appeal process 
and different things. But there is some people, quite a few 
people that are not that satisfied with SAMA at that. When you 
mention the fact there has been some RMs that are talking about 
. . . in the southwest corner I think talking about getting an 
independent agency to come in and assess. And I think — I 
could be wrong — but I think there’s a couple of cities that do 
that now too. I’m not sure. I know there was before at that end 
of it. And just feeling that the assessment that was set there 
should be, you know maybe it isn’t quite fair or maybe they just 
didn’t have the particular information or whatever of why 
they’re doing it. 
 
But I know that as an MLA I have gotten calls and I say well 
you know that’s . . . all we can do is direct you to the appeal 
process first on that, which a lot of people don’t realize you can 
appeal your assessment and do that, that step of it. But I know it 
has been raised a few times where they’ve come back and said 
they weren’t . . . got turned down at the appeal process and say 
well they just thought that they were being assessed unfairly 
because some of the towns were . . . just the way the assessment 
was. 
 
And another example I’ll use is even around Regina and outside 
of Regina, there’s some towns and aren’t that . . . they’re not 
that big; might be a couple, three, four hundred people, but 
there’s some nice homes out there. Because what happens is 
you’ll get people out of Regina, coming out building a home 

there, a very nice home, and they’re still only maybe 10, 15 
minutes from work. 
 
Where the same size town in let’s say . . . I’ve got in my 
constituency where the nearest town of any size might be 50 
miles away. They will assess . . . Somebody will build a house 
there, a new house and it will be assessed. That town, they’ll 
use the same assessment as they’re comparing it to a town 
outside of Regina that maybe has 2 to 400 people that will use 
that kind of the same value. And they’ll say yeah, but it’s only 
10 minutes out of Regina, that there’s more new houses going 
up, the property is worth more because of the proximity to the 
city. 
 
Where, where our town is located, there is no value for work 
around there so your land values, your houses are selling 
cheaper, a lot cheaper — your land, your lots, at that end of it. 
But we’re being still assessed fairly high because they’re 
including in that assessment package . . . And they’ll put quite a 
few towns together the same size but a lot of them towns, 
maybe some of them around Regina or Saskatoon or P.A. 
[Prince Albert] where your land value happens to be higher. I 
mean it goes back to the same thing about real estate, you know 
— location, location, location is what they say. 
 
So naturally property that’s just outside of a major centre or a 
major work area always sells for a little more or will sell for 
more than a property that is . . . Basically if there happens to be 
no jobs in the area or in the agricultural area which is getting 
very depressed, them houses will be the same, same kind of 
houses, but a guy with a four-bedroom house, 2,000 square feet, 
maybe 20 years old out where I live isn’t going to be able to sell 
it for a whole lot of money compared to if that house was sitting 
just outside of Regina in a small town. 
 
The guy outside of Regina in a smaller centre will probably get 
three or four times the value of his house. So they’re using that 
assessment when they’re also assessing his house. That town 
may be in the same link of towns they use in that band there. 
And that’s where there has been some problems with SAMA — 
raised with it. I mean naturally when you come to assessment 
there’s always problems at that, but those are one of the issues I 
would like to raise. 
 
And I know on farm land, I mean the way assessment’s gone 
up. This year in the RM of McCraney all the land went up — 
every acre. Everybody I talked to their taxes went up this year 
on assessment. A lot of it was the education portion tax, but it 
was also because the administrator explained to me there was a 
change in assessment. 
 
Pasture land was changed a couple of years ago. I think they’re 
assessing that at 75 per cent now. And that went up right 
through the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] crisis 
which when basically the cattle industry was suffering. That 
included, you know, pasture land was taking a dive through 
that. 
 
But getting back to the farm land, yes, it’s gone up. My taxes 
this year went up, went up I think $1,000 across . . . at least 
1,000, $1,000 to 1,200. And that included . . .and you know 
what that was because I checked on it? The minister . . . 
 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask hon. members to avoid 
yelling across the House so that the Speaker cannot hear the 
member on his feet. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Just 
addressing that yell a little bit for the Minister of Education. It 
was the education portion of the tax that went up. It wasn’t the 
municipal tax. It stayed the same. Theirs stayed the same. But 
the education portion went up this time so directing that back to 
the Minister of Education. 
 
And yet they tell us that they’re lowering it and people phone 
my office or stop me in the street. They say I’ve heard that they 
were supposed to throw in this money. It’s supposed to help 
bring my taxes down. Why have they gone up? Why have my 
taxes on the education portion gone up? And I say, you know, I 
don’t know. I heard them say the same thing that it should go 
down but obviously it didn’t. That was just another 
misinformation coming out of this House it seems like. And 
that’s unfortunate. And that deals with this particular Bill. 
 
And some other things that I want to talk about when they do 
talk about it. This would be a good Bill that eventually, that 
should be when it goes to committee, that it should be . . . 
stakeholders should be brought in. Because this affects people 
across the board. I’m pretty sure people from the real estate 
board would like to talk on it. I know SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] would like to talk about 
SAMA. And I know SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] would like to talk about SAMA. 
And plus I think there’s a few other stakeholders that would like 
consultation because this affects everybody across the board. 
And I think that this Bill, if it goes to committee, it should be 
brought in . . . some groups should be brought in so they can 
discuss a few things. 
 
And this government, I’m not sure how much that they actually 
spent consulting when they tell us that they’ve consulted certain 
groups. I know that I’ve heard that SARM wasn’t really, 
haven’t heard much of this Bill yet, at that end of it. 
 
So I think there’s a few things that have to be, for myself and 
my colleagues around me, questions that have to be answered 
when it comes to assessment because that basically affects 
everybody in this province. It affects the agriculture. It affects 
the business. It affects people in urban dwellings. It affects 
renters. If their property taxes go up, their landlord will raise 
their rent. It touches base with everybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
So when a Bill like this does come through, even though they 
say it could be some housekeeping, word changing, I see there 
may be possibly a deletion of some unnecessary clauses. I 
would like every stakeholder that’s involved, that it will touch, 
to be very clear about this Bill so they know the ramifications. 
If there are changes that will affect them, they’ll be able to let 
their lawyers, let their people go through it, at the end of it. 
 
So that’s some of the points I would like to address in this Bill. 
I see that they’re changing something about . . . to 
market-value-based assessment, which can be good, you know, 
as long as it’s done right. I think other provinces have gone to 
that if I’m right, at that end of it. And that’s something that they 
should be moving at in the direction. But it’s still the same 

thing. Every stakeholder involved should be having their say on 
this particular Bill, at that end of it. So that, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I will adjourn debate on this particular Bill for now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 5 — The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to make a few comments on Bill No. 5, An Act to 
amend The Cities Act. 
 
I understand this Bill could be a bit tied with the assessment at 
that end, but there is . . . I know that it’s a Bill that cities have 
wanted changes on different things of it. I see some of the . . . 
will affect different stakeholders. I see that the deal is about 
collecting from unpaid parking fines by seizing vehicles owned 
by the person who has the unpaid fines. Now I think that falls 
into section 335 at that end of it. 
 
Now that, you know, can be a good thing; can cause a lot of 
concern on that when seizing vehicles, especially vehicles that 
may be, how would I say, are money, that are leased vehicles 
like from a company or vehicles that there is . . .It wouldn’t be a 
lien, but let’s say you borrowed money, which most of us have. 
You drive a new vehicle. You’ve mortgaged that vehicle at that. 
Who has first right on that when it’s seized and it’s sold? Who 
has first right at the money? Does that go strictly to the cities, or 
does it go to a banking institution at that end of it, whether it be 
a credit union, a Bank of Montreal, Royal Bank, or various 
other fractions that lend money to buy vehicles? 
 
So that’s a concern. Myself, I have questions on it, and I know 
that when we talk to some colleagues about it there was, you 
know, some questions that we raised at that particular end of it. 
 
I know that the cities do want more power when it comes to 
collecting unpaid fines on parking tickets. I know in the cities it 
has been a particular problem from what I understand. I can 
remember a case in Saskatoon where it was quite publicized, 
where I think a woman went to jail on it, or it was along that 
lines. And I know that . . . I don’t think nobody wants to put 
anybody in jail for parking tickets. I mean, that’s carrying 
things possibly a little too far. 
 
So I know that parking is a problem. It’s a parking problem in 
the cities. When I go to park somewhere, it’s very hard to find a 
parking spot. But you keep looking until you find one because I 
make sure that I don’t want my vehicle seized or sold or end up 
in jail, but still that’s . . . 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

I know the cities it is a contentious issue with them how to 
collect unpaid fines. And from what I understand, they have 
thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars tied up in 
unpaid parking fines which they would like probably access to 
that money at that end of it. 
 
But yet in the same thing, same vein, you also want to make 
sure that you also don’t trample people’s rights too by going too 
far in some legislation. And with this particular one that’s one 
that you want to make sure that you don’t want to trample 
people’s rights or not even end up going after the right people. 
 
Getting a vehicle that . . . maybe the person that got the tickets 
isn’t the one that’s, the vehicle that’s being impounded, at 
different ends, and then company vehicles and lease vehicles 
and you can run into all them different kind of questions. It can 
be quite onerous to figure out who’s in the right, who’s in the 
wrong, who’s in the different things on that particular Bill on it. 
 
I know that . . . I see there’s some changes being made that are 
consistent with The Municipalities Act too dealing with railway 
companies, road allowance, and vehicles at that end of it. 
 
And I see there’s a new provision adding that there will be a 
youth board position available appointed by local council. This 
youth board member is not official council member, cannot 
vote or count in quorum. But it’s also being added to it. I’m not 
sure did . . . why that particular was put in there, or why the 
cities wanted it. I don’t even remember going through the 
second speeches if it was even, if the minister even addressed 
that particular one in there. I don’t remember that being . . . 
He’s shaking his head. He said he did. I will have to read it a 
little more careful to see how he . . . He may have put it in there 
but I don’t think he really answered my question on why it 
should be in there. 
 
But with this particular Bill, same thing. I know we had . . . 
When we get them, even though the government says that 
they’ve consulted with certain jurisdictions that in the cities, in 
the municipalities, in SARM, in SUMA and the people that are 
affected, we found out in the past that sometimes maybe 
they’ve only talked to one or two people, or really haven’t 
consulted that much, and there was concerns raised. 
 
I can remember last year a particular Bill being pulled 
eventually from the order paper because of there had to be 
changes made in it that stakeholders wanted afterwards. So with 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker, we would like to make sure that 
all the stakeholders have been consulted on this particular Bill 
and that they have no reservations with it and they’re happy 
with it. So with that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will adjourn 
debate on this particular Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[15:45] 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 6 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern. No. Sorry. Wood River . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Rosthern-Shellbrook. Thank the member for the correction. 
I recognize the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand in the House today to speak to Bill No. 6, an 
Act to amend the municipal Act. And as a representative from 
the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, I’m pleased to stand 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, members. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, in my former life before I took on the job of an MLA 
politician, I was the mayor of the town of Spiritwood, and I was 
also a business owner in the town of Spiritwood. So I’m pleased 
to speak today on behalf of The Municipalities Act. 
 
Now this amendment from what I understand makes changes to 
the wording and the definitions to move from a fair-value 
assessment model to a market-base model in the 2009 
re-evaluation year. And that brings to light, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, if re-evaluation’s coming in the year 2009, which I 
believe if I did my correct math is four years away, and 
because, because the fall sitting that we’re taking place right 
now is a place for the government to introduce Bills — which 
they have done, and quite a few Bills — the reason for the fall 
session was to introduce Bills and then have consultation of 
those Bills with the local stakeholders. We as an opposition on 
this side are going to do that part. 
 
So I’m wondering, Madam Speaker, why the hastiness of the 
minister from Government Relations and why the hastiness to 
have on his wish list the last three Bills, the assessment manage 
agency amendment Act, The Cities Act amendment, and The 
Municipalities Act amendment . . . needs to be passed in the 
next week and a half? 
 
It’s our job as opposition to make sure everybody is consulted 
in this process. And I’m reminded, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
when The Cities Act was introduced — I believe that Act was 
some 200 pages — it was mostly because of the Saskatchewan 
Party that we undertook to have meetings in the province to 
have all stakeholders understand what is in that Bill. 
 
Then the Minister of Government Relations, who now is the 
House Leader, took it upon himself to have I believe six 
meetings in the province of Saskatchewan. I attended one of 
those meetings in Wilkie along with my colleague, the member 
from Biggar. 
 
And when we were at that meeting in Wilkie, there was a 
number of gentlemen that stood in their place and posed 
questions to the Minister of Government Relations in the 
opposition of The Cities Act, in the hasty manner in which he 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

wanted it to go through. And I was amazed at the questions that 
were asked by the members to the minister. And I know the 
minister and his colleagues at that time were writing down these 
questions and at the end of the meeting said, we will take these 
questions into consideration before we put through the Bill. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Bill did not pass in the 
hastiness that the Minister of Government Relations wanted it. 
Instead he took it back, and he went over some of those 
amendments. And he saw fit to make some significant changes. 
 
Now I’m sure in The Municipalities Act, that we’re here today, 
there are changes that was never done and he sees fit that has to 
be done. But the question that I want to pose to the Minister of 
Government Relations is, has he consulted with all the 
stakeholders? And if he hasn’t, and if he hasn’t, it is our job as 
opposition to make sure that we consult with those members 
and then bring back to this House the recommendations that the 
minister should change. 
 
It is not our job to stand here and have the minister introduce a 
Bill and in a day or so pass the Bill. Yes there can be work done 
in committee. And we welcome the chance to go in at the 
committee and talk at that time of changes that could be made. 
But before it gets passed into committee, it is our job as 
opposition to consult with the stakeholders. And we will do 
that. We will consult with SUMA, with SARM, with all the 
members before passing this Bill. And, Madam Speaker, with 
that I am going to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 3 — The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand in this Assembly to speak to 
The Summary Offences Procedure Act, Bill No. 3, and to raise 
a few more questions in regards to the piece of legislation we 
have before us. 
 
And I understand one of the biggest components of this piece of 
legislation is changing the guidelines whereby municipalities 
can go after individuals who may have outstanding tickets, 
parking tickets or fines, and trying to simplify the process. As 
well as in this specific situation, Madam Speaker, by allowing 
for municipalities to send letters of notice it frees up some of 
the police officers that have in the past or at least even today are 
forced to have to go and hand out tickets to individuals who 
have not been forthright in paying their overdue parking tickets 

or traffic violations. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, as I was looking at . . . as I’ve been 
looking through this piece of legislation, I noticed some 
interesting things. But first of all let me say when it comes to 
parking violations, and I know the city of Regina’s certainly 
one of those cities that really has a . . . We hear the business 
community in downtown Regina complaining about the lack of 
individuals taking the time to come down and shop in the area. 
And yet it was one of the most difficult places to try and find a 
parking spot. 
 
So I can see why the city would be trying to implement some 
kind of guidelines that would free, if you will, free up parking 
stalls rather than . . . Maybe what they need to do is look at 
creating larger parking areas that are actually close to the 
business community so that individuals would find it easier to 
drive downtown and find easier access to parking that is more 
than reasonable and where the notices are clearly defined so you 
know exactly what you’re facing. 
 
And when I talk about notices, I talk about — just reiterating 
some of the situations a person can run into as you go 
downtown, especially when you come to an Impark parking lot 
— the fact that there are two or three entrances to this parking 
lot but there isn’t very clear signage at the entrances to indicate 
that you need to go to the one specific entrance to pick up your 
parking pass. And sometimes, Madam Speaker, I think part of 
the problem that individuals have is the fact that we have very 
poor signage when it comes to whether it’s on a parking lot or 
even on the street. 
 
For example, and I’m not sure if this is changed because notice 
was given to the city, but just off of Victoria, south of Victoria 
on Rose Street, there’s a 15-minute loading zone parking sign. 
Interestingly enough, Madam Deputy Speaker, if it happens to 
be the spring and through the summer, that sign is not visible to 
the public unless you happen to be right underneath it. And 
when you pull into a parking area, it looks like the parking area 
is open. The reason I say that is because that sign happens to be 
covered over by trees. 
 
And I would suggest, Madam Deputy Speaker, some of our 
municipalities, cities included, need to take a look at their 
signage and how clear the signage is to ensure that individuals 
have no excuse whatsoever — that the signage is visible, it’s 
clear, and it’s in visible sight range. And therefore I believe you 
would find on numerous occasions, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that you may not have as many outstanding offences. Although 
I know individuals who have been in situations like this, have 
gone immediately to confront the authorities in regards to the 
lack of or the poor visibility of some of these signs. 
 
A colleague of mine and I were just discussing a situation that 
they ran into fairly recently where they were moving down a 
street and they came to an intersection, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and they were looking for oncoming traffic. 
Unfortunately — well I should say fortunately — they saw the 
traffic and the traffic seemed to be moving fairly quickly and 
they thought that kind of odd because they were . . . it was their 
understanding that the stop sign was on the other side of the 
street. When they did a turnaround and went back, they noticed 
the stop sign was well off the street. And unfortunately because 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

of the way the parking is allowed, it’s totally restricted to the 
visibility of the traffic flow that you’re trying to inform that 
there’s a stop sign here. 
 
So I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, we talk about offences. 
And yet at times I’m not exactly sure if municipalities make 
enough of an effort to ensure that their signage is not blocked or 
hindered from visibility so the traffic, people that are 
proceeding down the streets or looking at parking on the streets 
have a clear understanding of what the rules and the guidelines 
are. 
 
And once you get to live in a community, you get to understand 
what the guidelines are for the community so you understand 
what the requirements are to meet those guidelines. But if 
you’re in a new community or travelling into a new area of a 
community that you may have been around, if the signage isn’t 
as visible as it should be, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly 
very easy to mistakenly park in a parking area and find yourself 
with a traffic offence having been, say, parked too long in a 
certain area. And so you’ve got a traffic ticket to deal with. 
 
Now the good part about traffic tickets is when you realize that 
you’ve made a mistake, because that person has the ability to go 
and pay that immediately. However, Madam Deputy Speaker 
. . . And the member from Regina Northeast must have had an 
awful lot of them because he sure is complaining an awful lot. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, I know that there are individuals 
who totally refuse to acknowledge the fact that they have had a 
traffic violation. And then we have people, my colleagues and 
I’m sure colleagues across the way have people coming 
complaining to you about the harassment from city officials or 
municipal officials because of the fact that you’ve been slow on 
responding to your traffic violation, whatever that traffic 
violation may be. 
 
Now I note in the summary offences one of the requirements 
that have been brought forward, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 
giving communities or cities the ability to put a lien against 
vehicles or personal property. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
have a concern with that. And we certainly want to raise some 
questions in that regard for the simple reason the question is 
this: if a vehicle happens to have a traffic violation, like parking 
too long, and a parking violation and you put a lien against that 
vehicle, you don’t know whether that vehicle happened to have 
been borrowed for a while. You don’t know if that vehicle was 
a rented vehicle. You don’t know if that vehicle was a stolen 
vehicle. But that vehicle has a traffic violation. 
 
One of the members in this Assembly could have very well 
have a vehicle stolen. And I believe it wasn’t that long ago that 
the former Justice minister in a situation went out to his vehicle 
only to find it was no longer where he had parked it. And that 
minister, Madam Deputy Speaker, may have under this new Act 
found himself with a summons to court because there was a 
parking violation against that vehicle that he hadn’t responded 
to. 
 
What I’m saying, Madam Deputy Speaker, is the fact that you 
or I may not know that if we’ve lent a vehicle to someone just 
to run downtown to do a bit of shopping, that they may have 
incurred a violation on that vehicle, like a parking ticket, unless 

they’ve informed us. And therefore when a summons is . . . 
You’re asking yourself, now why? 
 
So I think we need to raise some questions as to whether or not 
we should move in that direction of allowing cities to put a lien 
against a vehicle if it’s got outstanding parking tickets against 
it. 
 
I’m also somewhat opposed to . . . I believe there’s a place in 
the legislation that calls for or allows for incarceration of a 
person for a parking offence. You know, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we hear on an ongoing basis from the Department of 
Justice the cost of holding people or in incarceration. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And it would seem to me that, in fact I believe, we’re talking of 
having to build more space in our correctional centres and our 
prisons because we don’t have enough room today. But maybe 
we need to look at some other alternatives such as, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, maybe community service. I’m not sure if 
we’re sending the right message. 
 
Yes I believe cities are finding that, and the province is finding 
that there are just too many outstanding violations that haven’t 
been responded to which means there’s a significant amount of 
change that is either not available to the Minister of Finance or 
is not available to cities as they try to provide services to the 
residents of their communities. And therefore the municipalities 
are looking at ways and means of addressing this issue. 
 
And I believe that’s what the intent of this piece of legislation, 
the summary offences procedures Act, is attempting to do, is 
attempting to strengthen some of the rules and the guidelines 
that would make it easier for municipalities to move against 
individuals who have outstanding, long outstanding parking 
tickets or traffic violations. 
 
However some of the issues that this piece of legislation is 
bringing forward is suggesting that maybe these are ways in 
which we could move to address those issues. I think, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, we need to be very careful and very diligent as 
we review this piece of legislation to ensure that at the end of 
the day this legislation as it moves forward will indeed address 
in the best possible form the issue that it’s trying to address, and 
that’s regarding outstanding traffic violations. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe there’s a number of 
questions we certainly can move forward on as we move into 
committee and certainly address in committee. But I believe as 
we continue our consultation with municipal governments, 
whether it’s urban or rural or other groups that would be 
affected under this piece of legislation, it’s imperative that we 
get a better understanding of where the groups are coming from 
and whether or not this government actually, as the minister 
indicated, they had taken significant time to consult. 
 
We want to get an understanding of whether or not this piece of 
legislation actually is following the guidelines of the 
consultation process that the government had undertaken or 
whether or not the government basically moved on their own 
with what they felt would be a better form of addressing a 
number of these issues. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

certainly imperative that we do take that time. And therefore at 
this time, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 17 — The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to have the opportunity to speak to Bill No. 17, An Act 
to amend The Real Estate Act. 
 
The renaming of the Real Estate Commission to Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Commission appears to be a housekeeping matter, 
and I do not anticipate that over the period of the next few 
months, as we have the opportunity to bring this proposed 
amendment up with the stakeholders, that we will be opposing 
this part of the amendment. 
 
The continuance under the corporations branch and 
corporations Act also appears to be a necessary housekeeping 
matter. It would also seem logical that the fines and fees that are 
collected by the commission would become the property of the 
commission. And it appears that in fact this Act will allow that 
and not just having it being allowed by the past practices. 
 
The areas that would appear to propose changes are in 
responsibilities and/or practices of the commission as it relates 
to the commission’s ability to buy, hold, lease, sell, or dispose 
of real and personal property. 
 
It is our duty as opposition to assure that these changes being 
proposed meet with the approval of the stakeholders involved. 
In the minister’s explanatory statements he indicates that this 
legislation has been requested by the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Commission, although it would be my understanding that at this 
time we’re still dealing with an entity called the Real Estate 
Commission and not the Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission 
as that’s part of the change to the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the stakeholders are not only the commission but 
also the clients. The clients — be they buyers, sellers, landlords, 
or renters — must be assured that there is no potential for 
conflict of interest between the realtor, the commission, and the 
client. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be studying this Bill, and for that reason I 
would move to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 2 — The Film 
Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
we’re on the Bill No. 2. I can hear them chirping from the other 
side, and I haven’t even turned on the eloquence yet . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Okay I’ll go home to where the light 
is. I’ve got it here. Okay. We’re getting there. We’ve got the 
lights on, somebody’s home, and we’re dealing with, as I said, 
the Act to amend the employment tax credit Act. 
 
What the Bill does is it makes changes to the amount and the 
calculations of the film employment tax credit. Now that’s 
always interesting. Any time that you turn an NDP government 
loose and say here’s a little segment of society and you can 
tamper with your tax credits, that’s a highly scary thing, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And you know the most scary thing is, even 
before I looked at my next line, is very specifically, what does it 
do with the tax? It increases the tax credit from 35 per cent to 
45 per cent. 
 
Now here we have a government that . . . you’ve had the term 
about swimming in cash. We’ve had the terms about the 
mountain of cash. We’ve had the Minister of Finance talk about 
all the money that he had and how it was going to be spent, but 
he wasn’t going to tell us what it was and how much he was 
going to make from it. We actually had our Finance critic do a 
guesstimate on how much the increase was going to be. And we 
were basically — considering the sizes of the members’ — 
within pennies, within pennies. 
 
Now we find that after this government has garnered in that 
amount of extra cash, that amount of extra cash that they don’t 
know what they’re going to do with, they don’t know what 
they’re going to do with. They’ve had options presented. One of 
the options was to go ahead and help in some of the 
communities that have the facilities for community — whether 
we’re talking the rinks or the seniors’ centres — helping them 
with some of their utility costs. But the minister wasn’t going to 
talk about that. Instead he takes the film employment tax credit 
and increases that from 35 per cent to 45 per cent. Now why in 
the world is there any need for that? 
 
We’ve had tough years in this province. Everyone knows that. 
We’ve had debt that needed to be paid. And we won’t go into 
that unless I’m forced to do that. But we’re quite prepared to 
discuss that at length, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

But we had that discussion about the hard times that had been 
there. I’ve been here for nearly a decade, and there haven’t been 
that many really good years as far as finances were concerned. 
It’s always been sort of eke and scratch, and hopefully we’ll 
have enough money. And as a result, this government has had 
to close all sorts of things. I remember the fact that they closed 
down all the hospitals because they said there weren’t enough 
money . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 52? This is hard to 
believe. 
 
We have a province, a province of 1 million people. That’s 
small. Because there are cities all over Canada that have a larger 
population than that. So here we have a population of 1 million 
people, and we’re going to close 52 hospitals. But they said 
times were tough. Times were tough. 
 
So here we get a little more money. Enough money, as I said, 
that the Finance minister isn’t quite sure how he’s going to 
spend it as yet, and he’s increased tax from 35 per cent to 45 per 
cent. Now if I happened to be a mathematician like my good 
friend that sits down the road here, I’d be able to tell you 
exactly what the percentage increase was. But I think that’s 
moderately significant. 
 
Anyways this would allow direct government equity investment 
as part of the eligible costs on which the tax credit can be 
calculated. Okay let’s just follow that through. It would allow 
direct government equity investment as part of the eligible costs 
on which a tax credit can be calculated. Well what in the world 
would possess a government to want to do that? Why would 
any government want to go ahead and put in that equity 
investment to deal with those eligible costs on which that tax 
credit is calculated? 
 
It would provide an additional 5 per cent tax credit to 
productions that employed Saskatchewan residents, but that 
isn’t all. There’s a little bit of fine print there. Those deductions 
— that 5 per cent tax credit — has to be if they employ 
Saskatchewan residents in key eligible positions. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would really be interested in 
knowing what those kinds of positions are. What positions are 
there in that whole industry that are so unique and so special 
that if you happen to be in one of those that’s when that 5 per 
cent tax credit kicks in. But if you’re not in one of those eligible 
positions, the tax credit doesn’t kick in. 
 
Now what could be the reason for that? Are these people better 
looking? Are they more adept at the whole issue about the 
industry? I suggest that this piece of paper was probably 
produced in the last week or two, and it was just one other 
effort by the NDP to raise their membership lists. I am sure that 
if we do get down to that fine print, we’ll find that that 5 per 
cent tax credit applies to eligible positions if they have an NDP 
membership, have an NDP membership. 
 
It’s interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker. We’ve had some 
interesting scraps in this House about the NDP. We were 
watching back in the lounge the speeches that are going on over 
here. And I don’t know if this is planned or not, but I’ll ask the 
members across the floor to answer this. When one of your 
people comes up on the screen and you have this long name 
that’s out there — and we’re not allowed to use first names so I 

won’t do that out of respect for the House. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Under what colour would you use for that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . We have one person, just one person on that 
whole side that’s been watching what goes on in the House. 
Now this is supposed to be the government, supposed to be the 
NDP government. And I’m not allowed to go ahead and discuss 
how many aren’t here or are here and who it is, so I won’t do 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker. But only one person identified 
that they knew what the answer to that question was. Just one. 
And I would really wonder why it is that only one person on 
that whole side has been listening to the discussion. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, an increase in the tax credit 
from 35 to 45 per cent, now this is part of a whole set of 
broader changes to the film tax credit that the government 
acknowledges would do what? Shrink the number of 
out-of-province productions that are produced in the province. 
 
So they’re going to increase the tax credit from 35 to 45 per 
cent. Then they’ve got this little phrase about key eligible 
positions. And the hope is, the hope is, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
they want to shrink out-of-province productions that are 
produced in the province. 
 
What a way to grow a province. What a way to grow a 
province. That we’d actually have a Bill, Bill No. 2 — which 
I’ve been working so hard on to go ahead and be familiar with 
— Bill No. 2 and the key thing, the key thing is to shut down 
and slow down the production of that particular industry in the 
province. I have never, ever heard of a political group that’s that 
backward economically. 
 
You know, let’s shut down production; let’s shut down 
production. Who knows what else they’re going to do? We’ll 
suddenly find the price of gas higher here than in most other 
provinces so that when other businesses come in to drive in 
Saskatchewan they’ll say it’s too expensive. We’re going to 
find all of those sorts of things happening. 
 
I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is just the thin edge of the 
wedge. Following hard upon the NDP convention, where they 
did all their planning for the future, we see here exactly what 
it’s about — Bill No. 2. And it’s going to be interesting to see 
as we go through the rest of these Bills exactly some of the 
other ideas that they have to shut down business. 
 
To have a tax in place that’s going to limit the production in 
that area in a province, I don’t think you could find any other 
similar situation all the way across Canada. I mean how amazed 
we would be if all of a sudden we found out that in 
Newfoundland or PEI [Prince Edward Island] they have a 
special tax on raising potatoes so that fewer people will raise 
potatoes. We’d say, what a bunch of stupid people. And here 
we’re doing that. Here we’re doing that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the member to stick with the 
decorum of the Assembly, and I’ve been patient in having him 
address the Bill before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. So the 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

last point that I’ve been working on is the key part. That is the 
key part. We referred to the tax going up and down. We referred 
to the tax in key eligible positions. We’ve dealt with both of 
those. But what is the reason for that? 
 
It had nothing to do with the Minister of Finance raising money. 
It had nothing to do with keeping open rinks in small towns and 
help them with the cost of their fuel. But it had everything to do 
with making sure that there wouldn’t be competition for this 
industry in this province. And if you don’t want the competition 
in this industry in this province, they’re going to be going 
elsewhere because, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe it’s every 
province in Canada would love to have this industry within its 
boundaries. 
 
So Ontario . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He says about 
lowering the taxes. Well I think if you look at the taxes that are 
there and the way they limit it and who’s eligible for it, you’ll 
find that that’s not the case. That’s not the case. This will 
actually push that industry out of the province. 
 
There’s a phrase here that I think that we’re going to need to get 
some discussion on. It says that the Act would allow eligible 
companies the employment tax credit equal to 5 per cent of 
eligible salaries — and that word eligible scares the life out of 
me, Madam Deputy Speaker — if the company employs at least 
six prescribed positions on that particular item. Now what in the 
world is a prescribed position? It has nothing to do with being a 
scribe I’m sure, or a professional scribe either. But somewheres 
you have to hire at least six. 
 
I think if government got right out of the business of trying to 
control everything, we wouldn’t have the difficulty in seeing 
this province grow. There’d be absolutely no problem with 
seeing this province grow. 
 
As I’ve explained, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are numerous 
problems in this Act. It is frankly, I think, a disaster. It doesn’t 
do for this province what it could do or what all of us would 
probably hope it should do, and for that particular reason I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Martensville that we now adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beatty that Bill No. 13 — The 
Archives Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today on behalf of the official opposition and put 

my words to this Bill No. 13, The Archives Amendment Act. I 
would think that most of us when we hear the word archives, 
we think the word, stuffy and boring and of course very old, but 
as we get a little older we realize maybe the importance of some 
of the work that they are doing in keeping records and more 
importantly keeping track of the records that’s happening in this 
building. 
 
Madam Minister, the Heritage Foundation actually is looking at 
a lot of the issues of old infrastructure that we have in this 
province, and as we celebrated our centennial I think many of 
us appreciated the work that they have done. But The Archives 
Amendment Act that we’re discussing today has more . . . is 
actually a housekeeping Bill that’s looking at some of the 
records that are kept here in the Assembly. Currently the 
government is obligated to implement record schedules and 
manage and control the disposition of public records. And the 
government can destroy records that are administrative and are 
addressed as common. But you can’t destroy any records 
without first obtaining permission from the Provincial 
Archivist. 
 
The one thing that this Act does acknowledge is that the cabinet 
records that are so very vital to the decision making or they are 
the record of what’s happening in this province, were omitted in 
the previous Act. So the amendment is actually giving the 
authority to keep the records that we have, that this cabinet 
deals with on a daily basis. 
 
The one thing that really amazed me when I read, listened to the 
minister speak about this, The Archives Amendment Act, is 
saying that: 
 

. . . public records created and maintained by the 
Legislative Assembly . . . will be subject to the Act. 
By. . . . [and] their inclusion in the records scheduling . . . 
will see greater accountability, privacy, and access to . . . 
[the] records. 

 
Madam Minister, on this side of the House, we have been 
waiting for just about the 10 days since we’ve been sitting in 
this session, for this government to be accountable, to give us 
access to the records that we’ve been asking for through many 
of the questions that have been put forward in this House. The 
fact that this government hasn’t been open and accountable, that 
they haven’t given us access to the records that we need to do 
our job on this side of the House and to provide the information 
to the people we represent, is just plain despicable, because we 
haven’t got answers to the many, many questions that we 
deserve to have records, answers for. 
 
It’ll be interesting to see if all this information that’s vital to 
growing the province, which my colleague from Rosthern spoke 
about so elegantly for the last little while . . . Growing the 
province is something that we’re very, very interested in, but 
some of the information that is held by this government right 
now is not accessible to the people of this province. I believe 
over 500 questions have been asked of this government and 
there hasn’t been answers. We haven’t been able to find out 
what the government is doing. 
 
So I’m hoping that maybe when the government looks at these 
Archives Act and looks at the material that is going to be kept 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

on public record for all time, some of this information will be 
seen down the road by people that think, you know what, 
maybe a few years ago these people could have used the 
information. 
 
So at this time we’re waiting for information back from groups 
of people who have got an interest in keeping the public record 
and knowing what the cabinet ministers have been saying. And 
this decision making could carry on because of the information 
they were given. 
 
So at this time, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would adjourn debate 
on this Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Prebble that Bill No. 11 — The Youth 
Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to rise on item no. 9, Bill No. 11, the youth justice 
Act. I’ve looked at the Bill. It’s not a very large Bill. It doesn’t 
cover a lot of pages. It really only deals with kind of the 
designation of youth justice workers. It talks about people that 
are employed in or assisting in the administration of youth 
justice facilities — making them into peace officers as is done 
with youth workers or workers in other facilities. So it’s just a 
matter of changing the designation of those people that work in 
youth justice facilities. 
 
But you know when we start speaking about youth justice and 
any Acts that pertain to youth justice, there certainly are a lot of 
issues that come to mind and this being one of them, changing 
the designation of those certain workers. But there are a lot of 
issues that come to mind and I don’t know whether it’s I’ve 
been paying more attention to the fact but some of the violent 
crimes that we’re seeing in our province now and so many of 
them are being committed by our youth. Now if you go back 20 
and 30 years ago perhaps there were as many crimes committed 
and perhaps youth were involved but I don’t think it was 
anything to the magnitude that we’re seeing in our province 
today. 
 
We heard the minister talk earlier about a Bill that he was 
introducing regarding gang-related activities, and you know I 
look back when I went to school and so many of my friends 
before me and after me, and I don’t remember us talking an 
awful lot about gangs. I remember there being certain gangs 
where they would drink Canadian and we would drink Pilsner, 
for example, and those were the kinds of the gangs that we 

would see. But we’re seeing gangs now that are wearing colours 
to signify which gang they belong in and they’re violent. 
They’re turf protecting, they’re into, you know, drug trafficking 
and they’re into all sorts of things that I frankly don’t 
remember. And perhaps I was naive but I don’t remember that 
being around 20 and 30 years ago. It just didn’t seem like the 
violence was there. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Now I want to couch that with saying that the vast majority of 
youth in this province are great citizens. I had the opportunity 
of teaching in the high school system for a number of years; 
after that working for a non-government organization for a 
number of years that dealt with youth, and by far the vast 
majority of the youth that I dealt with were excellent people. 
But it seems like there is a nucleus or a core that right now in 
our society are causing an awful lot of problems. 
 
I think back just this past summer about just an absolutely 
horrific incident that happened in Saskatoon where a young 
fellow was stabbed. And I went to school with his dad. I knew 
. . . I didn’t know Justin but I know Dean and Diana very well 
— Sproat — and what happened to their son in the inner city in 
Saskatoon is horrific. It’s unimaginable that that type of 
situation could take place in our province. 
 
And although this Bill talks about the youth justice Act and it 
talks about changing designation of certain people that work in 
youth justice facilities to peace officers, there are so many other 
issues around this area. And I just used the one example that 
happened this summer and, you know, the absolutely 
senselessness around that whole situation. 
 
But it leads me to wonder why we’re having these problems, 
why they are so prevalent in our society today. And I mean I 
can come up with a few conclusions and I think quite often if 
you talk to police officers, I don’t know whether . . . I don’t 
think my conclusions are that far off the base, but I think it has 
an awful lot to do with poverty. And with poverty becomes . . . 
and breakups in families and breakups in homes in . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. While I respect the member’s 
debate, the Act before us does just change the designation, so if 
the member could address the Bill before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’ll be glad to address the Bill because what 
I was talking about, the people, the very people that I was 
talking about, end up in these facilities. And so when I talk 
about people that are in the city with breakups of homes and 
poverty, they end up in these facilities that these people which 
we’re changing the designation to, for, are going to have to deal 
with them. So why are we changing the designation of these 
people? It’s because of all the external problems that we’re 
seeing in many of our cities and rural communities around the 
province. 
 
So when I talk about poverty and when I talk about family 
breakup, it directly relates to the Bill because the people that 
we’re talking about in this Bill are the people that are going to 
have to be dealing with some of these youth when they come 
into correctional facilities. 
 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

So I need to first of all kind of understand why we’re having so 
many more people enter these facilities and why we’re having 
to change the designation. We’re having to change the 
designation because we see in our society a huge amount of 
poverty. 
 
I mean we have seen the growth of food banks in our inner 
cities and now small communities like we’ve never seen before, 
even after the Premier has stood and vowed that he was going 
to eradicate food banks. And that hasn’t happened; we’ve seen 
it go the other way. We’ve seen food banks increase, which is a 
direct relationship to how our society is doing within our 
province. And how our society is doing within our province 
directly relates to Bill No. 11, youth justice workers and 
changing the designation. And we have seen that in our 
province, people having to access food banks at greater 
numbers than we have ever seen before. And why is that? 
 
We’re a province that is in a have position for one of the first 
times in a number of years. And I know our Premier will stand 
and say, well we’ll be in and out of equalization. We’ll be a 
have province or we won’t be a have province. And I think part 
of it is that very attitude — the attitude that you don’t expect to 
succeed, that you are setting up a culture and a society that we 
expect not to be a have province with all the resources that we 
have. 
 
We have resources in this province. We should be second to no 
one. But we’re not. And why is that? And why are we finding 
so many people using food banks which then in turn, and it’s 
not a direct relationship, but I think there is some sort of 
correlation that when we see the number of people using food 
banks, we also see the number of people in youth custody 
facilities increasing — which in turn then has to lead us to have 
to change definitions of youth workers to peace officers. It’s all 
directly related. It’s directly related to how this province is 
doing as far as dealing with some of the people in our province 
that have not as much as others. 
 
We see people in the inner cities that are having to use food 
banks. We see community organizations that are starting up to 
try and help youth to cope with some of the situations that they 
are facing. I can use and I know some of the members opposite 
are familiar with it, the North Central Family Services Centre, 
who my constituency assistant Vonni and her sister are directly 
working with, and there’s a huge demand there. 
 
There’s a void somewhere that certainly the government hasn’t 
been able to fill and these organizations are filling to try and 
help our youth stay on the right track, so they don’t get into 
facilities that this Bill addresses. So we don’t have to worry 
about revisiting this Bill next year or next week and having to 
change the definition from just workers to peace officers 
because that is significant. That is significant, and I think it 
directly talks about where we are as a society in Saskatchewan 
today and how we have dropped the ball in so many different 
examples. 
 
When I talk about we as far as population as a whole, I mean 
population as a whole when you look at the amount of food 
banks that have increased in our province, the number of people 
that are visiting food banks, not only in Regina, not only in 
Saskatoon, in Moose Jaw, in Biggar. It’s unbelievable that a 

community like Biggar would have to start up a food bank for 
some of the less fortunate in their community, and it shouldn’t 
be that way. 
 
Part of the problem is, is that there just aren’t the opportunities 
that people need to succeed. There aren’t the opportunities for a 
lot of youth that come out of school to get into a job right off 
the bat and start making a living and contributing to society 
because so many times in our province the opportunities aren’t 
there. They get out of school and they look at what are they’re 
going to do. And quite often they end up in the wrong crowd 
with the wrong people, and it causes nothing but grief for the 
justice system. So many of those people that get in with the 
wrong crowd and in mixing with the people that are into illegal 
activities, they end up in facilities like this. 
 
They end up in youth justice facilities where now we’re having 
to re-look at how we designate those people. And you know I 
think a lot of these youth . . . People that work in these youth 
facilities didn’t expect to be designated as police officers. 
They’re working in the facility for the betterment of the kids 
that they can then turn out and contribute to society. But I think 
that we’re seeing, in talking to a number of people, that we see 
the increase in the use of these facilities because they are not 
afforded the opportunities that they should be afforded when 
they get out of school, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we look at youth justice as I said, you cannot just look 
at the Bill alone and say, oh it’s just this because it has so many 
tentacles into the rest of our society. I’d be very interested to 
look at other provinces and see how they’re doing in this area. 
 
Not to say that there isn’t crime in other provinces, there 
definitely is. But is it to the degree, is it to the degree that we 
see in our province? The violent crime, is that as prominent as 
what we see in our province? Because certainly it is. And when 
you look at crime in our province, you can pretty much . . . as I 
said, directed or related to poverty quite often, but quite often 
it’s no opportunity, lack of job. Often there are issues around 
drug abuse. 
 
And we’ve seen in the House over the last couple of years 
members on our side of the House bring up the issue of crystal 
meth and other drugs that cause problems. And for a long time, 
we didn’t really hear much response from the government. In 
fact they just really wanted to sweep it under the carpet and say 
it wasn’t an issue when it is an issue. And it has been an issue. 
And there isn’t a member in this House today . . . Of the 58 
members in this House, I will guarantee you it is an issue in 
every one of our constituencies. There is no one of us as 
members of this Legislative Assembly that are immune to some 
of the issues that we face with drug abuse. 
 
And I would again say that that is a direct relationship. It has a 
direct relationship to this Bill. Because of that, we’re seeing 
more people in correction centres, in youth justice facilities, 
according to the Act. And that’s how come we’re having to 
change some of the employees or change the designation of 
these employees to peace officers. It has a direct relation to 
what is going on within our society — whether it is poverty, 
whether it is drug use, or whether it’s lack of opportunity. And 
we need to address those issues. We need to address those 
issues. 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2005 

We’ve been calling on the government to address it. As I said, 
when it comes to the issue of crystal meth, it has taken a very 
long time before the government would first of all recognize 
that there is a problem even though . . . And I don’t think it was 
necessarily just a rural Saskatchewan issue because I believe it 
and I know it is involved in many cities. But we seem to, in 
rural Saskatchewan, whether we noticed it first or whether it 
was a larger impact, we certainly know that the drug came up 
through the mid-west, through the agriculture communities and 
ended up in Saskatchewan which directly related to the 
constituencies that we happen to represent. 
 
And so whether it was that reason that it came to our attention 
maybe quicker than the government’s, so be it. But when we 
raised the issue and when — I don’t want to put words into the 
mouths of our other members — but when our members, 
whether it’s from Kelvington-Wadena or Weyburn-Big Muddy 
or Saskatoon Northwest talked to the police officers of our 
province, it wasn’t just in rural Saskatchewan. Because the 
police officers and the peace officers around . . . which this Bill 
deals with, is peace officers. And that’s why I’m relaying it. But 
when the peace officers around our province and in the major 
cities realized that hey finally someone is going to listen to 
them, there is a huge problem with this drug in our cities and 
finally for the first time they felt I believe, that some of the 
politicians were going to listen to them. And it was through the 
hard work of these three members that raised it over and over 
and over and over again that finally the government has started 
to listen. And we’ll certainly debate the actions that they’re 
taking on the effectiveness that they will have. 
 
But it was members on this side that heard from citizens in our 
constituencies, that heard from peace officers around the 
province and in particularly the major cities that told us this is a 
huge issue. And if we don’t correct this issue I believe that 
we’re going to find our youth justice facilities increasing in size 
because of the demand, because of the people that are going to 
be accessing these facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So although this is a one page Bill that just certainly talks about 
changing the designation of youth workers to peace officers, I 
believe the ramifications to our province are huge. And I would 
be remiss if I didn’t take my opportunity to talk about the issues 
of youth justice in our province and certainly have had the 
opportunity. I know we’re going to hear much more feedback 
on this Bill from people that it impacts directly, so at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate of second reading on Bill No. 11 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Prebble that Bill No. 21 — The Boiler 
and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
am pleased that I’m able enter into the debate on Bill No. 21, 
An Act to amend The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill when you first look at it, it seems fairly 
innocuous. It’s merely a change in phraseology, and I believe 
some changes that are mostly of a housekeeping nature. 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s perhaps a little more to 
the Bill and to this whole area of inspections of boilers and 
pressure vessels than would meet the eye by merely looking at 
the Bill. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I think we need to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the inspection of 
boilers in our schools, in our hospitals, in our rinks . . . In this 
building I would presume that we most likely would have a 
boiler, and it needs to be inspected. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, a few years ago back in 2002, there 
was some serious, serious problems in that whole inspection 
unit. And I’m not so sure whether they’ve been rectified, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I said, it’s very important that — and particularly at this time 
of the year when these pieces of equipment are operating during 
the winter months to heat the buildings and facilities that we 
have throughout our province — that they be operated, that they 
are in good working condition and be operated in a safe and 
efficient manner. And that is the responsibility of this Bill and 
of the inspectors that operate under the authority of this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now going back to 2002, I was made aware by a constituent 
that we had some serious problems in that boiler inspection 
unit. Morale was at an all-time low. Staff turnover was at an 
all-time high. Expertise within that unit was minimal because 
those inspectors who had been with the unit for many years and 
worked within the unit to improve the quality of inspection and 
work with the problems that were being faced by that unit 
finally threw up their hands and moved on. 
 
And we were left with a number of inexperienced inspectors 
who pleaded with the two or three remaining experienced 
people in that unit to stay and educate them and teach them and 
show them how to do proper inspections. There was real 
concerns within the unit and with the people that had left that 
we could be faced with a very serious accident somewhere in 
the province just due to the inexperience and the inability of the 
people left to do the work. 
 
And as I had said, it was raised by a number of inspectors 
within the unit who had written a public letter, and I was given 
a copy of it. And I talked to an individual who had left the unit 
but who was very concerned about the public safety of this 
province. And we went to work and that, I felt, was a role that 
opposition plays . . . is to hold the government to account. And 
we took the minister of the day to account on this whole issue. 
 
And there was some changes. Some of the problems, at least 



November 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

part of the problems seemed to stem around lack of leadership 
in that whole area. The executive director of the inspections 
branch had education and training in administration procedures 
but had no working knowledge of what the people that she was 
supervising actually did. She had no knowledge whatsoever, no 
experience in the whole area of inspections and particularly 
boiler inspections, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not sure if it was 
coincidence or not, but I’m told that, a few short months after 
that whole issue was raised in the legislature here, that that 
individual moved to another position or perhaps left. But she 
resigned her position, and there was some measures to improve 
the working morale of the inspectors. But I understand that 
there still are some shortcomings in this whole area. 
 
I’ve been told — and this is something that we need to do some 
research on — that the regulations that go along with the 1999 
Bill, the Bill which we are now amending, there are some 
problems and that they may not be fully implemented or 
implemented at all. We don’t know at this point in time whether 
we’re still operating under the old regulations and whether 
some of the amendments contained in this Bill will fix the Bill 
so that new regulations can be put in place, Mr. Speaker. And 
so we need to take some time to research and investigate some 
of the conditions that surround Bill 21. 
 
But what I’d like to do, Mr. Speaker, also is perhaps explain 
what is happening in this whole area in boiler inspection in 
other provinces. And as you might know, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
usually quite hesitant to make the Alberta comparison to 
Saskatchewan because Alberta does have some natural 
advantages that Saskatchewan may or may not have depending 
on how you view the comparison. 
 
But we need to look at other provinces including Alberta and 
recognize if, when they are doing things in a better fashion, a 
more efficient manner. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, from the 
information I’ve been given, that in fact is the case in Alberta. 
 
In fact one of our more senior boiler inspectors who finally 
decided that they could not rectify the situation back in 2002, 
finally felt that they could no longer live with themselves or 
couldn’t live with themselves if a serious accident happened, 
resigned from the unit, resigned from public service in this 
province. Set up his own business and is now doing work in 
Alberta. Doing exactly the same kind of work he was doing 
here in Saskatchewan, but in an entirely different format as 
such. 
 
Boiler inspection in Alberta, and you could well imagine with 
three million, over three million people there and with all the 
industrialization that’s taken place in that province, you could 
well imagine that there are many more boilers and pressure 
vessels in that provinces that require safety inspections. And the 
way it’s being handled in Alberta is that a non-for-profit 
corporation was set up, and they have been charged with the 
responsibility of ensuring public safety in this whole area. And 
they contract firms and individuals to do the inspections. They 
review their qualifications, Mr. Speaker, and they are held to 
account in a very open and public way, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
told that that system is working very well. 
 
And perhaps it’s something we need to look at. I’m not familiar 
with the systems in other provinces, but I think perhaps we need 

to investigate the way this whole area is being handled in other 
provinces. So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I think we need to 
take a little bit of time on this whole area, and so therefore I 
would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate on Bill No. 21 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:52.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................337 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................338 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................338 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................338 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................338 
  Bakken Lackey..........................................................................................................................................................................338 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................338 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................338 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................339 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................339 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................339 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................348 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Addictions Awareness Week 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................339 
 Saskatoon Fastball Team Wins World Masters Championship 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................339 
 Weyburn Carbon Dioxide Storage Project 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................340 
 ABEX Award Winner 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................340 
 Pelican Narrows Boxers Win Championships 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................340 
 Eston Physician Honoured 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................341 
 Saskatchewan Film and Television Productions Win Gemini Awards 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................341 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Availability of Medical Specialists 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................341 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................341 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................342 
 Measures to Combat Addiction 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................343 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................343 
 Prohibition on Wearing Gang Colours in Licensed Establishments 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................345 
 Collection of Fines 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................345 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................345 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Suppression of Gang Activity 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................346 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................347 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................347 
 Bill No. 27 — The Youth Drug Detoxification and Stabilization Act 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................348 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................348 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................348 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................348 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................349 
 Bill No. 26 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2005 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................349 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................350 
 Bill No. 23 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................350 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................351 
 Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................351 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................352 
 Bill No. 16 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................352 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................353 
 Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................354 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................354 
 Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................354 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................355 
 Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................356 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................356 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................357 
 Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................357 
 Bill No. 5 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................359 
 Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................360 
 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................361 
 Bill No. 17 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 (No. 2) 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................363 
 Bill No. 2 — The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2005 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................363 
 Bill No. 13 — The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................365 
 Bill No. 11 — The Youth Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................366 
 Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................368 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


