















































Hansard: May 03, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 104A  TUESDAY, MAY 3, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2819 
 May 3, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise on 
behalf of constituents of the area of Cypress Hills concerned 
about the serious deterioration in Highway 32. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have three and a half pages of signatures from 
the communities of Abbey, Lancer, Cabri, Kyle, Pennant, Swift 
Current, Shackleton, Lacadena, and even three from Manitoba. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege again to 
rise on behalf of residents of southwest Saskatchewan who are 
concerned with the level of residential support offered to people 
who have lifelong disabilities. The prayer of their petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Pambrun, Saskatchewan, and McMahon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want you and 
all members to know I’m receiving a number of petitions on 
behalf of the staff, participants, and families of the Wheatland 
Regional Centre Inc. and other like centres across the province 
that provide services for individuals with disabilities. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly will please consider implementing the 
minimum compensation recommendations for staff 
members who support people with disabilities, as outlined 
in SARC’s human resources plan. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown, Herschel, Zealandia, and Brock. 
And I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who are concerned about cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular 
telephone coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Radville and 
Weyburn. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to rescind its decision to force school 
divisions to amalgamate. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville and 
Bengough. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatoon who are 
outraged at the obscene consulting contract of former Saskatoon 
Health Region CEO [chief executive officer], Jim Fergusson. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 

 
The petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so present, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 



2820 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
where citizens signed that they want to resurface Highway 15 or 
at least if nothing else to repair it from the junction of Highway 
11 east to the junction of Highway No. 2. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of No. 15 
Highway be resurfaced immediately or at least repaired so 
as to remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on 
this vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Hanley, Loreburn, Saskatoon, 
Davidson, Kenaston, and Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Grandora and Langham and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I am 
pleased to rise and present a petition on the excessive 
consulting contract of CEO Jim Fergusson for the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray and your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Presented by the good citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today regarding the 

contract of Jim Fergusson. I will read the prayer for relief, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this contract is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan concerned with the rerouting of Highway 51. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 51 is rebuilt to 
go through the town of Kerrobert so that local businesses 
may be given the opportunity to promote themselves to 
and gain business from patrons passing through Kerrobert. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens of both 
Kerrobert and Luseland. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned about this 
government’s plan to force the amalgamation of school 
divisions. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea, Earl Grey, and Regina. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 637, 639, 640, 666, and 800. 
 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2821 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on House Services 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Gantefoer presents the 
fifth report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of House Services 
Committee is hereby recognized. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Douglas Park, that the 
fifth report of the Standing Committee on House Services be 
now concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Regina Douglas Park, that the fifth 
report of the Standing Committee on House Services be now 
concurred in. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 
109 ask the government the following question: 

 
To the Minister Responsible for SGI: do all 1A driving 
instructors hold a class 1A licence? What screening is 
done on people who conduct 1A driver testing? What 
provisions have been implemented for training new drivers 
to make our roads safe? Does Saskatchewan have the same 
standards and system of testing 1A drivers as Alberta and 
Manitoba? Have discussions been held with respect to 
standardization of 1A testing across Canada or Western 
Canada? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure today to extend a 
very special welcome to some very special guests who we have 
with us today. There are 22 Saskatchewan Olympians seated on 
the Chamber floor and in the gallery. They are from the 2004 
Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece, and the 2004 Summer 
Paralympians in Athens, Greece. And with them today as well 
are many Olympian volunteers and family members. 
 
I ask that the members greet with a legislative welcome these 
Olympians. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With you, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m sure all members, I want to welcome the 
Olympians and the Paralympians, their coaches, and their 
families who are with us today. It is a significant honour for this 
Chamber to welcome these individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals have brought distinction and 
honour to themselves, to their families and friends and coaches. 
They’ve brought distinction to their communities, and they’ve 
brought great distinction to the province of Saskatchewan as our 
representatives in the Olympics and the Paralympics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we soon will hear through individual 
introductions, these Olympians come from virtually every 
corner of the province of Saskatchewan, from many 
communities. And they’ve shown the nation — and they’ve 
shown the world — the great talent that comes from this 
province. 
 
But in my view, Mr. Speaker, it takes even more than talent to 
achieve at this level of athletics. It takes determination. It takes 
courage. It takes endless labour and sacrifice to compete at that 
level. And so we honour these individuals of our province, and 
in this centennial year as we celebrate 100 years of heart, you 
truly are examples of Saskatchewan heart. We congratulate you, 
we welcome you, and we look forward to a day of celebration. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
with you and the Premier, and — as the Premier has highlighted 
— every single member of this Legislative Assembly in 
welcoming the Olympians, the Paralympians, the volunteers, 
the coaches, and the families who have joined us today. And it 
is fitting that we would take some time today here in this 
Legislative Assembly, and later outside in a ceremony, to 
honour these individuals — all of them — not just the athletes, 
but as well the volunteers and the coaches and family members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals, these Saskatchewan residents 
represent the best of the best province in the country. They 
represent people who not only set goals, but then achieve them. 
They not only dream dreams, but they go out and make them 
happen with the support of those who are attending here. 
 
It is no secret that the people of Saskatchewan regularly aim 
high and dream big, and these, our guests today, are examples 
of that. So on behalf of the official opposition, we want to join 
with the Premier in welcoming them, each and every one, to 
their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It’ll be my pleasure to recognize the 
individual members for individual introductions. And I would 
ask the Olympians as they are introduced to please stand or give 



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

us a good wave so we know who it is that is being recognized 
and introduced. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 
to the Assembly, Mr. Riley Janes, member of the Canadian 
swimming team. Riley is unable to be here. He is represented 
today by his father, Spencer Janes, and his grandmother, Donna 
Matthews. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly, Nicole Cargill from the 
synchronized swimming team. Nicole is unable to be here but 
she is represented today by her mother, Donna Cargill, and her 
grandfather, Donald Bennett. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my privilege to introduce to the Assembly one of my 
constituents, Mr. Cameron Baerg, silver medalist for the 
Canadian rowing team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, Rachelle deJong, who is a member of the Canadian 
rowing team and a very, very proud . . . a person that we’re 
proud of in our constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my great privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Erin Cumpstone, member of the 
Canadian softball team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
to the Assembly, Ms. Viola Yanik, member of the Canadian 
women’s wrestling team. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Amy Alsop, who won gold in 
goalball in the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce to 
the Assembly, Mr. Mike Bacon, a resident of Saskatoon 
Southeast, a silver medalist in wheelchair rugby. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thanks very much. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Alan Semeniuk, 
silver medalist in wheelchair rugby. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Lisa Franks, winner of two gold 
medals at the Paralympics in Athens, in the 200- and 400-metre 
in wheelchair athletics. And we, too, are very proud of our 
constituents in Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
and indeed a great pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. 
Clayton Gerein, bronze medal winner for marathon in 
wheelchair athletics. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege again to 
introduce to the Assembly another resident of Saskatoon 
Southeast, Mr. Rick Reelie, who participated in the 800, 1,500, 
and 5,000 metres in wheelchair athletics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to the 
legislature, Mr. Bruce Heidt, who participated in the 10-metre 
air rifle event in the 2004 Summer Paralympics. 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — For the third time the Chair recognizes the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my continuing privilege to 
introduce yet another fine resident of Saskatoon Southeast, Mr. 
Todd Hinds, the volunteer wrestling coach at the 2004 Summer 
Olympic Games. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Sherry Gross, 
volunteer massage therapist, the Canadian medical team, in the 
2004 Summer Olympic Games. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Liz Harrison, 
volunteer physiotherapist at the 2004 Summer Olympic Games. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Connie Burton, a 
volunteer at the Athens health sport massage team at the 2004 
Summer Olympic Games. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Sandra Roberts, volunteer 
synchronized technical official at the 2004 Olympic Games. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Pat Fiacco, 
sometimes known as His Worship, sometimes as Mayor Pat, 
and I think formerly as Sugar Ray Fiacco. And he was 
volunteer boxing technical official at the 2004 Olympic Games. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my privilege on behalf of my colleague from Moosomin to 
introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Bill McFarlane, Canadian speed 
swimming technical official at the 2004 Summer Olympic 
Games. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Ryan Flannigan, 
Canadian representative to the Olympic youth camp at the 2004 
Summer Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to introduce Mr. Lorne Lasuita, volunteer 
administrative officer, Team Canada mission. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there were five other of our 
residents who were participating in the Olympics or 
Paralympics in Athens this summer. I would like to —and they 
were unable to be here today or unable to be represented today 
— and I would like to add their names for the historical record: 
Mr. Mike Mintenko, who was a member of the Canadian 
swimming team; Mr. Jake Wetzel, silver medallist, the 
Canadian rowing team; Ms. Noreen Murphy, a volunteer and 
the softball assistant coach; Mr. Braydon Coburn, member of 
the Team Canada hockey team; and Mr. Ryan Getzlaf, member 
of the Team Canada hockey team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all proud of these athletes and the 
volunteers and the coaches from the constituency of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m really 
pleased to introduce some special guests in your gallery, and if 
they could just give a quick wave as I mention their name. 
Mayor David McCall from Indian Head, Councillor Randy 
Goulden from Yorkton, Mayor Gordon Hall from St. Walburg, 
Councillor Tony Leeson also from St. Walburg, Mayor Jim 
Stiglitz from Prince Albert, and Keith Schneider, executive 
director for SUMA, [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] and also Cam Baker from SUMA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a very good meeting this morning and 
they’ve come to the legislature to highlight the issue of 
addictions and offer their support. And I know they’ll be 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

meeting with the members of the opposition later today to 
reiterate their support for this important issue. And if all hon. 
members could welcome them here to their Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, and while I’m on my feet, Mr. 
Speaker, I also notice a constituent of mine — I guess a former 
constituent of mine — has joined the gallery. Mr. Thomas 
Linner, who I didn’t recognize him because he’s dressed up so 
nicely in a suit. I’ve known him for a number of years and his 
parents, Tony and Donna, will be very proud. He just started 
work here in minister of CIC’s [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] office, so if members could 
welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the official opposition I’d like to join the municipal 
leaders here today. And I hope you enjoy the proceedings of the 
House and we look forward to some of us meeting with you 
after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 
today to introduce to the Legislative Assembly a guest in the 
west gallery, Tahirih Vejdani, who is one of Saskatchewan’s 
talented young artists in the national artist program. The 
national artist program is a very important part of the 2005 
Canada Summer Games. It brings together talented young 
artists from each province and territory and challenges them to 
use the games as an inspiration for their art. 
 
Tahirih is an 18-year-old graduate of Campbell Collegiate 
enrolled at the University of Regina in the faculty of music. Her 
major is vocal performance and music history. Some of her 
accomplishments include first soprano in both school and 
community choirs, solo in the musical Hair performed by the 
Do It With Class Musical Theatre Company, and first soprano 
in the University of Regina Chamber Singers. 
 
She is an accomplished oboe player, talented stage performer, 
and was recognized for her musical talent and leadership with a 
Candice Tetreault Fine Arts Award scholarship as well as the 
Girls Choral Music Award. 
 
Please join me in congratulating and welcoming Tahirih. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the members today I’d like to introduce 

31 grade 10 students from the Melville Comprehensive High 
School, along with their teacher, Perry Ostapowich. And I 
might add Mr. Ostapowich has been a faithful visitor with his 
classes to the legislature in the last number of years, and I think 
he should be commended for that. So on behalf of myself, Mr. 
Speaker, but also the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood 
where some of the students reside, I would ask all members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly some special guests I have here 
today — my mom and dad, Don and Sharon Yates, and they’re 
accompanied by my daughter, Catharine. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And the Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly a constituent of mine sitting in the east 
gallery, Mr. Joe Donlevy. Joe is what they call a high 
maintenance constituent. Not only was Joe my campaign 
manager during the election but he’s also been my business 
partner for the last 13 years. And I’d like to welcome Mr. 
Donlevy to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
House, sitting in the west gallery, Larry Hubich, president of 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. And also Lily Olson is 
there, and Lily is employed with the Grain Services Union. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to have these individuals here in 
the House and I would like all members to welcome them, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Regina Student Wins Canada Day Poster Challenge 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year the 
federal Department of Canadian Heritage sponsors the Canada 
Day Poster Challenge. This competition is about providing 
young Canadians 18 years of age and under an opportunity to 
visually express their vision of Canada. 
 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to tell the Assembly today that 
this year’s winner of the Canadian Heritage Canada Day Poster 
Challenge, chosen from more than 7,500 entries from coast to 
coast, is Jennifer Truong, a grade 8 student at W.S. Hawrylak 
School in the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
This year’s theme was Canada East to West, and Jennifer’s 
poster captured it beautifully with an extraordinary montage of 
colourful and dynamic images depicting the scope of Canadian 
history in both time and space. I note, Mr. Speaker, that at least 
one image is specific to Saskatchewan, the fieldstone home of 
W.R. Motherwell, our province’s first minister of Agriculture. 
 
As national winner, Jennifer will be going on a seven-day trip 
to Japan to visit the Canadian Pavilion at the 2005 World 
Exposition. And, Mr. Speaker, her poster along with the other 
finalists’ from across the country will be on display from June 
to September in the Canadian Children’s Museum in the 
Canadian Museum of Civilization. 
 
Jennifer’s poster has been rightfully described as amazing and 
spectacular, and I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Ms. Truong on her outstanding achievement. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Saskatoon Bantam AA Raiders Capture Three Titles 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am rising today 
to inform the legislature of the exploits of a minor hockey team 
centred in the constituency of Saskatoon Northwest. The 
Saskatoon Bantam AA Raiders were able to capture the triple 
crown of minor hockey in Saskatoon by finishing first in the 
city standings, capturing the city championship title, and then 
going on to win the provincial championship presented by the 
Saskatchewan Hockey Association. 
 
This team, coached by Sheldon Boyd, exemplified the best of 
minor hockey in Saskatchewan and Saskatoon through the 
application of dedication, practice, and effort to achieve the 
winning season they enjoy. It is noteworthy that this team had a 
regular roster of just 12 skaters and their goalie, Duane Smith, 
and that with a short bench they prevailed against teams such as 
Battleford Bruins in the northern provincial semifinal and the 
Moose Jaw Extreme in the provincial final. 
 
These 13- and 14-year-old boys and their coaches are great 
examples of team work and coaching. And I would like to 
congratulate their head coach, Sheldon Boyd; assistant coaches 
Lindsay Lester, Rod Churchman, and Joe Donlevy; and all the 
players of the Saskatoon Bantam Raiders for an excellent 
season, achieving the position of the city and provincial 
championships. I’d like to especially note and congratulate 
defenceman Christopher Donlevy, my godson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Awareness Day 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Awareness Day in Regina. 
And right now, as I speak, an event sponsored by the Regina 
FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] Community Network is 
taking place at the Core Ritchie Neighbourhood Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, FASD is a term used to describe the range of 
disabilities caused by the consumption of alcohol during 
pregnancy. These lifelong disabilities can include behavioural 
and learning problems and could potentially have a major 
impact on the individuals diagnosed with FASD and their loved 
ones, and the community as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s event is primarily aimed at creating 
awareness about FASD and acknowledging how far the 
community has come in working toward a solution for this 
preventable disorder. This afternoon, community members, 
organizations, and agencies will have the opportunity to 
celebrate and reflect on the progress they’ve made in 
implementing prevention strategies and providing support for 
people living with FASD, while looking to the future and the 
work that is still left to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Community Clinic is one of 11 in 
Canada that houses a diagnostic and intervention centre. With 
early diagnosis, early intervention, and continuing support, 
individuals with FASD can become productive members of our 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
recognizing the Regina FASD network and all of the agencies 
and organizations across Saskatchewan for the important role 
they play in creating awareness about FASD, and for their 
commitment to ensuring that our province’s children are born 
healthy and receive the support that they need in life. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Swift Current Constituents Recognized 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today to 
acknowledge some of the achievements of constituents from 
Swift Current over the last number of weeks. First of all, 
congratulations to the Swift Current Comprehensive High 
School’s drama directorate for winning several awards at the 
regional drama festival in Rosetown. The comp high school 
drama group was named the top regional play, and several 
actors and crew members won individual awards. They’ll 
compete in the provincial high school drama festival later this 
month here in Regina. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, there was mention in the House earlier — a 
number of days ago — of the success of the Saskatoon Contacts 
who won the national midget hockey championship. It’s good 



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

news for my hometown for a couple of reasons. Swift Current 
native Jeremie Houde was solid on defence for the Contacts, 
and another Swift Current native, assistant coach Darren Evjen, 
worked hard behind the bench to get the job done. Additionally, 
goaltender Travis Yonkman and the tournament’s top scorer, 
Kyle Bortis, are both prospects of the WHL’s [Western Hockey 
League] Swift Current Broncos. So the Broncos will be looking 
forward to having those players in their lineup soon. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Cody Yolland of Swift 
Current. The young boxer was selected earlier this spring as one 
of nine Saskatchewan boxers to travel to England to take part in 
a boxing exchange program. Cody has fought in provincial, 
western, and national competitions, and he won both of his 
boxing matches in England. 
 
Once again, congratulations to the Swift Current Comp drama 
directorate, Jeremie Houde, Darren Evjen of the Saskatoon 
Contacts, and Cody Yolland. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 

Saskatchewan 4-H Public Speaking Competition 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the words mean so much — 
head, heart, hands, and health. 4-H in Saskatchewan is an 
88-year-old youth club organization serving approximately 
4,500 members and 1,200 leaders throughout the province. On 
Saturday in North Battleford, 4-H Saskatchewan held their 
provincial public speaking competition and 24 outstanding 
young people aged 9 to 21 from the four regions of the province 
competed in three age categories for the prestigious provincial 
awards. 
 
All of the young people participating on Saturday were winners. 
Each had already won at three previous levels of competition 
before they reached the finals. But each was competing for the 
provincial title, and at the end of the day there could be only 
three winners. 
 
In the junior category, the winner was Dominique Pouliot from 
the northwest region. His topic was “Killing Chickens.” In the 
intermediate category, the winner was Andrea Oleksyn from the 
northeast region. Her subject was “An Artist’s View of the 
World.” And in the senior category, the winner was Jamie 
Mack from the southeast region. His topic was “Welcome to the 
Real World.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young people show us all, once again, that 
Saskatchewan’s future is very bright and promising. These 
extraordinary young people are benefiting from a wonderful 
program. And for their unending support, I thank the 
Saskatchewan 4-H Council, its president, Karen Kvale, and the 
competition host committee and district no. 34 led by Tanya 
Snyder and Maxine Lehmann. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Kelvington Hockey Victory 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there is a town in my 
constituency that is producing championship teams. In 
Kelvington last fall the senior boys’ high school volleyball team 
won provincial gold. In March, the Kelvington Midget Wheat 
Kings capped off a very successful hockey season by winning 
the provincial C hockey title. 
 
Game one of the two-game combined total point series ended 
with a 2-2 tie in Kelvington on March 17. The rink was packed. 
On March 20, the Kelvington Wheat Kings travelled to Redvers 
for the showdown to determine who the midget provincial 
hockey champions would be. Two charter buses plus one small 
bus headed for Redvers carrying enthusiastic fans and players. 
 
After a very high-paced game, the final score of 5-5 sent the 
provincial final into sudden-death overtime. Despite the 
Kelvington Wheat Kings receiving a penalty in this overtime 
play, they achieved success. Short-handed, with one minute and 
22 seconds remaining in their major penalty kill, Bryce Walker 
scored from behind the Redvers net. He did this on his knees, 
banking the puck off the goaltender’s skate and into the net for 
a winning goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Assembly to . . . the 
Assembly to join with me in congratulating coaches, Tom 
Boyes, Warren Melrose, and Greg Standish; manager, Karen 
Standish; trainer, Curtis Nordmarken; players, Spencer 
Hawryluk, Matt Halpape, Bryce Halpape, Kyle Marshall, Kalan 
Marshall, Bruce Walker, John Plasky, David Berlinic, Adrian 
Sunderland, Justin Lamoureaux, Matt Melrose, Logan Boyes, 
Scott Standish, Stephen Standish, Rylan By, Mike Comfort, 
Tyson Anthony, Charlie Patrick, and Sean Patrick in their gold 
medal win and wish them success in future hockey 
championships. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan Awards Banquet 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last Saturday night I was 
extremely pleased to attend the Special Olympics awards 
Saskatchewan banquet in Saskatoon. There were over 350 
athletes, coaches, volunteers, and family members in attendance 
to honour outstanding achievement and recognize volunteers for 
years of service that ranged from 5 to over 30 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, honoured were Colleen Morestad of Swift Current 
and Ryan Roznowsky of Prince Albert, named Female and 
Male Athlete of the Year. 
 
Saskatoon’s Bob Thomas was Volunteer of the Year. Nancy 
Layman and Orest Schiller, both from Regina, were named 
Female and Male Coach of the Year. 
 
Adam Booker of Saskatoon was Junior Coach of the Year. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the Team of the Year is the Special Olympics 
curling team from Nipawin. 
 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

The medal-winning bowlers in the Bob Pedde Memorial 
Tournament also received their awards, and I had the privilege 
of awarding Saskatchewan centennial leadership medals to Alex 
Harnum of Regina and Imogene Watt of Melfort. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Jean Meckling of Regina was named 
honorary life member, and Jean Miskamin of Nipawin received 
special recognition with the presentation of the Bob Pedde 
Memorial Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been some time since I was in a room with 
more enthusiasm and smiles. Following the presentations, I was 
invited to stay for the dance that capped off the evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 
the nominees, the award winners, and everyone involved in 
Special Olympics Saskatchewan for a great event. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, a word to our 
guests. We are about to go into the proceeding known as oral 
questions, and in this proceeding it participates as a very 
competitive debate. And one of the rules of the Assembly is that 
only members can participate. So I would ask all our guests to 
refrain from applauding even though you know that our 
members love to be applauded, but so that the proceedings can 
proceed in the fashion that we have and obeying our own 
particular rules. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week I introduced a Bill to repeal section 13.4 of The Labour 
Standards Act, known as government-directed hours. Even the 
president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour wonders 
why the NDP [New Democratic Party] isn’t supporting this 
Bill. In today’s Leader-Post Larry Hubich questions why the 
NDP are wrapping the repeal of section 13.4 into another Bill, 
and I quote from his article: 
 

“Is the objective to obscure and deflect criticism away 
from their cowardly act? They can’t have this on its face, 
they’ve got to hide it inside another bill?” 

 
Mr. Speaker, Larry Hubich thinks the NDP should pass our Bill. 
Is this something we can count on from the minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting the 
member opposite yesterday was quizzing me on why I hadn’t 
introduced a Bill. And now he’s saying, why bother? Support 
mine. And this is the way they have treated everything. It 

depends on the issue, who’s in the gallery, whom they’re 
speaking to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we were doing the repeal of 13.4, we took 
the opportunity to review the legislation to do any updating of 
language and to clarify some titles where legislation had 
changed but we had missed updating some titles, so we added 
some other housekeeping issues with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today the Saskatchewan Business Council issued a 
news release that says Bill 87 will give the Labour Relations 
Board, and I quote, “sweeping search and seizure powers.” 

 
The council asserts that this power exceeds that of the police. It 
appears Bill 87 gives the LRB [Labour Relations Board] more 
leeway to conduct a search than the Criminal Code of Canada 
gives police. Section 487 of the Criminal Code lays out criteria 
police meet in order to conduct a search. Bill 87 fails to outline 
any such criteria that the LRB must meet before a search can be 
conducted. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why are these changes 
necessary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, about two Fridays ago in 
a scrum made some comments and I’d like to quote, and quote: 
 

We don’t need to have legislation a different balance here 
between worker and employer than there is anywhere else. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the amendments to the 
Labour Relations Board to access workplaces, this is not a 
radical move. It is not unique. This is allowed in six 
jurisdictions across Canada — Alberta, British Columbia, 
Manitoba, Newfoundland and Labrador, Ontario, and the 
federal government. Mr. Speaker, it’s not unique. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
point here is that there doesn’t appear to be anything broken 
with the current system. Is the Minister of Labour saying that 
this NDP government does not trust the courts to make the 
proper decision in cases like these where warrants may be 
required? Does she not trust employers? What problems will 
Bill 87 fix? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, one of the clearest 
solutions that we are looking for for the Labour Relations Board 
. . . And I will say that the members opposite have asked a 
number of written questions over the last two years respecting 
the length of the board rendering decisions. Mr. Speaker, part of 
the role of this is not to expand the powers, it defines the 
powers and makes them clearly laid out; powers that the board 
already utilizes and has to proceed with the cases, be able to 
render their decisions in a timely fashion, and not have to go 
through the judicial reviews that have become commonplace at 
the board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill 87 does give to the director or the Chair of the 
LRB additional powers. So the question to the minister is quite 
simple. She throws accusations across the floor, but she does 
not answer the question. 
 
This Bill before us in this Legislative Assembly will make 
significant changes to The Trade Union Act. If the minister 
can’t answer this question, then why did she bring Bill 87 to 
this House? 
 
Again to the minister: who asked for these changes, and what 
problems will they fix? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, again we are seeing 
extended periods of time where there is more complicated 
cases, there is pre-hearing information that is needed. Mr. 
Speaker, these are powers that the board currently utilizes 
which are often called, or at times called and taken before 
judicial reviews. Mr. Speaker, we are going to clearly define the 
powers of the board so we can improve the processes that are 
currently at the board, and get quicker and more timely 
decisions for the parties involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 
the election the Premier promised there would be no changes to 
labour legislation in this province without full consultation. 
That was before the election, Mr. Speaker. Now after the 
election the minister introduces these Bills without having 
consulted with affected parties. Say one thing, do another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please stand in her place and do 
her job. Will she tell this Assembly who asked for the changes 
that are set out in Bill 87 and what is she trying to fix if this 
system isn’t broken? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I will say to the member 
opposite, he should be aware of how processes have changed in 
this Assembly and he should stick to the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The legislation was tabled in the fall session. There was a 
number of months before the spring session starts. We have had 
ample time for any type of input that parties wanted to give on 
the legislation. We also have a process of policy committees 
and, Mr. Speaker, the new process is in place. We will follow 
that process. And we have received a great deal of input on this 
piece of legislation and others. Mr. Speaker, I have always met 
with stakeholders. I value the input from stakeholders and, Mr. 
Speaker, I will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 
The Premier has stated in his letter that there will be, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . no . . . [legislative] changes would occur without 
extensive consultations with all stakeholders. 

 
The Saskatchewan Business Council and other leading people 
in this province claim that they were not consulted on Bill 87. 
They have put this forward. Will the Premier stand and talk to 
this Assembly and guarantee the people that are affected that 
there was consultation or will he ask his minister to pull Bill 87 
until proper consultation takes place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I met with the 
Saskatchewan Business Council; Mr. Speaker, I met with the 
Business Council. They were quite clear in their comments on 
this legislation, on additional hours, and also on Bill 86 . Mr. 
Speaker, they were quite clear. I understood quite clearly what 
they said. That’s part of our consultations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been very open with meeting with 
stakeholders. There has been ample time between when the 
legislation was tabled and this session when it will be passed, 
Mr. Speaker, and I will continue to meet with stakeholders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Contracts with Angie and Jim Fergusson 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Angie Fergusson is a long-time 
government and New Democratic Party employee. She has been 
hired as the director of the provincial cabinet office in 
Saskatoon for a salary of $91,500. Mr. Speaker, Angie 
Fergusson replaces one Murray Gross who according to page 88 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2829 

of the 2003-04 Public Accounts salary was $63,369. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier explain why the new director of 
the provincial cabinet office in Saskatoon is earning almost 50 
per cent more than the old one? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to take this 
question on behalf of the government today. And I want to say 
first of all to the member opposite and to the Assembly, that 
Ms. Fergusson is, Ms. Fergusson is being hired exactly within 
the same grid that that position has held now for a number of 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Fergusson is coming to . . . Mrs. Fergusson is coming to the 
job, Mr. Speaker, at a level that is not at the top of the grid. She 
brings to the job, Mr. Speaker, organizational development 
management skills from SaskEnergy. She’s worked as a 
director of human services with STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she is a university graduate with a Commerce 
degree with great distinction, Mr. Speaker. She has an 
exceptionally good understanding of the social and business 
climate in the city of Saskatoon and we’re very pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, to have her as one of our employees at the cabinet 
office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, salary ranges for positions in the 
Premier’s office are set by order in council. The person Angie 
Fergusson is replacing held the title special advisor to the 
cabinet. According to the government’s own table of salary 
ranges, that title comes up with a salary of 65,856. That means 
Angie Fergusson is making over $25,000 more than the 
prescribed salary ranges. Why, Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier 
ignoring his own law and determining on . . . NDP patronage an 
appointee $25,000 more than the prescribed salary, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the facts about Mrs. 
Fergusson are these, Mr. Speaker. The facts are these, that Mrs. 
Fergusson is replacing the position that was previously held by 
Doug Zolinsky, not Murray Gross. And the position that 
Murray Zolinsky held, Mr. Speaker, had a top range of $92,000 
a year. Ms. Fergusson is getting less than the top of the range, 
Mr. Speaker, and she’s coming to work, coming to work in the 
cabinet office, Mr. Speaker, to do the work of managing the 
community of Saskatoon. The member opposite says one thing, 
Mr. Speaker, but the facts are something different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier talks about 
facts and qualifications. I’ll tell you about facts and 
qualifications. Jim and Angie Fergusson appear to have become 
the first family of NDP patronage. This couple is taking over a 
quarter of a million dollars in taxpayers’ money. This is at a 
time when working people across Saskatchewan are being 
asked to show restraint, and for what, Mr. Speaker. Jim 
Fergusson is getting $160,000 a year to answer the phone once 
a week. Angie Fergusson is getting more than $91,000 for her 
job — $25,000 more than the salary range calls for. Why is 
there one rule when you’re an NDP supporter, and another for 
everyone else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
hugely troubled, Mr. Speaker, by the comment that the member 
. . . hugely troubled by the comment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I am troubled by the 
comment because what we have here today, Mr. Speaker, is we 
see the previous Conservative leader taking the high road, Mr. 
Speaker. And the previous Conservative leader said on Monday 
that the Saskatchewan Party MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], quote: 
 

. . . Elwin Hermanson . . . [says that] the party does not 
object . . . [with] the appointment [of Angie Fergusson] to 
what is essentially a political . . . [position]. 

 
Is what the previous leader of the Conservative Party said. And 
now, Mr. Speaker, the new role of the new Conservative Party 
that’s here across from us under the new leadership, Mr. 
Speaker, today attacks, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental issues of 
who gets employed, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, you should tread very, you 
should tread very tenderly, Mr. Speaker. You should tread very 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The Deputy Premier 
ought to continue with his remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The new Conservative Party should tread 
very carefully, Mr. Speaker, when they attack members of the 
public. Because you should not throw, Mr. Speaker, you should 
not throw stones when you live in glass houses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re examples on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
where in fact there have been situations where people have seen 
situations that are difficult, and on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Next question. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the Deputy Premier doesn’t 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

want to talk about Angie Fergusson any more, let’s talk about 
Mr. Fergusson. Mr. Speaker, former district health board Chair, 
Bob Bundon, had this to say about Mr. Fergusson’s departure. 
He said, Mr. Fergusson was, quote, “at the end of his string.” 
And he wanted to leave the Saskatoon Health District because 
“his . . . heart wasn’t in it.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would a man who’s heart isn’t in it anymore 
get $160,000 a year contract? How does that make up for your 
heart feelings, to answer the phone once a week? And what 
assurances do we have from the minister that Mr. Fergusson’s 
contract is not going to be renewed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on a number of occasions the 
Minister of Health and other members of this government have 
responded to this question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that the new Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t 
have any respect for the health boards, Mr. Speaker. We know 
that because they’ve said on a number of occasions, Mr. 
Speaker, that if they were ever to be in the chairs of 
government, what they would do, Mr. Speaker, is they would 
fold up the entire health district boards in the province and they 
would do away with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that isn’t the position that this administration and this 
government takes, Mr. Speaker. We respect the, we respect the 
decisions, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we 
recognize and support the work of the health district boards and 
Chairs across the province, Mr. Speaker. And for the member 
from Saskatoon to be speaking loudly about patronage, Mr. 
Speaker, well I have here, Mr. Speaker, June 25, 1980, where 
Mr. Morgan, in quotes, Mr. Speaker: “Mr. Morgan receives the 
patronage appointment,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
The Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote, 
Mr. Speaker, because the member from Saskatoon Southeast 
enjoys quoting from their newspaper on a regular basis. And 
here, Mr. Speaker, the quote is, Morgan says his new job, now 
the patronage appointment after 10 years, lawyer receives the 
patronage appointment to the legal aid commitment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased the 
members opposite are so capable in their research. I’d like 
nothing better than to trade that patronage appointment for the 
one that I received. 
 

Mr. Speaker, let’s review this situation a little bit. A $60,000 
severance payment, a . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if they want to talk about a small 
severance package, let’s listen to what this one is. A $60,000 
severance payment, $160,000 consulting contract for which he 
answers one or two phone calls a week. All for a man who is at 
the end of his string, for a man whose whole heart wasn’t in it, 
and his spouse earning $25,000 more than the salary scale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the same story. Will this government commit 
to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please, members. We 
must allow the questions to be put. We must allow the 
responses to be given. And they should, all ought to be audible. 
 
The Chair recognizes the . . . Order, please. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, how can these salaries be 
justified while working people are being forced to adhere to 
rigid salary guidelines? And will the government today commit 
to not renewing Jim Fergusson’s contract any further? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that the new Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
we know that they don’t support the health districts in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. They don’t support them. And what they 
would do, Mr. Speaker, is they’d roll them up and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Just allow the 
response to be given. The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the members 
opposite, this new Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t 
support the district health boards in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t support the work that the administration within 
those health districts do. They don’t support the structure of the 
health districts because they’d roll them up, Mr. Speaker. And 
so it’s not unusual for them to be standing in their places today 
and saying, Mr. Speaker, that they want Mr. Fergusson’s salary 
reduced or reverted or removed completely. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, those decisions were made by the district 
health boards. We support them, Mr. Speaker. We recognize 
them. 
 
And unlike, Mr. Speaker, unlike the member opposite who 
received his patronage appointment, Mr. Speaker, in 1990, I 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

will . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In 1988. In 1988. Mr. Speaker, we’ll let 
the district health boards do their work in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Low Water Levels at Crooked Lake and Long Lake 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the annual debate between cottage owners at Crooked 
and Round Lake is once again pitting First Nations and cottage 
owners against each other. 
 
The cottage owners are concerned with low water levels again 
this summer. And, Mr. Speaker, as usual at this time of year, 
water levels are starting to go down. 
 
First Nations are asking for compensation for flood damages. 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, I know what part of the answer will be 
— it’s a federal jurisdiction problem. Well, Mr. Speaker, this 
has gone on for three years and we still have the same problem. 
 
To the minister, Mr. Speaker: what is the NDP government 
going to do to help solve this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Clearly it’s important that we let the negotiations go on. We had 
success last year; we had an interim agreement. This year we’re 
hopeful again. But it’s very important with these long standing 
out issues, that we resolve them in a way that’s suitable for 
everyone. And that’s what’s really important to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the same 
answer I got last year; that’s exactly the same answer I got from 
another minister the year before. The only difference is the 
answers are getting shorter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time someone dealt with this issue. We know 
that a lawyer from Saskatoon has been appointed to oversee . . . 
to resolve the issue but the provincial government has a 
responsibility to the people of Crooked Lake and Round Lake 
to see that the resolve comes and happens. This is the third year, 
Mr. Speaker. We have boat docks three feet out of the water in 
the middle of the summer, we have cottages losing value out 

there. The problem just keeps magnifying, Mr. Speaker, as time 
goes on. 
 
Will the minister tell us or the Minister of SaskWater tell us, 
what are the NDP doing to promote a resolve to this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear the 
opposition over there, the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
here, are saying one thing . . . but let’s get the facts straight. The 
federal government here is working hard to resolve this issue. 
We’re there to support them but the federal people, the federal 
government, is working hard to resolve this issue. It’s a very 
important one to all the people in the Qu’Appelle Valley. And 
we’ll work hard to resolve this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think the minister’s fully aware of what’s going 
on with the problem. There was no agreement with Crooked 
and Round lakes last year. There were other agreements but 
there’s never been an agreement with Crooked and Round Lake. 
 
And maybe, Mr. Speaker, that shows exactly why this problem 
continues to grow and go on. The minister doesn’t even 
understand the problem, he isn’t paying attention to the 
problem, and once again we’re going to have low-water levels 
at Crooked and Round Lake. It’s affecting tourism, it’s 
affecting fish stocks, it’s hurting the business owners along the 
lakes, and it’s especially hurting the value of cabins and 
cottages along Crooked and Round Lake. 
 
Doesn’t the minister, Mr. Speaker, think it’s time they took a 
leadership role and tried to prod the federal government into 
dealing with this problem once and for all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, over there, the opposition, 
the Conservatives are alarming people of doom and gloom. 
Clearly, we are working hard at this. There’s many stakeholders 
involved. We have to make sure we get the facts straight with 
very little help from the opposition here who are just concerned 
about getting doom and gloom out there. 
 
Now the federal government’s working hard. They’ve got new 
people working on this and we’re there to support the federal 
government in resolving this issue to the satisfaction of 
everyone. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 122 — The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 122, 
The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 122, The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 123 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 123, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill 123, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time. 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 124 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 124, 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation that Bill No. 124, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
government and table responses to written questions no. 1,027 
through 1,032 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,027 to 1,032 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to address our government’s ongoing commitment to ensure 
safe supplies of high-quality water for Saskatchewan people. 
After these remarks I will move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in July 2002, as a result of our government’s 
long-term safe drinking water strategy, The Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority Act was passed in the legislature. The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority legislation was proclaimed 
on October 1, 2002. The Authority brought together waste 
management . . . water management responsibilities from three 
separate agencies: SaskWater, Saskatchewan Environment, and 
the Saskatchewan Wetland Conservation Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is pleased to report to you today 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2833 

that since the Watershed Authority’s inception two and one-half 
years ago, it has accomplished and will continue to accomplish 
excellent initiatives aimed at managing and protecting the 
quality and quantity of Saskatchewan’s water. We have 
completed the public consultation process to develop a water 
conservation plan made for Saskatchewan which will be 
finalized by year-end. We have developed the watershed and 
aquifer planning model for Saskatchewan, and planning 
activities involving local people are under way in seven key 
areas of the province. And we are actively working to develop a 
process to monitor and report on the health of our watersheds. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we have identified amendments to The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act to strengthen the 
Watershed Authority’s capacity to ensure proper management 
of our water resources into Saskatchewan’s second century. 
 
Part of the Authority’s mandate, Mr. Speaker, is to protect the 
province’s watersheds. This includes helping landowners 
resolve disputes over the use and diversion of water. At times 
disputes do occur. Saskatchewan people who suffer injury, loss, 
or damage due to drainage works have the right to file 
complaints under the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act. 
 
Authority employees have had considerable success in 
resolving complaints between landowners using an informal 
process, Mr. Speaker. So we are refocusing the complaint 
process so that rather than starting with a more formal process, 
the first effort is to resolve disputes . . . will be on an informal 
basis. Civil provisions to the complaint procedure are added to 
enhance the authority’s ability to enforce its orders and the 
orders of the Water Appeal Board. Mr. Speaker, we believe that 
these changes will make the complaint process more efficient 
and at the same time more effective. 
 
A further amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will require that 
fees collected under the legislation shall be established by 
regulation. This move will ensure greater scrutiny and 
transparency of the process. Saskatchewan has a legal history 
regarding the ownership of the beds and shores of water bodies, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Both The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act and The 
Provincial Lands Act reserve for the province and prevent 
disposition of any interest in its beds and shores. However, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to allow the province the benefit of a federal 
capital works program that could benefit Saskatchewan’s 
commercial fishing industry, amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority Act and a consequential amendment to 
The Provincial Lands Act are necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allowing the federal government limited 
conditional administration and control of Saskatchewan’s beds 
and shores for the purpose of building or expanding wharfs in 
northern Saskatchewan is good for our commercial fishing 
industry. It’s good for the people in northern Saskatchewan, and 
it’s good for a green and prosperous economy. 
 
Now our government is committed to improving the health of 
our watersheds. Mr. Speaker, this includes our groundwater. 
Protecting and providing technical support for managing 
aquifers is important for Saskatchewan people. Having reliable 
groundwater data is also important. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is 

why we are changing the legislation to allow the licensing of 
contractors as opposed to the current method of licensing 
drilling equipment. Contractors in the drilling industry were 
consulted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they strongly support this 
measure. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 
Act, 2005 will streamline and modernize provisions currently 
found in The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act. The 
provisions of that Act will be significantly restructured. It will 
include the incorporations of provisions of The Ground Water 
Conservation Act which will be repealed. 
 
As we move into Saskatchewan’s second century, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, these amendments will strengthen the watershed’s 
authority and strengthen water management. Mr. Speaker, thank 
you and I now move the second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 118, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and do a debate on second reading of this fairly sized Bill 
that they talk about. Went through a bit of it, but there’s quite a 
bit of to go through. 
 
Every time the minister gets up of SaskWater,  they always tell 
they want to improve the quality of water, that this Bill is to 
improve the quality. Well sometimes I wonder because he’s 
been saying that for years. I was hoping that they’ve always 
had, that were working on the quality, good quality water here 
in the past. I don’t know why they’re tinkering with some of 
these Bills. 
 
Now some of the things he talked about was fees in regulations 
again. And whenever this government starts doing something 
like that, again you always know that the fees are probably 
going to go up. You know, it seems like this government has a 
consistent pattern of every year fees going up. 
 
I was at a meeting in Osler not that long ago dealing with 
SaskWater and a water pipeline there. And a couple of 
councillors and the mayor informed me that their water fees had 
gone up 55 per cent in one year. That’s a huge, huge 
adjustment, and they were finding it very hard to pass that on to 
the ratepayers. And when that pipeline was put in, there was 
talk about oh, it would be just cost recovery, but you know the 
fees probably wouldn’t be going up all that much. Well I call 
going up 55 per cent quite a bit at that end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that always makes me a little nervous on this side when this 
government always talks about adjusting fees in regulations at 
that end of it. You can pretty near guarantee that they’re 
probably going to be going up. 
 
And also, talked about consulting with drillers and said they 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

were quite in favour of that. And if they are, that’s fine. But I’ll 
tell you what, on this side of the House we’d like to check with 
them because this government kind of has a reputation of 
saying one thing and doing another. So saying that they 
consulted with the stakeholders in this, we’d kind of like to 
check on this side. I mean, you never know. It’s always . . . to 
make sure that these guys are doing what they’re saying at that 
end of it because it has been proven in the past that they haven’t 
consulted on some Bills that have gone through here and said 
that they did extensive talk on stakeholders. 
 
And there was . . . a member from North Battleford was talking. 
I think he’d introduced a Bill and then had to pull it, if I 
remember right, dealing with the municipal Act because he 
didn’t consult that much with the municipal leaders. And I 
remember he had to adjust it from last fall till now. So you 
know, that’s just one example that I can bring up here, at that 
end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s different Bills. There’s a labour Bill that they’ve 
had to readjust since then, Mr. Speaker, at that end of it. 
 
So that’s why that at this side of the House, we like to do our 
homework, and we can take our time with the Bills. And so 
with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to make sure that the 
government did consult on it and put it out to the stakeholders. 
So at that time, I’d like to adjourn debate on this second 
reading. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment 
of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 96 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act has not been substantially revised in 
several years. As a result, the current Act no longer accurately 
reflects the operation of the Legislative Assembly, particularly 
with respect to the expanded committee responsibilities under 
the new rules of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Accordingly this new Bill will repeal the existing Act and 
introduce new legislation that will update the procedures of this 
Legislative Assembly to better reflect current practices. Mr. 
Speaker, revisions are proposed in this Bill to consolidate and 
update the allowance and remuneration provisions of the Act, 
and to set out the powers and duties of the Board of Internal 
Economy to better recognize its functions as a management 
board of the Legislative Assembly. 
 

In accordance with the existing practice, the Bill will now make 
all such allowances and payments subject to board directives 
under the direction of the Speaker. Changes are also being 
introduced in this Bill that update the functions and duties of the 
various officers and employees of the Legislative Assembly 
under the direction of the Speaker and the Clerk of the 
Assembly. This includes the introduction of the newly created 
Legislative Assembly service as the organizational unit within 
which the various employees of this Legislative Assembly will 
provide their valuable services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the ongoing 
co-operative effort in the preparation of this Bill with your 
office and that of the Clerk, and the Legislative Counsel and the 
Law Clerk, soon to be parliamentary counsel and the law clerk. 
In addition the members of the Board of Internal Economy, the 
all-party management board of this Legislative Assembly 
played a significant role in the development of this legislation. 
Mr. Speaker, this Legislative Assembly operates both as a 
historic sovereign body exercising ancient rites and as a modern 
institution that needs to efficiently serve both the members of 
the Legislative Assembly and the public which they represent. 
 
I am confident that all members of the House can support this 
Bill as an important step forward in ensuring both the sovereign 
independence of this Legislative Assembly and its continuing 
relevance and efficiency as a 21st century institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and the Executive 
Council of Saskatchewan and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 96, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise today and speak briefly on the 
Legislative Assembly Act of Saskatchewan and the Executive 
Council and making consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined in her opening remarks in 
regard to the second reading of this legislation, it has indeed 
been some time since the legislation governing the functioning 
and rules of the Assembly has been updated. And, Mr. Speaker, 
as members are aware in this Chamber, there have been some 
substantial changes in the way we are conducting the affairs of 
the province in terms of our organizational structures, including 
moving to a fall session and standing field committees that have 
increased authority to investigate and make decisions about 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed appropriate that this legislation be 
updated and amended to reflect those current practices and to 
make sure that the governing legislation is indeed in harmony 
with what the practices are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also outlines various functions and 
remunerations to members and other officers of the Assembly, 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2835 

and we too think that that’s important, that these issues be 
addressed in a forthright and transparent way, and also in a way 
that is fair to all those involved. Mr. Speaker, it’s a fairly 
significant bit of legislation, and we will want to make sure that 
nothing has been overlooked in its preparation. And in order to 
do that, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 97 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 

sur une modification corrélative découlant de la loi intitulée 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 
move second reading of The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Consequential Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are aware, through the co-operation 
of both sides of this Legislative Assembly and your office, as 
well as that of the Clerk and the Legislative Counsel and the 
Law Clerk, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act, 2005 has been introduced for consideration by this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
This additional Bill is required to make bilingual consequential 
amendment to The Jury Act, 1998 that will update the reference 
in that Act to the new Bill. I would note for the Legislative 
Assembly that it is the intention of this government to pass an 
entirely bilingual Act based on the new Act in an upcoming 
session of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to make a 
consequential amendment to a certain Act rising from the 
enactment of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act, 2005. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 
97, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak briefly to Bill No. 97 with the consequential 
amendments to, really, Bill 96 and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s appropriate when we’re in the process of 
updating legislation that we also make sure that this very 
important legislation is also done in a way that everyone in the 
province can understand it. And it’s very much paired with Bill 
No. 96, and therefore to keep these Bills moving through the 
process together I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Melfort has moved 
debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 116 — The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Osteopathic Practice 
Repeal Act, 2005. Mr. Speaker, this Bill proposes repealing The 
Osteopathic Practice Act. It does so for two reasons: one the 
Act is obsolete; and two, there are currently no osteopathic 
physicians practicing in Saskatchewan nor have there been for 
many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Act remains in place it would be difficult for 
a Canadian-trained osteopath to practise in Saskatchewan. This 
is because licensing provisions in the existing Act require that 
their education program be approved by the American 
Association of Osteopaths. 
 
However, osteopathic medical training in the United States has 
changed over the years to include a broader scope of practice. 
Consequently a Canadian-trained osteopath would not likely be 
eligible for licensure under the current Act. Graduates from an 
American program could potentially be licensed in 
Saskatchewan, but they would be unable to practise to the full 
scope of their education. 
 
The repeal of the Act will not prevent an osteopath from 
establishing practice in the province as long as they do not 
engage in any treatment that encroaches on the scope of practice 
of any other regulated professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to an accessible, 
quality health system. We will provide leadership in making the 
changes needed to strengthen and sustain the system for the 
future. So. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of 
The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act, 2005. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 116, The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act 
be now read a second time. I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to respond to the minister’s second reading of Bill No. 
116, The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act. Regarding this Act 
and the repeal of it, after looking at the Act and listening to the 
minister, the fact that there are no osteopathic practitioners in 
the province and haven’t been for a number of years — I don’t 
believe there are any . . . I believe France is about the only area 
that this is actively practised — it doesn’t seem that there is 
much need for this Bill, or the existing Bill, and it seems like 
there is a need for this Bill to repeal it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would move to adjourn debate 
because we do want to just check a couple of issues with it and 
make sure that it is all the way it’s supposed to be. So, Mr. 



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

Deputy Speaker, at this time I’d adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 
Head-Milestone has moved debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 114 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
I had an opportunity to speak very briefly yesterday to this Bill. 
And as I said yesterday, that the minister when he did the 
second reading comments had indicated that this is basically a 
Bill, in his opinion, which is mostly a housekeeping Bill. And 
I’d also said yesterday that I would differ with that opinion on 
this Bill. There are some fairly substantive parts to this Bill that 
deal with the structuring of our school division and the forced 
amalgamation of our school divisions. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel that perhaps that this Bill is 
the Bill that gives the minister the authority to actually force the 
amalgamation of school divisions. Even though he hasn’t said 
that, he had made some comments that would lead one to 
believe that he may not have had as much authority as he 
needed to make these substantive and very significant changes 
to boundaries of school divisions. And therefore it is required 
that this Bill be passed so that, to legitimize some of things that 
this government is doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Normally when this government introduces a Bill, you can 
count on that day a news release is issued to explain to the 
media and people of the province what the Bill is about. I 
searched through the government news releases, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to find the news release that accompanied this Bill and 
I was unable to find such a news release. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I wonder why. 
 
Mr. Hart: — And exactly. I wonder why. I did find the news 
release dated February 14 in which the minister took it upon 
himself to announce the dates of . . . the election date for the 
new school divisions before any legislation has passed this 
Assembly. He also talked about establishing a panel to 
recommend a framework of local accountability and community 
involvement in the schools. 
 

The news release went on. The minister talked about the 
three-pronged program that the government is calling the 
government’s education equity initiative. It’s a three-phased 
approach which includes restructuring of schools, the forced 
amalgamation; improving our system of school operating 
grants, which we have seen very little of; and determining a 
long-term solution to education property tax, which we have 
seen absolutely nothing from this government on. In fact it’s an 
issue that they run from and hide even though they said would 
address that issue in their 2003 election campaign. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I must have hit a sore spot because when I 
mention that, I hear the Minister of Government Relations 
chirping form his seat, but if he would only chirp less and 
actually take some action to address this problem, Mr. Speaker, 
I think the people of this province would certainly be much 
better off, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So as I said, it leads one to wonder why this Bill is being 
downplayed to the extent it is. Yet when you look through the 
Bill, there are some very significant amendments to The 
Education Act which will allow this government to put in place 
their forced amalgamation. And what will these provisions do, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well what they will do is they will allow 
for elections of school boards for school divisions that don’t 
exist. And they won’t exist until January 1, 2006. 
 
It allows them to hire a director of education and the 
secretary-treasurer so at least they have some staff. Now we’ll 
have this convoluted system where we have current boards 
operating a number of school divisions, and then we have this 
other super board which has very little staff, very little ability to 
plan, a very short time frame, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to put all 
these pieces together so that they have an effective school 
division as of January 1, 2006. 
 
And many people across this province are asking, what is the 
rush? Why is this government in such a hurry to accomplish this 
forced amalgamation of school divisions? Well that is a good 
question, and we have never heard this government give a 
legitimate answer. Sure, when that question was raised with the 
Minister of Learning in last fall’s sitting during committee, the 
minister of Education used the feeble excuse that, well our 
education system is in dire straits and therefore we need to take 
some drastic action to fix it because the sky was falling in. It 
reminded me of Chicken Little going around the province and 
hollering, the sky is falling in, the sky is falling in. 
 
Yet prior to that point in time, whenever concerns were raised 
with the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education system, 
this government was so proud of pointing to increased funding 
and telling the people of the province, and anyone else who 
would listen, what a great K to 12 system we have. Now in the 
matter of a couple of months, the sky is falling in on the 
education system and on the K to 12 education system, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And one would have to wonder, how did we arrive at this 
situation where we have a forced amalgamation of school 
divisions for no apparent reason? At least the haste of what is 
. . . the pace that is being set out by this government. They 
cannot legitimize and provide satisfactory information. There is 
disarray, particularly in rural Saskatchewan because that’s the 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

area that’s going to be the most impacted by this forced 
amalgamation. School boards are wondering, parents are 
wondering, administrators are wondering, well you know, well 
what was the need for such a massive change and a massive 
change so quickly. And I think what one needs to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is step back and look at what has transpired in 
the last 18 months, and perhaps we’ll get a clue as to why we 
are in this mess that we have here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Back during the 2003 election campaign, the NDP, the Premier 
said that their election platform could receive the Boughen 
report. And the Boughen report was a report of Ray Boughen 
and his commission that this government set up a year or two 
earlier to study this whole area of the way we fund the K to 12 
system. And his report . . . He was going to deliver his report in 
early 2004, which he did. And as I said, the NDP and the 
Premier, they said their plan could accept the Boughen report. 
Well it could accept it, except it had no ability to deal with it. 
And so there was a problem. 
 
The Premier had been at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] for a couple of years and said as far as 
education tax on property that the status quo was not on. I was 
at those conventions, and a number of my caucus colleagues 
were at those conventions. There was 1,800 SARM delegates 
heard the Premier on two different conventions, on two 
different occasions say that the status quo was not on, that 
something will be done to address the education tax on 
property. 
 
So what we had in January 2004, we had Ray Boughen 
delivering his report, putting out a plan. Certainly there was 
some stakeholder groups said there was some problems. It 
wasn’t a perfect plan, but it was a plan. And there was . . . Some 
of the recommendations were very reasonable. One of the 
recommendations — no. 5, I believe it was — talked a bit about 
some restructuring. 
 
Well what the Minister of Learning, when he was pressured — 
and I believe this is probably what happened — when the 
Minister of Learning was pressured to come up with a response 
to the whole issue of property tax or education tax on property, 
he looked through the report and said, well okay, here’s 
something that we can do. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I say, you have to 
wonder, well why did we end up in this. And I think one might, 
with very little imagination, may be able to understand the 
process. And that’s what I would like to outline — what I think 
perhaps may have happened and why we ended up in this 
situation. 
 
As I said, the pressure was building in early 2004 for this 
government to do something about property tax. And I would, 
one could imagine that the Premier would on a regular basis 
remind the Minister of Learning that, hey we’ve got to come up 
with something and that’s your responsibility. And the Minister 
of Learning, being a fairly new member to cabinet, saw this as 
not only as a challenge but an opportunity to come up with a 
creative solution. 
 
And I’m sure, you know, that the Minister of Learning, as most 
cabinet ministers . . . Regardless of what party is in power, I 

understand that the workload as a cabinet minister is fairly 
heavy and probably would require taking some of your work 
home with you. And so I could imagine that perhaps this was 
weighing on the Minister of Learning. And so he took this file 
home with him one evening and studied it and tried to come up 
with some ideas as to how to address this situation. 
 
And one could imagine that maybe he fell into a troubled sleep 
and had a bad dream, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And he dreamt 
about, how are we going to address this situation of education 
tax on property. Well he thought to himself, perhaps that first of 
all we have to create a problem. Because, I mean, up until this 
point in time we didn’t have a real problem as far as . . . other 
than the education portion and the way we fund it. But if we’re 
not prepared to address that part of it we have to take another 
tack, and that would be maybe amalgamating school divisions. 
 
Because that is a message that this government likes to put out 
across this province on a regular basis. We saw it with the 
attempt to force the amalgamation of rural municipalities where 
their message is that out in rural Saskatchewan there is far too 
much government. Far too much government, and it’s costing 
the people of this province a fortune — that’s the message that 
this government puts out on a regular basis. And nothing could 
be further from the truth. 
 
Certainly there is some . . . we need to make some adjustments. 
That is happening. It could be encouraged by some moves on 
behalf of the government, and things would happen. We see 
some of the voluntary amalgamations in school divisions. Some 
of that, more of that could have been accomplished by a bit of 
prodding and some leadership from this government. 
 
So that I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this bad dream 
that the Minister of Learning was having, he was saying, 
thought perhaps if we create the problem that the sky is falling 
in on our education system, our K to 12 system, and then we 
can come to the rescue, and we’ll carry the torch of 
amalgamation, and that will be the solution to fix all the 
problems in the K to 12 education system. 
 
And the more the minister dreamt, the better the plan got. He 
could see himself leading the charge across the province. And 
you could just see it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There is the Minister 
of Learning, Chicken Little, and the amalgamation choir 
spreading out across this province, singing the glories of forced 
amalgamation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And he took that plan to 
the caucus, not thinking that they would buy in. But they were 
desperate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so therefore they said, well 
we haven’t got anything else, so let’s go for. 
 
I mean, this government is very prone to using children to 
bolster their initiatives. So we saw it out at Belle Plaine, when 
they bussed the children out there. And they put up the tent, and 
they had the big event with the imaginary ethanol plant. 
 
So we’ll use that plan. We’ll go out to Balgonie. We’ll gather 
up all the students, and we’ll bring our officials out there and 
the media, and we’ll make a big media production of this 
amalgamation which is going to cure all the ills in the K to 12 
system, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing could be further from the 



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

truth. This forced amalgamation is creating a lot of uncertainty 
out there. It’s creating a lot of concern amongst current boards 
of education, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s creating division and concern amongst their 
Saskatchewan School Board Association. They’re being tasked 
with putting this plan into effect. 
 
They don’t have the proper legislation. At the time the minister 
announced this ill-conceived plan, he told us, told the public 
that the only thing that needed to be done was a small piece of 
legislation to change the election date of school divisions. And 
so last fall we saw Bill 80. Well now we seen a number of Bills 
that are impacting on this whole process. And why are we 
seeing these Bills? Because that government hasn’t done their 
homework. 
 
This is the same . . . we’re seeing the same scenario as we saw 
with the Minister of Labour’s ill-conceived attempt to revive 
the section thirteen four in The Labour Standards Act. That was 
another situation were this government was desperate. They 
needed to find something to bring to the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, so they reached in their grab bag to see 
what they had, and they went forward. And this is the same 
scenario here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So now we’re faced with this situation where the government 
has to set up a coordinating committee to help with the 
amalgamation, something they never had to do before when we 
had voluntary amalgamations because those school divisions 
that undertook voluntary amalgamation set up their own 
committees. 
 
[15:15] 
 
We can look at a model that many people have looked at and 
referred to as far as amalgamation, the amalgamation of the 
school divisions that surround Regina and the Qu’Appelle 
Valley. They call themselves the Qu’Appelle Valley School 
Division now. Those three school divisions that were involved 
in that amalgamation, they took three years to amalgamate. 
They had 30-some committees set up to look at all the various 
issues. They took ownership of amalgamation, and they got it 
right. There was very few complaints. In fact my office received 
no complaints and a good chunk of my constituency was 
affected by that amalgamation. 
 
So there was the model. And the key was, they took their time. 
They worked at it for three years, not ten or ten months or 
twelve months or less than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so 
therefore, you would wonder why people in rural Saskatchewan 
are concerned. 
 
Well they have good reason to be concerned, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And not only that, in the process of this whole 
amalgamation debate, what did the Minister of Learning do? He 
tried to build a case that the sky was falling in on the education 
system. He insulted the board members of the school boards. 
He insulted the teachers. And he insulted members of this 
Legislative Assembly when they challenged him on his actions, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this started as a move of desperation in response to the 
whole issue of education tax on property. And it’s got out of 

hand to the point where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of my 
greatest fears is that it’ll affect what happens in the classrooms 
across this province. I’m afraid that through this whole process, 
we may see children — particularly children with special 
educational needs — that won’t get the services that are 
required. They’ll fall through the cracks. And they, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will be the biggest victims of this ill-fated attempt of 
forced amalgamation . . . when it could have been 
accomplished, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through consultation with 
school divisions, some leadership and vision, and on behalf of 
this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as I said, I have that fear. I hope it doesn’t happen. But if 
we impact some of our students in our classrooms in a negative 
way, it’ll be on their conscience, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
we certainly have raised the issues on this side of the House. 
And if they fail to take notice of these issues, they will have to 
deal with them in the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise and speak on Bill 114, The Education Act 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is really unfortunate that we are going through 
this process of putting in place legislation after decisions have 
been made that have not been, in my opinion, in the best 
interests of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan has an excellent education system. The reason it 
does is because people have been empowered in this province 
to provide leadership and direction for the education system that 
serves our children so well. Mr. Speaker, that’s been a tradition 
that’s gone over decades of time and has proven to be a very 
good model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that this province is in transition. 
There is no doubt that there is an alarming movement of people 
away from rural locations to the cities and out of this province 
entirely. And this government has lacked any leadership in 
terms of dealing with the issues that are arising as a result of 
this movement of population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly no one would argue that the original 
configuration of school districts and divisions in this province 
should stay fixed forever. No one would argue that the number 
of school divisions that we had 30 years ago should be etched in 
stone and should stay in this province forever. But, Mr. 
Speaker, what we do not appreciate very often here in Regina is 
the ingenuity and the leadership and the commitment that 
people have to the education system right across this province, 
and certainly in rural Saskatchewan. And I would submit, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this legislation and these Bills that we’re 
going to talk about today — because they all have varying 
aspects on the same general topic, the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions in Saskatchewan — they largely are only 
involving rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a situation where we 
have decided in Regina, in our infinite wisdom, that the 
government knows best, the NDP government knows what’s 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

best for rural education in this province. And by and large, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there are no NDP members in rural 
Saskatchewan. They sit in Regina, and they sit in Saskatoon and 
the urban centres. And they look out and they survey the scene, 
and they decide from these urban locations that they know 
what’s best for the configuration of school districts in 
Saskatchewan and particularly in rural Saskatchewan. And they 
discount, they discount the years of commitment and leadership 
that have been made to the school system by community leaders 
over the years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s too bad that the decisions have been 
made, and this whole exercise feels for people in the system as 
a done deal, a fait accompli that is gone so far down the road 
that it is impossible to slow it up or stop it or change direction. 
And that’s really too bad because this government could learn a 
lesson if it truly consulted with people before it made these rash 
and impetuous decisions. Mr. Speaker, what this government 
may learn is that people out in the communities have a lot of 
insight, have a lot of wisdom, have a lot of knowledge about 
how things should be organized and restructured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in every part of this province, virtually, there has 
been the recognition that changes in the organizational structure 
should occur. There have been recognition that school divisions 
could best serve their students if they had an appropriate 
number of students in the division. 
 
In many school divisions there have been very heart-wrenching 
decisions made over the years about the continued viability of 
facilities. And many school divisions have looked at their 
communities and the facilities in them and made the 
heart-wrenching decision that they could no longer continue to 
have those facilities open. And closures have occurred in the 
past because community leaders were responsible, and they 
understood that sometimes, if they’re going to preserve the 
quality of the education system, that difficult and 
heart-wrenching decisions are going to have to be made from 
time to time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t been any different in regard to the 
amalgamation of school divisions. Divisions have voluntarily 
gone forward and talked to their neighbours, in many instances 
decided that their interests would be better served if they 
amalgamated their regions so that they could provide a greater 
mass, a critical mass, that would allow them to provide for a 
vast array of subject matter and support services that the 
children in their divisions needed. And that has proceeded very, 
very well on its own, thank you very much. But this NDP 
government in Regina has decided it was going to do what’s 
best and say, we’re going to impose these forced new divisions 
on the province of Saskatchewan, largely rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and when they have done this, it seems that 
there’s been almost a terrible rush to get this done. Now I can’t 
understand what the hurry has been because in the past when 
the voluntary amalgamations proceeded, in every single case, I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been the experience that 
it takes more time and it takes enough time in order to get the 
new dimension put together correctly. There are cultures that 
build up around the school division, around the division and the 
teachers and the students as to how they operate and conduct 
their affairs. There is a precedent, almost a heritage and a 

history, that becomes part and parcel of who and what a school 
division is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you make an amalgamation of 
different cultures and realities, it takes time to get those kinds of 
accommodations done correctly and properly. Mr. Speaker, in 
the past, divisions have found it’s taken anywhere from two to 
four years to properly discuss all the issues surrounding an 
amalgamation in order to get it right. And what we’ve done 
here is we’ve said it has to be done almost overnight and on a 
massive level. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s going to be very, very 
challenging for the school divisions for many years to come to 
rebuild that culture and trust that has been taken away from 
them by this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first when the government decided to do this, they 
came out with a theoretical map that virtually no one 
appreciated or liked. They came out with some sort of pretext 
about that there had to be so many students and you had to have 
so much mill rate and all the rest of these criteria for 
establishing these divisions. But the reality is that in many 
instances representations were made — in most instances, I 
would submit — that the boundaries that were proposed were 
not appropriate. And then they put another hearing process, 
again put together in haste, that went and went through with the 
illusion of listening to what people were saying, and at the end 
of the day changed very little. 
 
And so divisions are now being created that were not supported 
by the vast majority of school divisions that were being affected 
by it, but it’s imposed. The minister’s signature is on the order 
in council that says these new school divisions are going to be 
created. It’s a done deal. It’s past the fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a very diverse opinion in this province 
about the wisdom of doing this, and there was no 
acknowledgement of the diversity of that opinion. And there 
was no attempt to allow for people to come to a common 
consensus as to how this should proceed. It was simply jammed 
forward, and now we’re going to end up with a situation that is 
in effect irreversible. 
 
As a new critic for Learning, I’m also finding that there is a 
reluctant resignation across this province to the fact that this is 
going to proceed — a reluctant resignation. There is no 
enthusiasm. There is no joy about facing the challenges that are 
before the system. There is simply this reluctant resignation that 
this is a done deal, and we better make the best of it. 
 
And try as best we can from each of our perspectives — from 
the teachers, from the boards, from the parents — to say how 
can we make the best possible result happen out of this whole 
pressured situation. Because at the end of the day, what we’re 
all trying to do is something positive for the children. That is 
everyone except the NDP government, who hasn’t realized the 
impact that this is going to have on the system. And ultimately 
that affects the children. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time that these Bills move forward 
because there are decisions that are going to be . . . need to be 
made by certainly the school systems. They’re going to have to 
cope with this reality as best they can. Mr. Speaker, it is 
certainly with a heavy heart that I address these issues. I think 



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

any of the specific details and questions can be asked in 
committee. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important to note that the 
NDP government is going to bear the responsibility for the 
mess that they’re creating in this legislation. And I hope — I 
think everybody hopes and prays — that it’s going to have not 
as negative an impact on the children as it may have. And that’s 
because of the quality leaders in the education in this province 
who are going to pick up the mess that the NDP has laid on 
their laps and make it work in spite of this government. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re prepared to move this 
legislation and these related Bills forward to committee for 
further consideration. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — The question before 
the Assembly is for second reading. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Carried. Second 
reading of the Bill. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill 
114, The Education Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — It has been moved 
by the member from Battlefords that the Bill be referred to the 
Human Services committee. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 115 — The 
Education Property Tax Credit Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure for me to rise and speak briefly on An Act to 
provide Education Property Tax Credits, Bill No. 115. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly again this points to 
the NDP government’s lack of vision in terms of the needs of 
the educational system. You know, repeatedly over the years 
people have said to this government that some significant 
changes into the way educational property tax is levied in this 

province has to be committed to. In addition to that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there has been the great need to say that there is an 
incredible shift of the burden of the cost of education that has 
moved from the responsibility of the provincial government to 
the property tax owners. 
 
I remember in the late ’80s when I was on the Melfort Board of 
Education, we used to calculate that 60 per cent of the cost of 
providing education for our students would come from the 
provincial government, and that 39 or 40 per cent was raised in 
the local community by way of educational property tax. And 
that seemed to be a pretty acceptable ratio of responsibility — 
60 per cent from the provincial government and 40 per cent 
from the local ratepayers by way of property tax. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the years this government has 
slowly but surely decreased the level of commitment that they 
have made to the educational system in this province. And 
faced with that reality of an increasingly diminishing 
percentage of the cost of education coming from the provincial 
government, boards of education have had to do really two 
things, is all they could do. 
 
One is that they have looked very closely and with a great deal 
of scrutiny as to how they were spending the money to make 
sure that they were doing everything they possibly could to 
wring out the last drop of efficiency from their own operations 
that they could. And included in that was the possibilities of 
doing voluntary amalgamations and reorganizing structurally 
how they were operating. It became even more important that 
divisions would be doing relationships like shared services for 
speech language pathologists and support staff of that nature. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no matter how hard they worked at 
creating these efficiencies in the system, at the end of the day, 
boards of education were forced into the reality that they had to 
increase property taxes for educational purposes because it 
simply was impossible to make everything work. 
 
This government negotiated settlements with the teachers and 
the other support staff, and then they would refuse to fund them. 
And so it fell onto the local taxpayers to make sure that the 
appropriate numbers and appropriate contracts were supported 
and honoured in the educational system. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is again we are forced with a 
situation of considering a Bill that provides a mechanism for an 
ad hoc rebate process on property tax for education. There is no 
vision, there is no plan in the long haul; there is just simply a 
knee-jerk reaction to a promise that was made to do something 
about it and the increased pressure from ratepayers right across 
this province of saying something needs to be done. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have here is a piece of 
legislation that simply provides a vehicle for a property tax 
credit. And that’s well and good in itself and I’m sure that 
property taxpayers across this province are going to be glad that 
they are receiving a rebate. But, it’s a rebate. They have to pay 
the money upfront and it isn’t a rebate that’s going to be long 
term, and it isn’t a rebate that’s going to address the inequalities 
of the funding relationships between the province and property 
taxpayers. 
 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again this speaks to the lack of vision 
of this NDP government. They’re putting band-aids on wounds 
that they have created and we would be told that this is . . . 
should be some type of progress, where in reality it’s simply 
patching up a system that is been sincerely compromised by this 
NDP government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again as I indicated in my remarks on the 
previous bit of legislation, we’re being told now, from 
stakeholders in the education system, that with heavy hearts and 
much regret, they recognize that this is inevitability and they 
need to have the tools to make decisions going forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are issues that we’ll want to address 
and questions we will want to ask in committee, which we 
would suggest we move to at this time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion put by the minister that Bill No. 115, The Education 
Property Tax Credit be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred. I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 115, The Education Property Tax Credit Act be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
that Bill No. 115, The Education Property Tax Credit be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 80 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again it’s 
a pleasure that I rise and speak to these education Bills that are 
before this Assembly today. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it at a 
risk of not being willing to repeat comments that I have made 
on the other Bills. They’re all related and they certainly have 
similar sorts of information that’s required. 
 
Bill 80 was introduced last fall when this whole process was 
announced. And with much fanfare, we were told that this was 

going to be a great cost saving and that they were learning from 
other jurisdictions where amalgamations were a sign of the 
times. And so we wanted to do some checking to see what the 
experience, indeed, was in other jurisdictions. 
 
And it’s very interesting that we received some information 
from our neighbouring province of Manitoba, who is ahead of 
us if you like or behind us, but is further along the process of 
forced amalgamation. And in Manitoba, the members of the 
educational community was told that they were going to save 
$10 million annually and that would be a very good deal. 
 
However what was . . . they were also told that the first year 
costs would be $17.1 million extra and that was sort of sold to 
them. However, Ms. Carol Duhamel spoke to the SSBA, the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association spring seminar and 
she confirmed that it cost Manitoba approximately $72 million 
from July 2002 to December 2004 — far more expensive than 
what was initially indicated. And there are now questions about 
why did we go in this direction because the promised 
efficiencies are also not happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba they are suggesting to us that if they 
could do it over again, they might take a lot more time and a lot 
more thought into the process, about the amalgamations of 
school boards. Because while in theory this was going to be a 
good thing, the practice and the reality has been something very 
different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this regard as well we have found in our 
discussions with the School Boards Association and others that, 
even in this initial planning process, the government thought 
this was all going to be very simple. We’ve got an extra piece 
of legislation this spring that is before the House — 114 — that 
actually is fixing some of the loopholes that were not envisaged 
when Bill 80 was introduced last fall. And we are told that there 
are further accommodations, perhaps legislatively, that will 
have to be made in order to dot all the i’s and cross the t’s about 
what is necessary to empower this forced amalgamation across 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it goes without 
saying that this whole process has been a very fundamentally 
hurried, ill-thought-out, and ill-conceived process that is going 
to create a great many challenges for the high quality 
professionals in our learning system to accommodate. And it 
probably is not a useful purpose to say we wish we hadn’t have 
gone down this route. We warned the government. The past 
Learning critic has said on the record that difficulty is going to 
occur, and exactly the things that we predicted as problems and 
challenges that were going to occur in the learning system are 
indeed coming to fruition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of these Bills are related to each other 
and should move through the process together so that they can 
be accommodated in a constructive way, so that all of the tools 
that are required by the learning professionals in this province 
are made available to them. They certainly do not need any 
more difficulties from this government than they’ve already 
received. And in order to allow that to happen, we are prepared 
to allow this to go to committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

a motion by the minister that Bill No. 80, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2004, be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill 80, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2004, be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 80, The Education Amendment Act, 2004, be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 104 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 104 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to rise on Bill No. 104, which is An Act to amend The 
Planning and Development Act, 1983. Mr. Speaker, this Bill, 
like many, are connected to the municipal Act, the new Act that 
was first introduced into the legislature and then withdrawn 
after hearings were held across Saskatchewan, and has been 
reintroduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of elements to this Bill, but I 
want to focus on just two or three of them. First of all, we were 
told by the Minister Responsible for Government Relations that 
this was to be a permissive Act rather than a prescriptive Act. 
And of course we know municipalities have for quite some 
time, beginning with the cities, been calling for more 
permissive legislation so that they would be able to take charge 
of their own affairs to a larger degree. And we were pleased to 
support The Cities Act because it was more of a permissive 
document rather than a prescriptive document. And the minister 
assured us that the new municipal Act would be moving in the 
same direction. And there may be parts of it that in fact are 
moving in that direction. 
 
However there is some concern about a portion of the Act 
which introduces some changes in the ministerial approval 
process for municipal planning efforts and zoning bylaws, by 
introducing a new concept of provincial interest. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we know that certainly the province should be 
interested in municipal affairs, but we are concerned about what 
the exact definition, what the exact consequences of provincial 
interest as outlined in this Bill might mean. 
 
[15:45] 
 
It certainly seems to be less permissive than perhaps the 
minister was indicating in some of his comments. We recognize 
that there could be a potential bottleneck if several provincial 
interests involving many different provincial ministries and 
departments are involved. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen many instances where 
the NDP government has put roadblocks in the way of progress 
in this province. And that’s one of the reasons why 
Saskatchewan lags behind so many provinces in Canada. In 
spite of our rich resources, in spite of the ingenuity and hard 
work and the overall work ethic of the people of this province, 
we have not prospered and moved forward as a province the 
way we should have, particularly here in Western Canada where 
the other three Western provinces have seen more growth, have 
seen more progress, have seen more prosperity than we have 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we would hope that Bill 104, an Act that would allow 
municipalities to plan and develop their own areas, we would 
hope that this Act would facilitate growth and facilitate 
initiative at the local level, at the municipal level. But we are 
concerned, in fact, the concept of provincial interest might in 
fact harm and hurt the ability of local municipalities to make 
independent decisions and to move in the best interests of their 
citizens, of their ratepayers, and of the people who vote at the 
municipal level. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to know more about what the 
concerns of the provincial interest or the concept of the 
provincial interest might be. And those are questions that we 
will continue to ask of the NDP government, and we would like 
to have some answers. We would like to see a more forthright 
response from the NDP government than we have seen in the 
past. 
 
You know, they can talk about flowery concepts, and they can 
talk about being progressive and allowing permissive legislation 
to come forward, but in fact they need to explain more clearly 
the consequences of portions of this Act, such as the concept of 
provincial interest. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will certainly 
be asking them about that. 
 
The other area that there is some concern over is with regard to 
new points about approving authorities require the owner of 
land that is being subdivided to provide part of that land, in 
consultation with the minister, as an environmental reserve 
where necessary. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a beautiful province, a province 
rich in environmental strengths. We have clean water. We have 
fresh air. We have beautiful scenery. We have lakes, rivers, 
forests. And obviously we want to work with all of the 
government, with the private sector to ensure that the beauty 
and the cleanliness of our province remains intact. 
 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

How this part of Bill 104 will impact environment and impact 
the owners of land is not yet clear, and we want to see more of 
those issues clarified in the debate around Bill 104. 
 
We’ve seen some problems in the environmental area when the 
federal department of oceans and fisheries became very 
involved in the inland waters of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And I would suggest there was some bad decisions made. There 
was an overextension of authority by Fisheries and Oceans, 
where they really had no business exercising that authority. 
There was no positive . . . no or little positive impact on the 
environment. In fact it was more of an interruption and a 
frustration to municipalities and to even provincial departments, 
including our own Department of Environment, who had to 
sidestep and work around the impacts of decisions made by the 
federal department of Fisheries and Oceans. 
 
What we need in the whole area of environment and 
environmental authorities interaction with citizens, with local 
governments, is a mood and an attitude of co-operation — 
working together to ensure that we maintain a sound 
environment, but also that we work co-operatively and 
constructively to build the province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re curious about how Bill 104 
might impact on the environment, especially where we read that 
the owner of the land that is to be subdivided will have to 
consult with the minister of . . . regarding environmental 
reserves where necessary. Who decides where these reserves 
might be necessary? What rights does the owner have? What 
role do municipalities play? What role does the federal 
department of Environment play in this issue? These questions 
need to be answered, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The whole purpose of changing our municipal Act is to allow 
municipalities to function at their optimum level. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have seen an NDP government in 
Saskatchewan that has hindered and disappointed 
municipalities. We have seen an NDP government that has 
failed when it came to funding for municipalities. We have seen 
an NDP government that has ignored and failed to consult with 
municipalities. We saw that in the introduction of the municipal 
Act, which in fact is connected and is the reason why Bill 104 
has actually been introduced and being debated here on the 
floor of the legislature. 
 
It’s time for consultations to be forthcoming and to be sincere. 
It’s time when the . . . It should be the time when the NDP 
government actually does do its consulting before it brings 
forward legislation so that it doesn’t have to withdraw 
legislation and reintroduce it, so that it doesn’t have to bring in 
piecemeal other Bills around it, you know, before the original 
municipal Act was fully thought through. 
 
It’s because of this lack of cohesiveness on the part of the NDP 
government that we scrutinize these Bills so closely. We have 
seen so many mistakes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the NDP 
government as it affects rural Saskatchewan, as it affects 
municipalities, as it affects urban municipalities and the cities 
of this province — failures in revenue sharing; failures in 
dealing with amalgamations, whether they be municipal 
amalgamations or school board amalgamations. Just one failure 
after the other. 

And those failures cause us a great deal of concern when we see 
a huge number of Bills — several that we’ve debated today and 
others in the past — that are related to municipal politics, 
municipal structure, school board structure. These are concerns 
that must be carefully considered. 
 
It is for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we would want to 
review this Bill some more. We want to consult with the 
stakeholders, the municipalities who are involved and will be 
affected by Bill 104, and also, as we find out, ratepayers and 
voters in these municipalities who may be affected by the 
government’s taking upon itself the concept of provincial 
interest and asking for environmental reserves where necessary. 
For that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would now move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill 104. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that debate be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 105 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 105 — The Local 
Government Election Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I’m also pleased to speak to Bill 105, An Act to amend 
The Local Government Election Act. 
 
The previous Bill spoke to municipal governments. This one as 
well speaks to local governments, but it also includes the 
election of the new and expanded school boards that are being 
created across the province. And so we’ve got quite an intricate 
matrix of legislation affecting both municipalities, school 
boards, amalgamations. It’s quite a lot to digest, and it certainly 
requires a lot of scrutiny and a lot of review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not the first province in Canada 
— as my colleague, the MLA for Melfort, mentioned — we’re 
not the first province to delve into the whole idea of changing 
the structure of school boards, making them larger. Manitoba 
has just gone through this process. 
 
And in fact a few months ago I had the opportunity to speak to 
an official who had been very involved both from the 
government side and from the organization called MAST, 
which is the Manitoba Association of School Trustees, who had 
to work through the new process of expanded school districts in 
the province of Manitoba. 
 
And as my colleague, the member from Melfort, correctly and 
accurately indicated, a lot of promises were made when new 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

legislation was brought forward into the Manitoba legislature. 
There was to be considerable cost savings. There were to be 
efficiencies. There was the argument made that the whole 
education system in Manitoba was overgoverned and needed to 
be thinned out. 
 
And in talking to this official, he talked about the bitter 
disappointment in Manitoba over seeing, not money saved but 
additional dollars, tax dollars, spent after the restructure. Not 
even including the restructuring, which was expensive, but 
following the restructuring, costs did not drop in the province of 
Manitoba. They increased. Education became more expensive. 
And also local contact and local connection between ratepayers 
and voters and parents with their school boards became more 
distant, more remote, more removed. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a great deal of concern 
over the process and the attitude expressed in this legislature 
and around the province by the Minister of Education, who is 
following in the footsteps of his colleague, the Minister of 
Education in the province of Manitoba, and seems to be 
doomed to make the same mistakes as have been made in 
Manitoba. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess if we were pioneering 
in this province and trying something out and it didn’t work, we 
could say, well at least we tried. We had no experience. We had 
no examples to observe, to study in other parts of Canada. At 
least you can’t fault us for trying to be innovative and try 
something new. 
 
But in this case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is not a new 
initiative. This is something we can observe as having occurred 
in other parts of Canada, in fact in our neighbouring province to 
the east, the province of Manitoba. And for Saskatchewan to 
make the same mistakes that Manitoba is making, is indeed 
disheartening and is causing real consternation for the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association and for those of us 
who are deeply concerned about the quality of education and 
the ability of an electoral system that will properly allow 
parents, voters, and ratepayers in this province to have 
meaningful impact in the development and the strengthening 
and the delivery of education here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As you no doubt know, Mr. Speaker, I have presented a number 
of petitions in this legislature from the riding of 
Rosetown-Elrose, the constituency that I represent, who are just 
appalled by the way the NDP government has arrogantly and 
independently moved to create a new school district in west 
central Saskatchewan — one that was not asked for by the 
ratepayers and parents of the area, and one that is causing them 
a great deal of concern as they see that their property taxes will 
rise, the cost of education will increase, and the quality of 
education for young people, in fact, will likely diminish. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, ratepayers and voters, parents and teachers 
and existing school board trustees in my part of west central 
Saskatchewan are concerned about a loss of representation. 
They’re concerned about the fact that these school boards will 
follow in the footsteps of the health districts where they become 
so large that there isn’t that feeling of ownership, of owning and 
having meaningful input into local government. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this Bill itself it talks about polling 
stations, and it suggests that the legislation would allow a 
reduction of polling stations. And that, in and of itself, is neither 
good nor bad, but I can see the potential through the passing of 
Bill 105 that some areas of these large school districts may be, 
be placed too remote, are too far away from polling stations. 
 
We’ve seen that in provincial and federal elections where 
there’s been manipulation over polling stations. Ad I doubt that 
would occur at the school board level; I would hope that that 
would not happen. But I’ll tell you, the public do not like to 
have to travel for three-quarters of an hour or an hour to get to a 
polling station. And I believe with the powers given to local 
governments in Bill 105, the Act to amend The Local 
Government Election Act, that in fact huge distances may be 
involved in voters accessing polling stations to cast their ballot, 
and thus we could see a weakening of the democratic process at 
the municipal level and at the school board level. So that causes 
me a great deal of concern. These are the concerns that have 
been expressed in the petitions that I have presented. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I have with me a petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I have not 
yet presented, and of course I can’t at this time during the day. 
But I will mention that the people that I represent in 
Rosetown-Elrose are concerned that forced amalgamation will 
not achieve any cost savings and therefore will not result in any 
reduction in property tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all the projections that we’re seeing 
in west central Saskatchewan and the new expanded school 
division that is being created in the riding that I represent, we 
see that the provincial government is intending to withdraw $4 
million of funding from that school district in comparison to 
what was put into the school districts that the one larger one 
will replace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are parents and what are school trustees 
supposed to do with the withdrawal of $4 million of provincial 
funding for education? They have very, very difficult choices to 
make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, painful choices to make. They have 
to either close schools and reduce programs or they have to hike 
property taxes — property taxes that are already far too high in 
comparison to the property taxes paid in other parts of Canada 
— because the provincial NDP government has been negligent 
in funding education in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners who have been contacting me are 
also concerned that the voluntary amalgamation process was 
working, and more school boards were in discussions when the 
NDP moved to force amalgamation. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
all know that it’s easier to do something we want to do than to 
do something we’re forced to do. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous Education minister in 
the previous government prior to the last election called for 
voluntary amalgamations of school boards. And school boards 
took them seriously. School boards in fact were amalgamating, 
and they were amalgamating at pretty much the rate that the 
minister had asked them to. And there was a reduction of 
approximately 25 per cent of the school districts in 
Saskatchewan. 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2845 

But now we have a new and, might I suggest, an arrogant and 
incompetent minister of Education who said, that’s not good 
enough; I’m going to draw my own map and the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to have to live with it. And a lot of the 
work, hard work that was done by the people of Saskatchewan 
on a voluntary basis is now being undone by this minister, who 
cares not for the education of children and cares not about the 
burden placed on property tax payers in the new school 
districts. 
 
My petitioners also say that affected school boards do not see a 
benefit for students, because services will not be increased. We 
have no commitment from the minister of Education to improve 
the quality of education in Saskatchewan as a result of this new 
structure that he’s put in place. And in fact there is a real 
concern, with less local input at the school board level, that the 
quality of education will be diminished and will be of less 
quality than it has been in the past. 
 
And then also these petitioners say that forced amalgamation is 
a smokescreen for the real issue, which is how K to 12 
education is funded by having the highest rate of education 
funding through property tax in Canada. And therein, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, lies the crux of the matter. The NDP has 
neglected its responsibility to fund education. 
 
Through the 1990s when the Romanow government was facing 
fiscal challenges, they in fact reduced funding to education, 
reduced it drastically. But parents and school boards were not 
prepared to see the quality of education compromised and they 
came to the plate by raising property taxes to maintain the 
quality of education. Because parents and the ratepayers 
recognize the importance, the critical importance and 
responsibility of educating our youth. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been some small increases of 
the funding of education in the last few budgets, but it certainly 
has not compensated for the massive cuts and the massive load 
for funding education that has been placed on property over the 
last number of years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s some concern also about the rush 
in putting these new school boards in place. And the reason 
why we are looking at Bill 105 is because it in fact contains the 
rules as to how the new school boards will be elected. And the 
minister has arbitrarily decided that he wants these new school 
boards functioning fully by January 1, 2006, which is only 
months away. And yet we currently have school boards that are 
not yet elected. 
 
These school boards are still trying to attract potential school 
board members who aren’t sure what their responsibilities and 
roles will be, will not . . . they’re not sure of how the new 
system is going to work. And yet the minister is driving this 
timetable hard and is not relenting in the slightest in his desire 
to be heavy-handed and impose a new system upon the people 
of Saskatchewan before they’re ready to embrace it and before 
they can property analyze it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve discussed this new system of school 
boards and the elections with a number of my constituents. I 
can tell you that the voters are concerned, the ratepayers are 
concerned. I can tell you that teachers are concerned. 

I was able to attend an MLA evening for teachers sponsored by 
the Saskatchewan federation of teachers, the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], the Teachers’ Federation. 
And the teachers there were very concerned about additional 
travel that would be required for the sporting events that they 
are coaches for and manage. They were concerned about 
teachers institutes and personal development days when they 
would have to travel larger distances and yet be expected to be 
back in the classroom at the, you know, assigned hour to teach 
students. They recognize that they may not be able to deliver 
education with the same quality that they have in the past with 
the new demands that are being placed on them. And they 
expressed those concerns to me when I was with them in their 
evening that they spent with MLAs. 
 
These are real concerns. And we’re not just talking about $1 
million or $2 million. We’re not talking about whether the 
boundary goes . . . includes this municipality or that 
municipality, or whether this town or that town will be in the 
new school district. What we’re really talking about is far more 
important. We’re talking about our children; talking about the 
quality of education they receive. We’re talking about the 
quality of life that they have as students and the distance they 
have to travel to schools; whether or not their parents and the 
parents of their fellow students will have meaningful input into 
the education system that they are in. 
 
These are real concerns. And these are concerns that the 
Minister of Education has avoided or neglected or pushed off to 
the side, and that’s particularly unfortunate that he would be so 
callous and uncaring about such an important matter. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is essential that careful consideration be 
given to Bill 105. The Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association has asked that we look very carefully at this, and 
we will have to do that. We’ve been doing that through this 
second reading process. This Bill will go to committee, and 
then will have to be looked at and scrutinized very closely. 
 
The things around the new map for school boards, the new 
proposals, have not had adequate scrutiny by the people of 
Saskatchewan, and there are real concerns that have not been 
addressed. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it is important that 
the committee be allowed to look at Bill No. 105. And 
therefore, with the concerns I’ve expressed, I would recommend 
that at this point the Bill proceed on to committee. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the committee is 
a motion by the minister, that Bill No. 105, The Local 
Government Election Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I move that Bill 105, The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 105, The Local Government Election Amendment 
Act, be now referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. The Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 106 — The 
Municipalities Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to stand today and speak to Bill 106, The 
Municipalities Act. 
 
This Bill that was just brought in is the second time around. As 
you know, this Bill was brought in late last fall, I believe it was 
in November, and it was pulled at the start of this session 
because of problems within the Bill. And I know we, as the 
opposition, we took heart on this Bill and said that when the 
Bill was introduced in November there needed to be some 
consultation. And we were wondering in that time if all 
organizations in the province of Saskatchewan were consulted. 
 
We know for a fact SUMA was involved great . . . [inaudible] 
. . . with this and were probably the biggest pushes behind it. 
But we had questions regarding SARM. Now we contacted 
some of the SARM members back in November and they 
pushed back against it. Some of the reasons that they pushed 
back was the fact that all municipal leaders from SARM had not 
a chance to sit down together and discuss this Bill. 
 
And this Bill was well in excess of 200 pages. And when you 
bring a Bill of this magnitude into the Legislative Assembly and 
want to have it passed within a week, 10 days, it puts a lot of 
pressure and everybody has to be on the same side. Last fall 
SARM was not on the same side. Not because the Bill was 
totally against SARM but the fact that some of the things that 
were in the Bill they had a disagreement with, and some of the 
things that weren’t in the Bill, they wanted implemented. 
 
And so this time around the minister has introduced the Bill, 
and he is quoted saying that there’s amendments to this Bill. I 
have not had a chance to read the whole Bill, but I’ve read a lot 
of it. And there are amendments to the Bill. And I really believe 
that most parties in the province of Saskatchewan are in 

agreement with the Bill as it is presented today. 
 
I do have some problems with . . . a couple issues with the Bill, 
Bill No. 106, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And maybe my comments 
should be referred to COW [Committee of the Whole], but I 
would like to bring it to the minister’s attention because in 
estimates I raised one of the issues, and today I’ll raise another 
issue. And at the start of the Bill it states: 
 

“An Act [representing] . . . Rural Municipalities, Towns, 
Villages and Resort Villages and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts”. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my capacity as critic for Northern 
Affairs, I’m just wondering where the northern municipalities 
fits into this Bill, or are they under or still under the jurisdiction 
of the northern municipality Act? If they are under the 
administration of the northern municipality Act, then I’m 
wondering if the northern municipality Act is okay in its state or 
if there’s problems within that part of the Act that should have 
been addressed in this Bill. Or did simply the makers of this 
Bill, the government, forget about Northern Affairs or northern 
communities? 
 
Whatever it may be, some of the leaders from the northern 
villages and northern municipalities feel that they are somewhat 
left out, and this Bill does not address any of those issues. So I 
guess maybe in Committee of the Whole I can address to the 
minister why they’re not addressed. And maybe we do have Bill 
of northern municipality Act as being the perfect Bill for them. 
I would highly doubt that. 
 
Another part of this Bill that I have some concerns with . . . and 
in fact was when the Minister for Municipal Affairs decided 
that there should be some meetings. And there was four 
meetings that took place in February. February 9 there was one 
in Weyburn, February 10 in Aberdeen, February 10 in Wilkie, 
and February 12 in Humboldt. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I attended the meeting in Wilkie, and I was surprised to see so 
many people at this meeting. At lot of the people that were there 
were SARM, municipal leaders. There was reeves. There was 
councillors. And they all had questions regarding the 
legislation. 
 
And a lot of them spoke regarding the legislation in a positive 
way, but there were still a number of them that had problems 
with the Act. They made their request, and I remember the 
minister saying that he will take the request to task. And 
hopefully the requests of the people at that meeting that day, 
those recommendations, were implemented into the 
amendments here. And I’m hoping that’s what happened. 
 
I also heard that the other meetings were subsequent the same 
as the one in Wilkie. People had great concerns. And also at 
that meeting . . . that meeting was held just before the SARM 
convention in the springtime in Saskatoon, which I also 
attended. And on talking to leaders there, they said that this was 
the first time that SARM actually got a hold of the Bill and 
could actually sit down as a group of municipal leaders and deal 
with all of it as a body in whole. 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

There were a number of leaders from SARM that were in 
consultation with SUMA and the government in putting forth 
the former Bill. But this was the first time that all members 
from SARM got together to discuss this. And maybe there 
wasn’t a lot of changes that needed to be done, but evident was 
that when this Bill was introduced this spring, the minister 
decided to pull it, take it back to the drawing board, and redo it 
to include the amendments that municipal leaders from SARM, 
rural municipalities, needed to have put in place. And I hope 
this was done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago I was asking questions of the 
minister regarding municipal problems, and it was in regards to 
the forest fringe issues. And I’ve been dealing with this for 
some time. I remember some of the comments that the minister 
had stated at that time, that if I would take the time to read part 
of the municipal Act, that I would be able to answer some of the 
concerns of the people from the forest fringe area that represent 
their issues. And so I took it upon myself to read it and under 
division 2, tax roll, it says: 
 

Contents and correction of tax roll 
 

264(1) The tax role must show all of the following for 
each taxable property: 

 
(a) a description sufficient to identify the location of the 
property; 

 
(b) the name and mailing address of the taxpayer; 

 
(c) the taxable assessment as determined in accordance 
with section 197; 

 
(d) the name, tax rate and amount of that each tax 
imposed with respect to the property; 
 
(e) [the amount] the total amount of . . . taxes imposed 
with respect to the property; 
 
(f) [and] the amount of tax arrears, if any; 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you go back to the first one, where it says, 
“a description sufficient to identify the location of the 
property.” Well, Mr. Speaker, this is where I have a problem 
with this for the simple reason the land in question SARM does 
not have jurisdiction over. SERM [Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management] has jurisdiction over. 
 
So I read this and I say, the description sufficiently to identify 
the location of the property. They are identifying property they 
have no control over. They are given the power to the 
municipalities the right to tax that said property. How can you 
tax something you have no jurisdiction over? And I’ve read 
this. I’ve read this, and I’ve asked questions many, many times 
regarding this. 
 
And I go on further where the Act states that the municipality 
has the right to not tax that property if they so desire. Now 
when you’re dealing with forest fringe, there is only 7 out of 28 
municipalities that enforce this right that was given to them 
back in 1995. Today, by reading this, the Act states that the 
governing body, the RM [rural municipality] has a right to 

delete that from their tax role or impose it. But what gives them 
the right to tax that when they have no jurisdiction over it? 
 
Members of the forest fringe have been asking this and 
requesting that they go back over this. And I understand where 
the minister comes from by saying, if the member would read it 
he would understand that now they’re given the right to reverse 
that decision. If all seven of the RMs go that route and reverse 
that decision, that’s great. That’s what should happen. It should 
not be imposed in the first place. How can you tax something 
you don’t have jurisdiction over? 
 
The farm group, the forest fringe association farm group are 
saying we are allowed through SERM, Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management, through SERM the 
ability to graze cattle on that property for 145 days maximum. 
In years like the last previous two years when it’s been dry, it 
may be only 90 days. It may be 100 days, but it may be 145. 
They are still taxed on that property, and they have no 
jurisdiction over it. They can put a fence up to keep the cattle 
there, but they can’t lock the gate because it’s public access 
property. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, if they have no jurisdiction over it, why 
is the RM allowed to tax it? I’ve been saying this over and over 
and over. In fact talking to SERM people, COs [conservation 
officer] and stuff, they said at one time that they were asked 
through SARM to be the tax collectors. 
 
Well SERM does not have the power to collect taxes. SERM 
does not have the power to impose taxes. They have the power 
to impose permits and monies associated with permits. The 
biggest problem with this, Mr. Speaker, is this is not lease land. 
This is permit land — permit land from year to year to year. 
 
Every year the body from the forestry association have to go in 
and apply to the permit through SERM to utilize that land for 
the maximum of 145 days. But once the RMs that are taxing 
this now, are taxing them at a full year, but they’re only using it 
for 145 days. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, how would you like to be 
taxed on a full year, when you only use it for a portion of time? 
That’s why I’ve said on many occasions, if you feel that the 
forestry association and producers need to be taxed on this, tax 
them for 145 days. But if you’re going to do that, then tax all 
organizations or users of that said permit land. 
 
A couple that come to mind is wood people, people that cut 
wood, or logging. Are they taxed? No, they’re not. What about 
outfitters? They use that land a year-round basis. Are they 
taxed? No, they’re not. So I say to the minister, why are you 
still giving the power to RMs to tax this land? Well the minister 
stands in his place, and he says, we’ve also given them the 
power to cancel it. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, when you have a chicken house 
and it’s full of chickens, and you put the fox in the chicken 
house and tell him not to eat chickens, I wonder what’s going to 
happen? 
 
You know something, Mr. Speaker? The minister is saying that 
now we can undo a wrong simply by giving the power to the 



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

RM administrator and council to say, well we won’t tax them. 
But if you were an administrator and an RM with this issue, one 
of the 28, why wouldn’t you take advantage of this? The 
government allows you to. It is a freebie, a freebie. You can tax 
this portion of land. You have no jurisdiction whatsoever to. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, you don’t even have to provide any services. 
The simple fact is, you can’t. You don’t have jurisdiction to the 
land. So why are they imposing a tax? The problem with this, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only that they have to play municipal tax. 
Municipal tax, as everybody knows, is on the portion of tax — 
$1. But education tax is $2 for every $1 spent. 
 
So now, Mr. Speaker, you have the forest fringe grazing 
association people, patrons, paying education tax, and they’re 
also paying municipal tax. Then they’re also paying permits 
through SERM. They are taxed and taxed and taxed. And yet 
the only one that has jurisdiction to that land is SERM. 
 
So when I look at this and I read this under the tax roll, this 
does state that the municipal council have a right to say no. And 
hopefully the 7 out of 28 that are charging will say no. But why 
will they? This should go back to the drawing board. There 
should be an amendment to this and remove this from the Act 
before it was implemented. And I’ve asked minister after 
minister to do this. Same old . . . they say one thing and do 
another. Nothing’s being done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that also brings me to another point I want to 
make in regarding this forest fringe association. And I brought 
it to the minister’s attention in estimates, and I want to bring it 
up again today, that there is a potential lawsuit that’s pending in 
the RM of Preeceville. And it addresses this very, very issue, 
where the RM is taking a forest fringe grazer to task because he 
hasn’t paid his taxes. Now the patron is paying taxes on that 
land. The RM is not providing the service. And you know the 
forest grazing association is saying, maybe this is what is 
needed; maybe it has to go to court so that the laws of the land 
will look at this and understand it better, and then come back to 
the government and said what they did wrong. 
 
Because I don’t believe that this government is listening to this 
people. I remember a former minister of Municipal Affairs said 
to me when I was questioning him about this, and he said, well 
look, member, it’s only a handful of people; don’t worry about 
it. Well, Mr. Speaker, those handful of people are still citizens 
of Saskatchewan. They’re taxpayers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They pay taxes. And they’re not cheap. They 
don’t mind paying their fair share of taxes. The same with most 
people in this province. But when you are paying tax on 
something that is wrong, it gets under your skin. 
 
So I say to the minister that I hope this court case does come to 
light. We will then find out what rights the RM have to be 
allowed to tax this property when they have no jurisdiction 
over.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act as long as it may be — and it will take 
some time to read — I believe overall has a lot of good things 
in it. But there are some wrongs in it, and I believe that it’s 
going to take time for us to contact the municipal leaders to see 
if it passes their recommendations, especially SARM and the 
leaders of SARM, to see if it meets all their requirements as far 
as the amendments to the Act. 

And to such time, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s some other 
members from my . . . colleagues that would like to speak to it, 
and therefore I will adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook that debate on second reading of Bill 106, 
The Municipalities Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 107 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 107 — The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 
2005 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi 
intitulée The Municipalities Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise and speak on Bill 107, the municipalities 
consequential. And Mr. Speaker, this Bill I believe hinges on 
the backs of The Municipalities Act, Bill 106. 
 
I believe this Bill, when I read it, is basically general 
housekeeping legislation. What they’re trying to do is replace 
the outdated language relating to certain municipal positions 
and titles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill tries to make changes to several bilingual 
Acts like The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act of 1997. 
And it also makes changes to The Education Act of 1995. I 
can’t see a whole lot of problems with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, as 
it hinges on 106. But before we can go ahead and proceed with 
this Bill, Bill 107, I believe that we have to make sure that 
everything in Bill 106 is up to where it’s supposed to be and all 
members of the province are consulted and understand this Bill. 
And therefore I move to adjourn debate on 107. 
 
[16:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook that debate on second reading of Bill 107, 
The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 86 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 
 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to get up and have 
a few comments on this particular labour Bill. 
 
It’s always curious when the NDP bring a labour Bill forward, 
because they have a bad history of not consulting with 
businesses when they do it. They have . . . I don’t know why 
that they seem to have a problem with businesses over the 
number of years that they’ve been in. They’re starting back in 
their old party, CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], 
or I’m not even sure what that even stood for back then, then 
they amalgamated and made a new NDP Party and basically 
amalgamated with business from what I understand. I mean 
amalgamated with labour from what I understand to . . . and 
they’ve been fighting, seems like, business ever since I can 
remember. 
 
In fact ever since I’ve been in the House, I can’t remember 
when a member on that opposite side, the opposite side of the 
House has gotten up and talked about business, saying how we 
need business, how this province needs business, how can we 
work with businesses to grow this province. And I’ve heard that 
very little from that side of the House over the number of years 
that I’ve been there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know this . . . You can go back to, I guess, when they tried 
to nationalize the potash. They did nationalize the potash. And 
they wonder why that they don’t work with businesses very 
well at that end of it. And I know that there was . . . they tried to 
nationalize the old business, starting with in the ’70s. And also 
if you go back to even 1947 with CCF, whatever that stands for, 
came into power and basically chased the old companies out 
because of the nationalization that was going on. They 
nationalized a number of businesses through that period of time. 
 
So they’ve always, ever since I can remember about this party, 
they’ve been at odds with business, you know. And then they 
wonder why this province isn’t growing the way it should be. 
They wonder why business is fearful of them and doesn’t come 
here and wants to work with them. I don’t understand why this 
government can’t sit down and work with business. On a 
particular labour Bill like this, why can’t . . . sit down with 
business and sit down with labour and work something out that 
will work for both parties — work for both labour and work for 
both businesses. 
 
But no, they just seem to go on one side, favouring all the time 
at that end. And that is the trouble they’ve gone into. That’s 
what they got into, the trouble they got into with their most 
available hours legislation that they, all of a sudden, just 
proclaimed without consulting with the people, with the 
business and . . . [inaudible] . . . not even consulting them that 
much with labour, doing something for labour that they feel that 
the labour wants. 
 
And maybe some union leaders want it, but not the people that 
work in the businesses. The majority of them didn’t want most 
available hours. I had people in my constituency that didn’t 
want it, that would . . . affected them for various reasons and 
that did not want it, Mr. Speaker, you know. 
 

And I’ve been told in my constituency time and time again from 
people in the labour end of it that actually work, that are 
working people, say that, you know, this government, even 
though they talk about labour, they seem to just listen to the 
labour union bosses and whatever they want. They don’t want 
to work with the people, with the people that are actually doing 
the work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this particular Bill, at this end of it, some of the things it 
talks about is whistle-blower legislation, which is good. But 
then they move into another area in the whistle-blowers where a 
third party or anonymous can make complaints against 
business. And that has people worried. Because you get, at that 
end of it, you can bring a frivolous . . . something frivolous 
against a business. That can be a business down the street that 
maybe a neighbour doesn’t like, can start bringing anonymous 
complaints against this business constantly and then they have 
to be investigated at that end of it. 
 
And we know that can happen, because there is a movement out 
there that people, just some people just don’t like businesses. 
One of them is the hog operations out there, mega hog 
operations. There are many people that don’t like it. So with 
this piece of legislation, they could just start bringing one 
complaint after another, making anonymous not . . . so that not 
making any of the complaints valid. But as long as they make a 
complaint that can’t be traced back to them, they can just make 
it constantly, causing that particular business, you know, a bit of 
hardship in having to address that concern, a different end of it. 
And that has businesses worried about it. 
 
And that’s something this government didn’t do. It didn’t sit 
down with the businesses. Didn’t even sit down, I don’t think 
even with labour, the labour movement, the actual people that 
work in there and ask how can we work together to build this 
province. 
 
Because I mean, both people, both end of it, whether it’s the 
people that work in their labour or for the businesses, they both 
work there, Mr. Speaker. All they want is a fair and reasonable 
place to work. The employers, you know, want that and the 
employees want that. But they also want to work together 
because, I mean, just about every employee that works for a 
business, I mean, they enjoy working there. They enjoy their 
bosses. They enjoy the management. And the bosses, you know, 
management, they enjoy working with them. Most of the people 
I’ve talked to, I’d say 95 per cent of the people that work for a 
living enjoy what . . . because you have to enjoy what you do, 
you know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this government doesn’t seem to maybe take that in 
consideration, that employers and employees work very well 
together, you know. So why not sit down with the union leaders 
and upper management and try to work out something that is 
compatible, that both can be happy with? 
 
I don’t think . . . With this particular piece of legislation, there’s 
still a lot of unanswered questions on it. There’s a lot of 
concerns on it. It’s been on the order paper since fall, on it. And 
you go back, and there has been . . . From what I understand, 
that the business wasn’t consulted with it at this end of it, at that 
end of it. There was no consultation even though the Premier 
had promised that he would consult with business before he 



2850 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

brought in, forced any labour legislation. 
 
And also, there’s another Bill on the order paper, 87, that same 
thing, that there was basically no consulting with the people that 
it affects at that end of it, you know. And yet, you know, this 
government it talks about labour, constantly talks about labour. 
 
But then I can remember on SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company], I can remember on that 
committee how this government got around the own union 
preference Act by starting, by saying with Con-Force that they 
had a partnership, a 51 per cent partnership, so they wouldn’t 
have to union, wouldn’t have to use unionized workers building 
the potato sheds on there. Now is that a party that is in favour of 
unions, you know? They say one thing, and they’re doing 
another. 
 
I look back in that history there of that, and we found out that 
basically that Con-Force, I think had about, if I remember right, 
a couple of hundred dollars invested in it when the government 
was trying to say at one time they had 51 per cent. And that’s 
why we couldn’t use the union preference tendering Act and 
that they didn’t fall under that because it was 51 per cent private 
business owned. And it came out in later years that no, it 
wasn’t; that government was running the whole show at that 
end of it, Mr. Speaker, you know. 
 
So this party, this government, you know, has a habit, a really 
bad habit, of saying one thing and doing another. So with this 
particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I think it 
should be still left in adjourned debate, because there’s a lot of 
unanswered questions out there that need to be addressed. 
 
I think this government has to sit down and work with business 
at this particular end of it, and I know that other MLAs later on 
are going to want to address this Bill. So right now I’d like to 
adjourn debate on Bill 86. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill 86, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 87 — The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill No. 87 is an interesting piece of legislation, let’s 
say. It certainly will have an impact on the operations of trade 
union, employer relationships in this province. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not sure that it’ll have a good impact, but it will 
certainly have an impact on how the relationship will be in the 

future between employer, employees, and the Labour Relations 
Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a lot in this piece of legislation that people across the 
province are questioning. And I think they question it with 
validity, Mr. Speaker, as to how this Act is actually going to 
impact on the operations of businesses, how it’s going to impact 
the operations of unions, and what it’s going to mean in the life 
of the employees that work for any business, Mr. Speaker, that 
operates under a union environment or, Mr. Speaker, that might 
operate under a union environment but that isn’t presently. Or, 
Mr. Speaker, how it’s going to impact on the lives of employees 
that are working in a union workplace today but want to 
withdraw from a union workplace through decertification. 
 
And we’ve certainly seen lots of places, Mr. Speaker, that have 
had union drives and have certified the workplaces as a union 
shop, which is the rights of the employees, Mr. Speaker, to do 
so. They have the right in Canada to bargain collectively if they 
so wish. But conversely, Mr. Speaker, those that are employed 
in a workplace that is unionized and wish to decertify also have 
that right, Mr. Speaker — also have that right. 
 
And yet in this particular piece of legislation, it brings into 
question the ease at which you can certify and the ease at which 
you can decertify. And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
there’s a huge difference in the ease of one versus the other, that 
it’s not equal in either direction. And I think that causes some 
difficulty for some workplaces and some employees, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think we need to explore that further. 
 
This Bill also talks and deals with how the Labour Relations 
Board actually operates — what their operating authorities are, 
what their powers to operate are, and how they can exercise 
those powers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that we see in this particular Act is a change 
that allows the chairman of the board to make regulations 
prescribing the rules and procedures for matters before the 
board. Well, Mr. Speaker, normally in the province of 
Saskatchewan regulations are done by ministers and by 
departments that are answerable to this legislature. And the fact 
is, under the new rules of the legislature, all regulations are 
reviewable by the standing committees of this Assembly. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, the Labour Relations Board does not 
come before this Assembly. They do not report to this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So how do the standing committees of 
this legislature that are responsible for labour, for the Labour 
department, how do they review the regulations as outlined by 
this Act when they’re being made by the chairman of the 
Labour Relations Board who does not report to this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think there’s a flaw in the government’s argument there, and 
in the authorities that they’re asking this legislature to grant to 
the Labour Relations Board; that they are somehow making a 
move, Mr. Speaker, to circumvent the authority of this 
legislature — the authority to review regulations as 
implemented by the Labour Relations Board because the 
Labour Relations Board does not report to this legislature. It 
does not report to any one of the standing committees of this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. So this House will not have an 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2851 

opportunity to review the rules and regulations as imposed by 
the chairman of the Labour Relations Board. 
 
And that is a serious flaw, Mr. Speaker, in this piece of 
legislation that needs to be corrected and needs to be changed 
through an amendment to not allow the chairman to make 
amendments on his own, or her own as the case may be. But 
rather those regulations that the government may wish to make 
need to be made by the minister who in turn then reports to this 
legislature and reports to the standing committees, Mr. Speaker, 
where they can be questioned and where the validity of that 
regulation can be dealt with and debated, and whether it serves 
a needed public policy, Mr. Speaker, because that is now part of 
the rules. 
 
[16:45] 
 
That is now part of the operations of the standing committees 
that they can review the regulations to determine their value in 
public policy. That cannot happen, Mr. Speaker, under the 
current situation where the person making the regulations does 
not appear before the standing committees, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think that’s a serious flaw that needs to be looked at. 
 
Now in a number of pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, the 
government has given themselves the authority to make 
regulation. It’s the minister, or the minister’s agents, but the 
minister reports back to the legislature. It doesn’t do that here, 
Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

The [chairman] . . . of the board may make regulations 
prescribing the rules and procedures for matters before the 
board . . . 

 
Further on: 
 

. . . including preliminary procedures, and prescribing 
forms that are consistent with this Act and any other 
regulations made pursuant to this Act. 

 
So there can be other regulations as well, Mr. Speaker, that can 
be made in relationship to this Act. And it goes on to explain 
where those regulations can come from. 
 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 
regulations interpreting, defining, enlarging . . . restricting 
how the provisions of the Canada Labour Code mentioned 
in section [19] . . . apply for the purposes of this Act. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor in Council, as 
represented by the Minister of Labour, is responsible and 
accountable to this legislature, but the chairman of the Labour 
Relations Board is not accountable to this legislature. And 
that’s a serious flaw, Mr. Speaker, in this piece of legislation 
that needs to be corrected by this government before this 
legislation becomes law. Before its proclamation, I believe that 
the government needs to correct that situation to ensure that the 
person responsible for making the regulations is answerable to 
this legislature, and therefore that person should be the minister, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the powers that are being given to the 
board under the title of provisional powers of the board, is that 

the board can review any matters that are before it. And that is 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that they deal with things that come 
before the board. 
 
But in determining that power, the government is giving them 
the power to . . . and I’ll read, it’s section 18(b): 
 

. . . the power to determine the form in which and the time 
within which any party . . . [or] proceeding before the 
board must file or present any thing, document or 
information and to refuse to accept any thing, document or 
information that is not filed or presented in that form or by 
that time . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, while this is an Act and not the regulations, 
it gives the chairman of the board, and the board itself, 
considerable power in adjusting the items that are requested and 
the time frames for presentation, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
that’s critical — time frames for implementation — because 
further on in the Act, it describes who can present things to the 
board and when they can present items to the board, 
applications to the board. 
 
So if there is a very narrow window of opportunity for 
presentation, Mr. Speaker — and we all know how slowly the 
wheels of government can sometimes grind — someone makes 
an application to the board with a limited time window of 
availability. If there’s an error — you know, i’s are not dotted 
properly, t’s are not crossed properly — by the time that item of 
an application could be looked at, the time frame may have 
expired because of the narrow frame of that time frame, Mr. 
Speaker, meaning that another section of this Act now becomes 
applicable, where the applicant can no longer apply for redress 
on the initial application. Because of a minor error, they have to 
wait a minimum of another year, a minimum of another year 
because some part of the form may not have been filled out 
properly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s an abuse of power. I think there needs to be some 
leeway in there for minor issues, minor irritants — such as the 
member from Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker — and that we can 
deal with things in an appropriate manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act goes on further to talk about some of the 
other issues that are of concern to people across the province, 
Mr. Speaker. It talks about how the board should gain access to 
information. It talks about being able to investigate, to be able 
to enter into premises for the means of examining documents, 
for observing the carrying on of business. 
 
And it talks in particular, Mr. Speaker, about what is required 
from an employer and it talks about what is required from a 
trade union that is making an application. Either one — the 
employer making the application or the trade union making the 
application and the relationship based on that application, Mr. 
Speaker, and how the Labour Relations Board will deal with 
them. And it says, Mr. Speaker, that the board will have: 
 

(e) the power to require any person, trade union or 
employer to post and keep posted in a place determined by 
the board, or to send by any means that the board 
determines, any notice that the board considers necessary 
to bring to the attention of any employee . . . 



2852 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

Now that in itself in relationship to the boards . . . the 
application before the board, I think is appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker, that all the employees, whether you be the owner, 
whether you be the president, whether you be an employee on 
the union shop floor, that everyone has the opportunity to be 
aware of what is going on, so that the labour board can 
communicate with all of the employees, either as a employer or 
an employee. 
 
But I think it’s also important, Mr. Speaker, that both the other 
two parties involved in this, the trade union and the business, 
also have an opportunity to communicate with the employees, 
Mr. Speaker, and I don’t see that being dealt with here. I see the 
board’s concerns being dealt with as far as their 
communications, but I don’t see the opportunity for the 
employer or the trade union’s communications being dealt with 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Further on, Mr. Speaker, under clause (f): 
 

(f) the power to enter any premises of an employer where 
work is being or has been done by employees, or in which 
the employer carries on a business, whether or not the 
premises are those of the employer, and to inspect and 
view any work, material, machinery, appliances, articles, 
records or documents [or] . . . question any [purpose] . . . 

 
Well that’s pretty broad, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not unusual 
for outside of the workplace, for work to be carried out from the 
employer’s point of view, Mr. Speaker. The employer may have 
other management employees over to their home for supper or 
just even for a meeting, Mr. Speaker, in which they’re carrying 
out business, business of that organization. So that opens up, 
Mr. Speaker, that the board can then go into that home and 
search for all of the things that are mentioned here — any work, 
material, machinery, appliances, articles, records, or documents, 
or question any person. 
 
So if the employees — yours, the manager, the president, 
whatever they might be, spouse — happens to be there, they can 
question them even though they aren’t related to the business, 
Mr. Speaker. They can go into their home and question their 
spouses. I believe that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. Not even the 
police, Mr. Speaker, in investigation of a crime have that 
ability. If they wish to enter into a person’s home they have to 
get a warrant. If they want to question a person then they have 
to inform them of their rights, Mr. Speaker, so that they can be 
protected as well. 
 
And none of that is being provided under the Labour Relations 
Board with this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. But 
let’s take a look now at the other side, because this doesn’t 
affect just employers. It also affects the trade unions. Here is 
what the Act says about the powers of the board in relationship 
to the trade unions: 
 

. . . the power to enter any premises of a trade union and to 
inspect and view any work, material, articles, records or 
documents and question any person . . . 

 
Well just quickly reading through that, Mr. Speaker, you think 
it’s the same thing because it deals with the same items. But, 
Mr. Speaker, nowhere in here does it say that the Labour 

Relations Board can go anyplace other than where the trade 
union is at. So if the head of the trade union discusses business 
with other members of the trade union in his home, the Labour 
Relations Board does not have the right to investigate that home 
or look for materials and records and documents, etc., at that 
home. 
 
So I guess you have to ask: why is it acceptable to invade the 
home of one group of this discussion and not the other? If one’s 
home should be sacrosanct, then the home on the other side 
should be sacrosanct as well, Mr. Speaker. And if the Labour 
Relations Board wants to carry on an investigation in a home, 
then they should have to get a warrant. They should have to go 
before a judge. Whether it’s the employer’s home or the trade 
unionist’s, they should have to go before a judge and explain to 
the judge why they believe it’s necessary that they have this 
warrant to search someone’s home. 
 
You can’t do it for drugs, Mr. Speaker, you just can’t walk in 
and search someone’s home. You can’t do it under the liberal 
government’s Firearms Act even though they wanted to that 
initially, Mr. Speaker. So why can you do that under the Labour 
Relations Act? It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is clearly a violation of people’s human rights in Canada. 
It’s clearly a violation of what Pierre Trudeau brought forward 
in 1982, supported, Mr. Speaker, by Allan Blakeney, designed 
and built and agreed to by another premier in this province, Roy 
Romanow, when he sat around the kitchen table, Mr. Speaker, 
with the Attorney General of Ontario, Roy McMurtry, and, Mr. 
Speaker, the federal Minister of Justice at that time, Jean 
Chrétien. So why is this NDP government today trying to 
abrogate the rights and privileges that each Canadian citizen 
holds dearly with this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us why they would do that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleague says, 
why would they want to do that. That’s a very good question. I 
can’t get into the minds of the members opposite to understand 
how they think. But they somehow believe that there is some 
sort of a nefarious happening going on that businesses need, or 
businesses should have that threat hanging over their head, that 
the Labour Relations Board can come swooping into your 
business, take all of your records, come into your home and 
violate your privacy, with impunity, Mr. Speaker, because they 
further on go to say that members of the Labour Relations 
Board should be treated as if they were . . . I’ll read it: 
 

The members of the board shall have the same privileges 
and immunities as a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re not appointed to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. They’re on the Labour Relations Board which 
. . . The Court of Queen’s Bench requires different rules and 
regulations and conduct from judges than does the Labour 
Relations Board, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have to meet the 
same strict requirements that a judge has to. And yet they’re 
being given the same immunity as a judge receives, Mr. 
Speaker, even though they don’t have to meet the same 
qualifications and the same review in receiving an appointment. 
 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2853 

Mr. Speaker, a Court of Queen’s Bench judge is appointed with 
a recommendation by the Law Society. Who makes that 
recommendation, Mr. Speaker, for an appointment to the 
Labour Relations Board? There is no professional society that 
makes that, that judges the applicants. Or the people who may 
be qualified to become a judge, there is a group for that. But 
there is no professional society that judges the qualifications to 
become a member of the Labour Relations Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[17:00] 
 
So the criteria is completely different, and yet this government 
wants to give them the same immunities as members of the 
court would receive, Mr. Speaker. And clearly that, again, is not 
an acceptable practice, Mr. Speaker. If they want to have the 
immunities and the privileges of a judge, then they should go 
through the same kind of rigorous process of selection that a 
judge goes through, Mr. Speaker. Their impartiality should be 
ensured just like a judge. 
 
And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, I was just reading today one of the 
other Acts that are before the House, dealing with Executive 
Council and the Legislative Assembly, on who and who cannot 
be a member of this Assembly, who can and cannot participate 
in partisan politics. And judges are one of those that are 
excluded. No place in there, in this Act does it say that the 
members of the Labour Relations Board can’t participate in 
partisan politics, Mr. Speaker, so the criteria is completely 
different. Therefore they should not receive those immunities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government wants to insist that the Labour 
Relations Board has the power to enter into any premises where 
they consider that business may have been carried out or that 
there may be work, or materials, machinery, appliances, 
articles, records, documents, and to question any person on the 
employer’s side, then those very same things need to apply on 
the trade union side as well. 
 
We in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, believe that there is a need 
for fairness. And clearly these two sections of the Act, 18(f) and 
18(g), are not equally weighted, Mr. Speaker. There is no 
fairness when they are different. Either one of them needs to be 
changed, Mr. Speaker. Either businesses have the same rights 
and the same protections that the trade unions have, or the trade 
unions have to face the same impositions that the businesses, 
the employers face, Mr. Speaker. You can’t have both of them 
being unfair. 
 
Another sector, Mr. Speaker, that deserves and needs some 
consideration in this particular Act, needs to be reviewed, is the 
section dealing with new first contracts where the board . . . I’ll 
read this section: 
 

If the board has made an order pursuant to clause 5(b), the 
trade union and the employer, or their authorized 
representatives, must meet and commence bargaining 
collectively within 20 days after the order is made, unless 
the parties agree otherwise. 
 

And this is for a first contract, Mr. Speaker, where the board has 
determined on certification of a new workplace. So they have to 
meet within 20 days to commence collective bargaining. 

Well 20 days at the beginning, you know, there’s probably still 
some animosities there, but 20 days is maybe not too bad. But it 
should say 20 working days, Mr. Speaker, rather than 20 days 
because you could end up with that period being over a couple 
of statutory holidays — three of them if you’re looking at 
Christmastime — where there isn’t a lot of work that happens in 
that particular period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so there will be some difficulties there in completing this 
within 20 days if you’re simply looking at the calendar and 
marking off 1 to 20, Mr. Speaker. It should be 20 working days. 
So that takes into account time that people may not be at their 
place of work because of statutory holidays, weekends, or 
whatever the case may be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the real, the real crutch though, Mr. Speaker, on this comes 
in at the tail end where under this Act the union and the 
employers have to have completed their first contract within 90 
days, Mr. Speaker — within 90 days. So really it gives them 70 
calendar days in which to do their negotiation. So they’re 
starting with a clean slate, a blank piece of paper, and now they 
have to go through and define every position. They have to go 
through and define the criteria for every position. They have to 
go through and determine the qualifications, how you would 
move up or down the ladder, Mr. Speaker. You have to 
determine all of the salary scales. You have to determine which 
positions are in scope, which positions are out of scope, Mr. 
Speaker. There is a lot of work to do. 
 
And I don’t believe . . . And if you talk to most people, 
including union members, they will tell you that the first 
contract rarely, if ever, happens within 90 days because there is 
too much to do to get there. And fact is, if you look at most first 
contracts, Mr. Speaker, you’re probably approaching closer to a 
year than you are to 90 days. 
 
So I think the government is rushing this in attempting to force 
it in 90 days, but then perhaps that’s the government’s desire to 
be able to use the Labour Relations Board to impose a first 
contract on a new workplace, a contract that’s not negotiated 
between the employees and the employer but rather one that’s 
been imposed by the government. And we’ve seen how 
successful that has worked, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen how 
successful the government’s 0, 1, and 1 mandate is on salary 
negotiations with its very own workers that have been . . . these 
contracts have been in place for many, many years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And yet when the other night in questioning the Minister of 
Health, he was asked how long have the health negotiations 
been going on with the union’s representative in that sector, 
these contracts have been going on, in some cases, negotiations 
for over a year, Mr. Speaker, and these contracts are already in 
place. They’re not trying to establish all the ground rules; that’s 
already there. And yet it’s taken the government over a year to 
negotiate an existing contract, Mr. Speaker, and yet they expect 
a new union dealing with a new workplace to complete their 
negotiations within 90 days of which 70 days of that is the real 
negotiation because there’s 20 days set aside for the first 
meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clearly the government either is being unrealistic in putting 
forward 90 days, or they have some other motive, Mr. Speaker, 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

for doing this — that they want to simply impose on that 
workplace the contract, whatever it might be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that again we see the government 
interfering in the negotiations within the workplace with fair . . . 
interfering in fair bargaining practices, Mr. Speaker, simply to 
impose their own will for whatever political purpose they may 
have, Mr. Speaker, on those employees and on that workplace. 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is a considerable amount of difficulty 
with this particular Act that I think the government needs to 
have some sober second thought on before they proceed with it. 
 
So you have to wonder though, Mr. Speaker, exactly what it is 
that this whole Act is supposed to be doing, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re giving the Labour Relations Board powers that the 
police do not have. They’re trying to make the members of the 
Labour Relations Board . . . give them immunity and privilege 
that Queen’s Bench judges have. They’re trying to impose on 
the workplace, on the employees and the employers, a contract 
with an unrealistic time frame in it for negotiations. So why is 
this, Mr. Speaker? What are they trying to do? I guess we need 
to go back to the very beginning. What is the government trying 
to fix with this legislation? What was the problem that 
precipitated these changes, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The government has not explained that at all. The questions 
have been asked. The Minister of Labour has not answered the 
question: what is broken that you’re trying to fix, Mr. Speaker? 
And we get nothing for answers. We get words, but they don’t 
add up to an understandable meaning, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister simply continues to skirt the issue and refuses to 
answer as to why they are carrying on in the manner that they’re 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a good number of reasons why this 
particular piece of legislation needs to be given more time for 
the government to give consideration to either withdrawing it or 
making the changes that are necessary in bringing a piece of 
legislation like this forward. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on second reading of Bill 87, The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 88 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 88 — The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 88, An Act to amend The Health Labour 

Relations Reorganization Act. As we know, Mr. Speaker, the 
Dorsey report came in, and the government brought in a Bill in 
1996 to bring together many or all of the health care workers 
under the same bargaining units. And this amendment really 
speaks to two components. 
 
This Bill is giving the Labour Relations Board the power to 
make an order on multi-employer bargaining units. As an 
example, Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, SUN, represents 
members across the province who work in different health 
authorities. And the other part of the Bill that it does . . . it 
extends the Dorsey recommendations for another year which 
prevents members, who have been put in unions by Dorsey 
when the health regions were rejigged the first time around, 
from applying to the Labour Relations Board as The Trade 
Union Act gives them the right to, to choose the union that they 
wish to represent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s some unions that have been very 
upset with this, and the medical technologists and technicians 
have been lobbying the government for the past nine years to 
have the right to choose their own union. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve been very vocal about their concerns, and I’d just like 
to read parts of a letter to the editor that the president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Medical Technicians and 
Technologists Inc. has to say. And the president writes: 
 

I am writing [to respond] to concerns raised by [the] 
SAMTT members to statements made by the 
Saskatchewan Labour Minister Deb Higgins. 
 
In the Provincial Legislature on March 31, 2005, the 
Honourable Ms. Higgins defended a proposed bill which 
ensures further segregation, discrimination and oppression 
of the Health Care Workers in Saskatchewan. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

On three occasions Ms. Higgins stated “The Trade Union 
Act does not allow for decisions to be made in 
multi-employer bargaining units by the Labour Relations 
Board.” However, contrary to her statement, the 
recommendation of the Dorsey Commission which states 
“Two province-wide, multi-employer standard bargaining 
units [with] specific occupations will be the only 
exceptions to the 30 primary all-employee units” was put 
into effect by The Health Labour Reorganization in 1996. 
There are currently five Unions in Saskatchewan for 
Health Care Workers: CUPE, SEIU . . . SGEU, which 
cover multi-employer standard bargaining units for the 
Health Service Providers; [and] HSAS which covers 
multi-employer bargaining units for Licensed Providers, 
and SUN which covers multi-employer bargaining units 
for Nurses. 
 

And the letter goes on, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Under the Trade Union Acts in all provinces and 
territories: “Employees [and he quotes, employees] have 
the right to organize in, and to form, join or assist trade 
unions and to bargain collectively through a trade Union 
of their own choosing.” However, under the Health Labour 
Relations Reorganization Act, Saskatchewan Health Care 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

Workers are not presently allowed these rights enjoyed by 
other Canadian workers. Health Care Workers in 
Saskatchewan deserve the right not to be segregated, 
oppressed, or discriminated against in the name of Health 
Care Reorganization. If the Trade Union Act does not 
allow for decisions to be made in multi-employer 
bargaining units [for] the Labour Relations Board, as 
stated by the Honourable Ms. Higgins, then amendments 
should be made to the Labour Act. 
 

And he goes on to say: 
 

Any solution to Health Care Labour issues must start with 
a mutual respect towards all parties involved which 
includes the rights and freedoms allowed workers under 
the law. The NDP should keep this in mind when they are 
representing the public. 
 

And the president signs off. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. The 
history of the NDP government, they brought in the Dorsey 
report. They forced amalgamation of the health care regions, 
initially to 32 districts, and now we know the regions are down 
to 13. But even this government not only didn’t trust the people 
of Saskatchewan to be able to work within the initial health care 
regions, but this government didn’t trust their traditional friends 
in the union movement when they forced various health care 
professionals into five bargaining units. 
 
And to this day, they have not allowed these various unions 
within these bargaining units to choose their own union or their 
bargaining unit that they would like to belong to. And every 
year the government brings in an amendment to the original 
1996 Bill, which continues this practice of not allowing, as in 
this case, the medical technicians and technologists to, under 
The Trade Union Act, to choose their own bargaining unit. 
 
And it makes you wonder why that this NDP government, Mr. 
Speaker, seems like they don’t seem to trust anyone in 
Saskatchewan. They force the changes in the health districts. As 
we’ve seen, they’ve tried to force amalgamation of RMs, and 
they had to back down on that. They have now forced the 
amalgamation of school boards, Mr. Speaker, and it’s just a 
repetition of not trusting people in Saskatchewan, not trusting 
business, not trusting even their so-called labour friends into 
deciding which bargaining unit that they would like to 
represent. 
 
And it’s interesting that the government has not respected the 
wishes of the people of Saskatchewan, and they don’t respect 
the wishes of the rank and file of this particular union and, I 
might add, many other members that belong to unions. As we 
see, this government not only doesn’t trust the people of 
Saskatchewan. They don’t trust the businesses, and they don’t 
trust the rank and file union members. 
 
But when we look at what the government does, as an example 
in SPUDCO, when they pretended to have a private partner 
with 51 per cent of the SPUDCO operation to get around their 
own labour laws — and it’s interesting again, they stab the 
people that are traditionally their friends in the back every time 
— and we find out later the minister of the day had to 
apologize. He not only kept the truth from the legislature and 
the people of Saskatchewan, but even his own caucus and 

cabinet were not aware of what was going on. And it’s 
interesting, the mindset of the member and of this government 
when it comes to these types of labour issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is this union to do? Well the 
government continues to bring in an amendment to the original 
Bill in 1996. And again and again, year after year, this union 
and other unions come and they lobby hard to really regain their 
right, which is allowed to other people in Saskatchewan under 
The Trade Union Act. And year after year, this government 
does not allow them their basic rights which is given to workers 
across Canada, in other provinces across Canada, which the 
labour movement across Canada takes for granted; that they’re 
able to choose their own bargaining unit and work things out 
with their employer on the basis of their own bargaining unit 
that they would wish to belong to. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the government continues 
to really run away from this particular union, from the 
rank-and-file members of this union and the other members of 
the labour movement because, for what reason, we can only 
guess. We can only guess why. But I suggest that this 
government doesn’t trust these people. This government seems 
to be paranoid about allowing other people in Saskatchewan 
society to make their own way. And this government seems to 
feel that they have to have control of every item in the society. 
 
And if the NDP government doesn’t get its way, well they bring 
in laws to change things so that they control, they continue to 
keep control, power in their hands, and quite frankly to the 
detriment of the province. But the NDP keep gathering more 
control and power over the lives of people rather than letting the 
people of Saskatchewan having the freedom to choose their 
own bargaining unit and the right to bargain freely as every 
other union in the country does, and as in every other province. 
So it’s very interesting that this government continues to do 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting circumstances that we find 
ourselves in. It’s very interesting to see the SAMTT 
[Saskatchewan Association of Medical Technicians and 
Technologists Inc.] members continuing to have concerns about 
this Bill. And one wonders how long will it be before this NDP 
government begins to trust the rank-and-file members of this 
union to determine their own future in their own way, like every 
other union does in the province, and quite frankly, in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so we will continue to . . . other members of my 
party would like to speak to this Bill. And we will continue to 
consult with the people of Saskatchewan and the rank-and-file 
union members of this province. And we will continue to put 
pressure on this government to really take a second look and 
begin to trust the people of Saskatchewan, because at the end of 
the day, the people of Saskatchewan know better than the NDP 
government. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 88, The Health 
Labour . . . Order, members. That Bill No. 88, The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 95 — The 
Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise today to talk regarding the ecological reserve Act, Bill 95. 
And before starting, I had the pleasure of reading the comments 
made by the member from Cypress Hills. And in regards to this 
Bill, I think he put it the best that I’ve ever heard. And I would 
just like to quote in his comments regarding this Bill to 
reinforce to the Assembly what is happening in the Great Sand 
Hills. And the member says, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, nobody has offered more protection to the 
delicate nature of the Sand Hills than the very individuals 
who are operating leases in that area, who are running 
cattle in that area . . . who are very protective, personally 
. . . [for] the fragile, ecological balance that exists in that 
particular area of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Cypress knows this area like the 
back of his hand and he speaks very well of it. His concerns, 
and concerns of many of the people from the Great Sand Hills, 
is the fact that this Bill triples the size of the area that was 
protected before, tripling the size of that, Mr. Speaker, and 
unless the government has good reason to do this, then I have 
questions regarding it. 
 
I also read the report from the Minister from Environment and 
in his second reading of this Bill, he states and I quote: 
 

The Great Sand Hills ecological reserve covers 36,585 
hectares or 141.25 square miles. That’s about 18 per cent 
of the Great Sand Hills. The amendments would allow for 
activities such as exercising treaty rights, ranching and 
hunting to continue in the Great Sand Hills representative 
areas . . . However, [however, Mr. Speaker] activities such 
as gas development would not be allowed. 

 
Now let me repeat that again, Mr. Speaker. The amendments 
would allow for activities such as exercising treaty rights, 
ranching, and hunting to continue, but not gas development. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as a member of the Wildlife Federation — 
and a long-time member of the Wildlife Federation and kind of 
an environment activist — I remember asking questions of this 
government regarding critical habitat wildlife land, protected 
land. And we all know what happened last year when I started 
asking question in estimates regarding this land, and found out 
that this government, the NDP government was selling off that 
land, turning that land into land to satisfy treaty rights. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this critical habitat wildlife land that we 

have in place was put in place by a lot of individuals — 
biologists, Wildlife Federation membership, members. 
Members from the government sat down and decided what land 
in the province of Saskatchewan should be set aside for wildlife 
or environment, and they took a lot of time and did a lot of 
homework to preserve that land. And out of the blue the 
government comes along and it says with a stroke of the pen, 
we will use this critical, very, very critical land to satisfy treaty 
land entitlements. 
 
And here we are, Mr. Speaker, right back to the same thing. We 
have land that is somewhat protected in the Great Sand Hills, 
and the minister states that the amendments that would allow 
activities of this land to exercise treaty rights, hunting, and 
ranching. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are we going with this? In the comments 
made by the member from Cypress Hills, he states that the 
ranchers of that land are probably the best and most critical 
environmentalists of that land. They know the land inside and 
out. And now with this amendment or this Act we are going to 
have another body who . . . Are they better users of the land? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Federation raised questions regarding 
this critical habitat wildlife land and I brought them to the 
legislature. And at that point in time the minister said that they 
would be replacing the land that they took out of the critical 
habitat wildlife protection Act, replacing it with land, but they 
were going to leave the land in question as it is, under 
protection. 
 
Now we have some more land, and is this going into that same 
parcel of critical habitat wildlife land? If it is, why are we 
allowing it for hunting? I don’t follow the minister’s reasoning 
in protecting this land unless he is going to give it sole 
protection. And I don’t believe he’s doing that with 
recommendations regarding this amendment Act. 
 
So I believe, Mr. Minister, you have to go back to your drawing 
board and explain why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I do believe that the member 
ought to make all of his remarks to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I know I 
should be doing that but the minister over there, I was trying to 
get his attention. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. There ought not to be . . . 
Order, order. There ought not to be any debate on a ruling of the 
Speaker. I recognize the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will not do 
that again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to this Act, I’m wondering what the 
Wildlife Federation is going to say when they read this. I 
believe they will have concerns regarding this. Not only them, 
but other officials, other people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, especially people from the Southwest, will have 
problems with this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, the Great Sand Hills is very, very 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

critical land and I believe that there should be an environmental 
assessment of this land. The assessment should be conducted in 
an environmental impact assessment which sets forth the basics 
for a comprehensive implementation plan for long-term 
management of the Great Sand Hills. 
 
I also believe that the involvement of land users and those with 
an interest in this environmental impact assessment process 
should be contacted. I don’t believe that all the users of that 
land have been contacted and I believe they have issues with 
that. 
 
There is also, Mr. Speaker, the zoning outside of this additional 
existing protected land, this extra land put into the Act. What is 
going to be the zoning bylaws of that said land and what is 
going to be the existing protections regarding that land? 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in that said land there should be 
conservationists that will look at the wildlife of that land. They 
should conduct surveys for rare and endangered species, they 
should establish standards that include the use of appropriate 
native plants, and also assess the need to increase and decrease 
hunting opportunities, ensure that the steps are taken to manage 
the risk of wildfires. 
 
In regards to increasing or decreasing hunting opportunities, 
Mr. Speaker, when we go back to the comments made by the 
minister in regarding this land set aside for treaty rights, I’m 
just wondering if this will put a huge impact on the hunting of 
that said land. I’m wondering if this said land will then become 
an outfitting business, which then will put a huge amount of 
pressure on the resources of that said land. 
 
So there again, Mr. Speaker, I also think that the minister needs 
to conduct some worthy studies of this to see what impact that 
will make on that land. It also will make an impact on the 
government as far as selling hunting licences to that land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also need to conserve the air and the water 
resources. We also need to understand the groundwater 
resources contained within the Great Sand Hills. We need to 
conserve and develop and implement a water management 
strategy, and we need to understand the impacts of all forms of 
airborne pollution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s lots that needs to be understood about this 
Act regarding the Great Sand Hills and we need to do it before 
this Bill is passed. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I 
know that there are many colleagues of mine that would like to 
speak regarding this Bill, and I would like to hear from 
organizations in and around the province regarding this Bill; 
and therefore I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook that debate on second reading of Bill 95, 
The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 

Bill No. 98 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 98 — The Prairie 
and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure I 
rise to speak on Bill No. 98, The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act. 
 
I recognize the intent of this Bill, but I’m concerned that there 
will be no reduction in funding. And then also, I’ve got a 
concern with the let it burn policy. And I quote from Hansard 
the other day where the Environment minister says: 
 

The new policy also allows fire, wherever possible, to play 
a more natural role in the ecology of our northern forest. 
 

How will you control the fire, is my question. When a fire runs 
along treetops, how do you stop that fire when it reaches a 
populated area? 
 
Controlling fires is as an exacting an art as picking lottery ticket 
numbers. I’ve seen the damage done by a well-intending farmer 
burning stubble. Letting a forest fire burn could have the same 
effect only on a much, much larger scale. Our main concern is 
first for human life and letting a fire run is a very, very risky 
venture. Adequate funding must be in place, and adequate 
equipment and trained personnel must be in place. There can be 
no compromise on that. 
 
When the province was born in 1905, Big River saw mill was 
the largest saw mill in the entire British Empire. So we have 
tremendous potential. I would like to see Saskatchewan forestry 
again become forestry leaders in Canada. The forestry centre in 
P.A. [Prince Albert] says we have that potential to rival British 
Columbia. 
 
I believe we should be harvesting forests, not letting them burn. 
Saskatchewan forests reach maturity at approximately 80 years 
of age. We should be harvesting them at that time. Young 
forests are not such a risk to burning as old forests. When 
forests get old, they die. In the majority of cases, this death is 
by fire. So fire is the great renewer of the forest. The problem is 
that it’s very, very uncontrollable and so very dangerous. 
Caution must be taken to be sure the proper steps are taken to 
protect our people and to advance our forest industry that it 
might achieve maximum potential. 
 
If the minister will assure us that there will be adequate funding 
if a wildfire takes place, I will take this Bill out to the people 
who work in the forest and seek their approval. In order to do 
this at this time, I would ask to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Batoche 
that debate on Bill No. . . . second reading of Bill No. 98, The 
Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005, be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 99 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 99 — The 
Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan 
Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 
opposition has had the privilege of talking to a number of 
people who are very much in support of Bill No. 99, An Act 
respecting the Canadian Information Processing Society of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve had correspondence from the president of 
the Saskatchewan branch, and I have met personally with one of 
the vice-presidents and had a lengthy and substantial . . . 
substantive discussion with him about this particular piece of 
legislation. And as a consequence, I understand that by and 
large the organization is very supportive of this legislation and 
would like to see it move forward in the near future. 
 
The Canadian Information Processing Society goes by the 
acronym CIPS, C-I-P-S, and it’s used fairly frequently in the 
information processing arena. People are quite aware of what it 
stands for. And as well there’s another acronym that has 
become very important and it’s really part of what forms the 
initial intent and the substantive intent of this particular Bill. It’s 
the designation ISP, which stands for information systems 
professional. Now, Mr. Speaker, this designation has been 
around for some time and it’s been used with more or less 
legality in various jurisdictions. 
 
The Canadian Information Processing Society is a Canada-wide 
organization. And there’s been a provincial chapter of CIPS that 
has been in operation here in Saskatchewan since about 2000, I 
believe. The provincial branch has approximately 250 active 
members of which 150 hold the designation ISP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the ISP designation held by 
those individuals was actually obtained from other jurisdictions 
where the designation has already been made legal. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, there seemed to be a growing interest in having that 
designation recognized officially in Saskatchewan for use by 
professionals within the information processing arena. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to obtain the ISP designation that is being sought 
here, an individual needs to prove the following two or three 
items. And I’ve put their charter and their obligations into my 
own vernacular and I hope that I will adequately express the 
requirements of the designation — the ISP designation. 
 
But if you plan to become an ISP designated professional in the 
information arena, you want to prove the following: you want to 
prove that you personally possess the appropriate body of 
knowledge by holding a post-secondary degree or a technical 
school diploma. And failing having those particular educational 
standards, if you have the experience and the knowledge, there 
are exam equivalencies that are available to those who wish to 

challenge the standards to achieve that designation. So you can, 
based on your experience and your knowledge of the industry, 
become an ISP, assuming that you can challenge and meet the 
requirements necessary without having had the formal academic 
credentials. 
 
Secondly, you want to prove that you as an individual have 
achieved a minimum of two years of appropriate work 
experience in the areas of information processing. And there’s a 
variety of areas, most of which are more technical than I 
personally comprehend. But nevertheless there’s a variety of 
areas of expertise that you can gain your experience within, but 
they aren’t all identical. 
 
And thirdly, you want to prove the following: that you are 
willing and prepared to abide by a code of ethical conduct when 
you apply for your ISP [information service professional] and 
operate under it. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if I’ve got the 
code of ethics that the organization holds up as the standard for 
its members, but I have seen it. And it’s a very lengthy 
document and is the kind of document that challenges the 
people who are aspiring to be ISP designates to a very high 
standard of behaviour. 
 
And I think that it’s important for a number of reasons to have 
that code of ethics, that high bar of standards in place because 
anybody who holds that designation is going to be recognized 
by the general public as somebody who has a certain level of 
experience, expertise, education, and the highest ethical 
standards. And having established that as part of the 
professional designation, I think, gives creditability to the ISP 
designation and to the individuals who hold it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular designation, ISP — information 
systems professional — is currently recognized in several 
Canadian provinces and recognizes or indicates a level of 
professional capability that other individuals who operate in 
that world of information processing may not actually have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was one of the concerns, or one of the issues I 
raised with an individual who was talking to me about the need 
for this particular piece of legislation and the opportunities 
having this legislation would present for those professionals. I 
asked him point blank, if this is a requirement of the industry, 
what do you do about the young people who come out of school 
with all kinds of whiz kid knowledge — if I can use that 
terminology — all kinds of capability, all sorts of intelligence 
when it comes to dealing with information processing, but 
haven’t achieved the educational standards or the professional 
standards that one might require? Does that mean that those 
people will be put out of business? 
 
I don’t want to see anything come into place, Mr. Speaker, that 
would squelch the enthusiasm of the younger generation or the 
entrepreneurial spirit of that generation or the capabilities that 
often come with this new technology at a very young age. 
 
[17:45] 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you’ve experienced this; I know 
many of our colleagues have. When we’ve gone to trade shows 
in the community of Regina we’ve seen information processing 
capability being promoted by extraordinarily young 



May 3, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

entrepreneurs, and most of whom have learned their trade, 
learned their business, learned their capability because they so 
readily adapt to the new technology. And many of them just 
come by it naturally. Many of them are, I would almost suggest, 
superhumanly endowed with an ability in terms of computer use 
and capability. 
 
But the purpose of this particular designation is not to run those 
young people, those whiz kids, out of business. The purpose of 
this designation is to establish a standard of professionalism that 
they too can aspire to achieve. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the ISP designation will really provide a 
level of confidence or assurance to people in our society who 
will be purchasing services and products from those people who 
are in the information processing area. They will have 
confidence of their capability and their expertise. 
 
The ISP designation, Mr. Speaker, further, is a professional 
designation. It gives recognition to an achieved level of 
expertise. It’s not a licence to practise as it might be in some 
other professions. It’s really a recognition of the professional 
attainment of the individual who has had the opportunity to 
prove their merit and their capability and achieve the ISP 
designation. 
 
It’s believed that there are potentially upwards of 1,200 people 
in the province of Saskatchewan, people who are working in 
this particular industry, who would benefit from the ISP 
designation were it available in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And I think that that by itself, Mr. Speaker, is an indication of 
how much growth there is in this particular industry, how much 
potential there is, and how much critical mass there is in the 
area of information technology in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, participation in the Saskatchewan branch of the 
Canadian Information Processing Society is voluntary. The 
membership in CIPS Saskatchewan is completely unobliged. 
They do this voluntarily, and the organization collects 
membership dues from the people who want to be part of this 
organization. And those dues of course are a means of 
supporting the activities of the organization in its state, its more 
or less unorganized state now but in the future as it becomes 
more organized. 
 
The Saskatchewan branch of CIPS is really quite anxious to 
have this legislation put in place. They want to see this 
legislation progress through the provincial legislature as soon as 
possible, so that they will be able to announce the recognition 
of the ISP designation at a large informatics conference that is 
slated for the city of Regina at the end of this month. I believe 
the dates are May 29 to 31. 
 
And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this legislature will be able to 
obligate . . . I’m sorry, oblige rather, the organization with the 
movement of this legislation through the legislature in a timely 
fashion to meet their purposes for the announcement of this 
designation at the conference. 
 
I brought a brochure, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure if you’re 
interested or if any of the other members of the House are 
interested, but it seems to me that this particular conference 

being held in Regina is an indication of the seriousness with 
which the local provincial branch actually takes their 
responsibility. They want to participate in this organization at a 
full participatory level and having this conference here indicates 
the seriousness with which they take that responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some questions though that I have as part 
of this legislation that I think need to be attended to. We would 
like to raise them now just briefly before we conclude our 
comments on this particular Bill. 
 
But there were some interesting anomalies as we were looking 
through the legislation. One of them was simply the length of 
the Bill. The Bill is, as I recall, about 18 pages in length. Now 
let me just have a look, Mr. Speaker, if I can do that. Yes, 
approximately 18 pages in length. Now I guess that raises the 
question, if there are several other jurisdictions in the country 
that recognize this professional designation already, what does 
their legislation say and how detailed and lengthy is it? 
 
Well we did a check, Mr. Speaker, and found that the province 
of Ontario has legislation recognizing the ISP designation. 
Their legislation is less than five pages long, Mr. Speaker. The 
province of Nova Scotia has a similar Act recognizing the ISP 
designation. Unfortunately it’s only similar, I suppose, in the 
fact that it achieves the professionalism that the people in that 
province wanted. But the Act there is seven pages. We have a 
copy of the Act that came out of New Brunswick and, Mr. 
Speaker, this Act is in French and English, and it totals four 
pages. The Saskatchewan Act is roughly 18 pages long. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that raises the question why is it necessary 
to have an Act doing exactly what is achieved and necessary for 
professional recognition of these people in other jurisdictions, 
why is it necessary for the Saskatchewan Act to be 18 pages 
long? It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that while this government 
is helping achieve a purpose that the information professionals 
want to achieve in the province of Saskatchewan, they’ve gone 
overboard a little bit in the requirements and standards that 
they’re establishing for this particular organization. 
 
There is a question that rose as I was looking through the Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, and one of the things that jumped out at me is the 
government’s deliberate effort to at least keep tabs on this 
organization in a rather unusual way. And that is that the 
government has ascribed to itself the authority to insist that 
some member be appointed to the board of the Saskatchewan 
branch of the CIPS to sit on the board. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the relevance of that type 
of position might be in this case. But nevertheless, while I 
found that particular requirement interesting, I found it even 
more so when it says under section 8(6) that the government’s 
appointee to this particular organization must be . . . Well 
maybe I’ll read it verbatim: 
 

The member of the executive appointed pursuant to this 
section [that would be the government appointee] shall be 
a member of the discipline committee. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that that’s at all relevant or necessary 
in this day and age. I don’t know what the government is trying 
to achieve in this particular part of the legislation when they 



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2005 

insist on having an appointee on the board of directors and, 
furthermore, that that appointee must be on the discipline 
committee of this organization. I find that quite unusual and 
quite unnecessary, Mr. Speaker. Unless there’s a good 
justification for that particular element in this Bill, I’d really 
suggest that the government drop that kind of influence and 
oversight on this particular organization. 
 
As part of our research on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, and 
when we found this one unusual example of government 
oversight that we felt was excessive or unnecessarily onerous, 
we asked about the similar provisions that might exist in other 
pieces of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing that came out of this 
particular search is that the government has ascribed to itself the 
same level of participation in almost every organization that has 
come to the government for recognition at this level. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, we have the very unusual set of circumstances 
where the government has allowed for itself a position on the 
board of directors of such worrisome organizations as the music 
teachers’ association of Saskatchewan. Now I’m just going to 
use that as an example. There are many, many others. 
 
But it appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that what we’ve got here is a 
piece of legislation that is a template-based Bill that imposes 
the same limitations and restrictions on any organization that 
comes to the government seeking its support for legal 
recognition. 
 
And I’m not so sure, Mr. Speaker, that I could justifiably say 
that that kind of oversight is necessary in these kinds of 
circumstances. There may be legitimate circumstances in the 
public interest where the government might want to play a role 
of appointees . . . or being able to make appointments to certain 
boards and agencies. And that’s done with some commonality, 
especially as it relates to the Law Society or the medical 
profession or some of those serious, highly regarded 
professions. But when you have an organization coming 
together, looking to advance its own interests, training its 
members, regulating its members, I’m really not sure that the 
government has a legitimate role on the board of that 
organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that the Saskatchewan branch of the 
Canadian Information Processing Society was anxious to see 
this legislation move forward. We too are anxious that their 
request be obliged. And so I think the balance of the questions 
that we want to raise ought to be done so in committee. And I 
move that this legislation move to that realm. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the Minister of Learning that Bill No. 99, The 
Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act, 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill referred? 
The Chair recognizes the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I move that Bill 99, The 
Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act, 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that Bill No. 99 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. The 
Chair recognizes the Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that the House adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House now stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:58.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2819 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2819 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2819 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2819 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2819 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2819 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2820 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2820 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2820 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2820 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2820 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2820 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2820 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Clerk Assistant (Committees) ................................................................................................................................................2821 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2821 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2821 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2821 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2821 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2821 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2822 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................2823 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2823 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2823 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2823 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2823 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2823 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2823 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2824 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2824 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2824 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina Student Wins Canada Day Poster Challenge 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2824 
 Saskatoon Bantam AA Raiders Capture Three Titles 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2825 
 Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Awareness Day 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2825 
 Swift Current Constituents Recognized 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2825 
 Saskatchewan 4-H Public Speaking Competition 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2826 
 Kelvington Hockey Victory 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2826 
 Special Olympics Saskatchewan Awards Banquet 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2826 
 



 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Labour Legislation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2827 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2827 
 Contracts with Angie and Jim Fergusson 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2828 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2829 
 Low Water Levels at Crooked Lake and Long Lake 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2831 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2831 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 122 — The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2832 
 Bill No. 123 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2832 
 Bill No. 124 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2005 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2832 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2832 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2832 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2832 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2833 
 Bill No. 96 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2834 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2834 
 Bill No. 97 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur une modification corrélative découlant de la loi intitulée The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
 Council Act, 2005 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2835 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2835 
 Bill No. 116 — The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2835 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2835 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2836 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2838 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................2840 
 Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2840 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................2841 
 Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2841 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................2842 
 Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2842 
 Bill No. 105 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2843 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................2846 
 Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2846 
 Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Municipalities Act 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2848 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2849 



 

 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2850 
 Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2854 
 Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2856 
 Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2857 
 Bill No. 99 — The Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2858 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................2860 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




