















































Hansard: May 10, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 109B  TUESDAY, MAY 10, 2005, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2989 
 May 10, 2005 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
estimates for the Department of Learning. And I recognize the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Just before we recessed for dinner tonight the member 
for Melfort had asked me about the situation with SchoolPLUS 
and where we were at in that process. He identified that we had 
allocated $2 million in this budget for SchoolPLUS. And as I 
understand the question, it was pertaining to whether we would 
see additional allocations either in other budgets reflecting 
SchoolPLUS or in this one flowing in to deal with questions of 
youth, justice, social work, health issues. 
 
One of the challenges we have with SchoolPLUS is that it is not at 
this point very clearly defined as to what the program is, the 
expectations are, or how it should be dealt with. And I can 
perhaps just share with members a few of the observations I 
have at this point on how we might move this forward. 
 
It is I think fair to say that members of the teaching profession 
are concerned that SchoolPLUS will essentially end up with them 
becoming the de facto agency for all child and youth services in 
the province. And this is a concern that we frankly in the 
department share, that this is not our objective through 
SchoolPLUS to have the ministry of Education or Learning 
become the repository for all the issues related to children and 
youth. 
 
So what we are trying to sort through is how we make the 
schools more of a contact point for those service delivery 
agencies but at the same point not absolve other agencies of 
their responsibility to look after issues affecting children and 
youth. And this is part of what we are trying to work through. 
 
Ray Boughen, in his report had recommended each department 
identify an amount that they contribute to SchoolPLUS or 
essentially the services for children and youth. We have not yet 
been able to articulate how that works. 
 
So part of this has been us trying to sort through in a more 
broad sense across government how we identify what issues 
should be delivered at school-based locations, and to what 
extent we have the school system adopt it. 
 
I have noticed recently that some school divisions have started 
now advertising for — I think there’s an advertisement in one 
of the papers — for a SchoolPLUS social worker. While this is 
certainly within the options available to school boards, to start 
moving into that direction, I worry a little bit that what we are 
starting to see is the schools deciding or school boards deciding 
that SchoolPLUS now means that they are responsible for all 

these services. 
 
Over the next year, I really think we are going to have to spend 
some time working through what the program design looks like, 
what the expectations are, and what it means. From my view, 
what it should mean is that SchoolPLUS is our invitation to other 
agencies to use our facilities, to work with us in partnership, to 
build a collaborative environment that deals with children and 
youth, but that allows schools and teachers to go back to their 
primary focus which is education and teaching. And what we 
need to do is to make sure that that balance is appropriately 
struck. 
 
So I appreciate that that’s a bit of a lengthy and perhaps 
somewhat nebulous answer but this is perhaps the best way just 
to frame where we’re at today on SchoolPLUS and some of the 
issues we need to work through. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. I think that 
the concept that SchoolsPLUS is sort of the collector agency if 
you like for these various services, but you know I think that the 
word, the phrase you used I think was an invitation to 
participate from the other departments. The worry of course is, 
is that the learning profession, the teachers in the schools are 
going to somehow be left with these expectations building that 
these programs are going to be all integrated and assimilated 
and championed out of the school and the appropriate financial 
and human resources aren’t going to be there. 
 
And as a result teachers who are feeling very often under a great 
deal of pressure to provide much more than the basic core 
curriculum, that are being asked to provide so many more 
services, are feeling very, very pressured and harried. And this 
is not one of the positives about recruitment and retention in the 
profession. I mean we can add on increments into the grid to 
compensate for some of the extra pressure but then there’s the 
issue of pressure and tension and all these expectations that get 
harder and harder to meet. 
 
And I think, Minister, that certainly if we’re going to move 
forward with the concept of SchoolPLUS, we’re going to have to 
worry very hard, if we’re coming from a perspective of 
learning, to make sure that the invitation to participate is 
accepted and it isn’t just something that’s left dangling and we 
get caught with it. Because I think that’s a worry. 
 
The concept, the principle — I think what I’m hearing from the 
teaching profession is very positive but they’re worried about 
being left holding with less than the desirable amount of 
resources from other departments to make this happen. 
 
The other thing is, Minister, I think that again one of the 
realities of the new world is that in many instances, primarily in 
high school, you have single mothers going back for upgrading 
in order to improve their averages or broaden their courses so 
they can go into other professions. 
 
And the issue of child care is becoming increasingly something 
that, in my experience, is fairly new to the learning milieu. Do 
you see this as well as being something that has to be dealt with 
inter-agency wide in order to provide the kind of support that’s 
needed for single moms so that they can actually take advantage 



2990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

of improving their educational credentials so that they can go 
on to advancement in careers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I share a lot of the member’s 
assessment of the risks that we run on this. The other 
observation I would have is that there seem to be two differing 
views about SchoolPLUS. One is a view that I’ve heard from 
some teachers who are saying we are now doing all of this 
related to SchoolPLUS and we’re not being compensated for it. 
 
That’s not the case. Teachers are not supposed to be delivering 
SchoolPLUS. They are not supposed to become social workers, 
nurses, public health workers, corrections officers. Nor should 
we be compensating them for that. 
 
What we need to do is to get teachers back to teaching. And we 
need to figure out how it is we draw in these other agencies. 
 
I was at a community school about three weeks ago now and 
had an opportunity to talk with the principal and some of their 
staff members about what they were doing there. 
 
What I thought was very interesting is that they had hired into 
that school . . . a community coordinator is what they called the 
position. And the person was specifically there to try and deal 
with those linkages between the school and the outside 
agencies, between the school and the social workers that were 
dealing with members of the community, between the school 
and the justice agencies. And that was to largely free up the 
work that teachers had otherwise been feeling was defaulting to 
them that they were either doing or not able to do because they 
were obviously working on teaching. And what we need to 
make sure that we’re doing is really understanding where that 
balance lies. 
 
I agree that we need to make sure that schools, because the 
student population is different than it was 20 years ago or 30 
years ago or 40 years ago, we need to make sure the wide range 
of services that we all want are available to them. 
 
What we’ve got to figure out is at what point is that the 
responsibility of the school, the school system, the Department 
of Learning. And to what extent is it we need to simply better 
coordinate what’s happening with DCRE [Department of 
Community Resources and Employment], what’s happening 
with Corrections and Public Safety, what’s happening with 
Health. 
 
This is one of the big things that I think we have got to have the 
new school divisions really look at is what those relationships 
are. One of the benefits of the new divisions is that they will be 
relatively close in terms of size and geographic configuration to 
the health boards which should provide them with some 
opportunity to better coordinate those services, even functions 
like speech language pathologists, which the school system has 
basically taken on as a responsibility they think they need to 
provide in terms of services. Frankly it’s a discussion I think we 
should have again with the health system about who should be 
paying for this and where those are best located, because it’s 
not always a service that needs to be provided only in the 
schools. 
 
We have an opportunity to devise a system . . . If we were to 

think about SchoolPLUS not as a co-location of services but really 
as a seamless delivery of services. And what we’ve got to figure 
out is who does what in each of those. So I appreciate the 
advice and the perspective that the member is offering. It’s 
actually fairly close to what I, myself, have seen over the last 
several months as we’re working our way through this. 
 
Dr. Tymchak’s report was a very good piece of work and I 
think a very visionary piece of work. And the difficulty we 
always run into when we have those kind of fundamental 
restructuring issues that really speak to the core of what the 
services are is how do we operationalize them. And right now 
what we are trying to do is to struggle with that, to figure out 
how do we operationalize it, how do we move it past pilot 
program into a province-wide rollout without taking on all of 
the inherent responsibilities that still lie with other ministries. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to 
take this opportunity to thank your officials and yourself for 
answering my questions. And to the Deputy Speaker I would 
like to cede the floor to the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I listened earlier 
this afternoon when the member from Melfort asked you about 
the legal action that has been recently launched by a number of 
communities, both urban and rural, and by a number of 
individuals, and in fact three boards of education, those being 
the Melville-Deer Park Board of Education, the Eston-Elrose 
Board of Education, and the Rosetown Board of Education. 
 
And you seemed to . . . at least I took from your answer that 
you don’t think this is a huge issue. You seemed to write it off. 
However, one of the plaintiffs has indicated that prior to this 
action being filed that he received a call . . . or the solicitor for 
this group of people received a call from an official from the 
Department of Justice who was very concerned about this legal 
action. In fact that official asked for particular details of the 
action. In fact made the comment that this action could perhaps 
derail the upcoming elections for the amalgamated school 
divisions. 
 
In light of that phone call that would indicate to me that perhaps 
this issue is a little more serious than you will let it on to be. 
And I guess my question to you is, if in fact this legal action has 
the effect of derailing your plans, have you got a back up plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let me first of all say that my 
understanding as to how this works is that the Justice officials 
will have been in contact with the plaintiffs to determine some 
of the scope of what they were looking at before they filed their 
statement on Friday. And I understand that that is likely what 
the member’s referring to. 
 
That really doesn’t change any perspective that I have on this. 
We have looked at this. Justice is prepared to defend the 
approach and I believe that the courts will find in favour of the 
province. I’m not at this point looking at any other course of 
action other than the one that we’ve established. And while the 
statement of claim certainly articulates fairly clearly a list of 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2991 

perceived grievances and concerns I don’t believe, nor has the 
legal advice that we’re working under, shown that there is any 
cause in law to believe that this would be found in their favour. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So what you’re saying, Minister, is that the 
advice you’re receiving from the Department of Justice is that 
they don’t feel that this case has much merit and then therefore 
you aren’t making any contingency plans in case your plan for 
the fourth amalgamation of school divisions gets derailed by the 
courts. Is that what you’re saying, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We are confidant that the defence that 
we’ll mount will be successful and that the process will proceed 
as I’ve outlined it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, your plan on another issue — your 
proposal as we saw in the budget — you have I believe it’s $54 
million allocated this year and in the next fiscal year for 
property tax relief. Could you provide a breakdown of how, by 
property categories I guess — residential, commercial, 
agricultural properties — how will those monies be divided? 
 
[19:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The way that we have structured the 
Act, and it is of course before the Assembly, is to essentially 
provide an 8 per cent reduction across the board with a cap on 
industrial, commercial, and multi-unit properties in terms of the 
rebate available there. 
 
So the percentage that would go to each of the categories is 
roughly equal to the percentage that they pay in existing tax. 
 
That will obviously vary from board to board as some have 
significantly more agricultural lands, some have significantly 
more residential, some have more commercial. But across the 
province, the percentage — although I don’t have it here — 
would roughly reflect what the overall payment is, although 
commercial, industrial will be slightly under-represented as we 
have capped some of those payments. But that simply 
advantages the . . . allows to have a slightly higher percentage 
for residential and agricultural land. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So you don’t have any figures available tonight to 
give us a breakdown in actual dollars as to how many dollars 
will be allocated to residential property owners as far as 
property tax relief, or for agricultural property owners, or for 
commercial property owners. You’ve got $54 million and . . . 
but you don’t know exactly how that’s going to be split up 
amongst the various classes of property owners. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t have the specifics here tonight, 
but I can certainly provide that. This is a matter that’s fairly 
easily identified. I’m not sure that we’ll be able to provide it on 
a board-by-board basis but I can provide it globally across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well that was my question. I’m not asking on a 
board-by-board basis; I’m asking for the global numbers. 
 
If memory serves me, I seem to recall the Premier making a 
comment at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention where he thought at that time that 

perhaps 12 or $13 million or somewhere in that neighbourhood. 
And as I said I’m just, you know, I’m trying to recall his 
numbers and I was hoping that you’d be able to confirm those 
numbers. 
 
But assuming that my memory is correct, was somewhere in 12 
or $13 million would be going to agricultural property. And as 
we all know it’s the agricultural property owners in this 
province who are paying an unduly large portion of property tax 
that goes for education purposes. In many municipalities at least 
two-thirds of the property tax bill goes to education. 
 
Now if my numbers are correct — and I saw one of your 
officials nodding so I must be somewhere in the ballpark — I 
guess I look back to a program that your government had in 
place two or three years ago whereby we had $25 million per 
year for two years that went directly to agricultural property tax 
relief. So under your current program, the people who are 
paying them the largest percentage of their total property tax 
bill that’s going to education, they are going to actually receive 
probably 10 million or $12 million less under this current 
program than what they did two years ago. Is that correct, 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The quick figuring we’ve done would 
show that 13 million in each of the next two years is about right 
for agricultural. And the debate that we had in the panel, in the 
working group with SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association], and the school boards, was really 
about how we spend the 55 million. And SARM was very much 
of the view, and I think has publicly said so, that they believe 
the money should be . . . the reduction should apply only to 
residential and agricultural land. SUMA took the position that it 
should apply to all property classes. And at the end of the 
debate what we concluded is that it should apply to all property 
classes. 
 
The result of that is by adding in the industrial, commercial 
class and resort properties and others, you end up diluting the 
amount of money that would otherwise have been available to 
residential and agricultural land. That was the consequence of 
adding in the commercial and industrial sector, the rationale for 
that being that everyone who pays property tax should get a 
benefit. 
 
This was an issue of significant debate and a significant divide 
between SUMA and SARM. As we reflected on it, it was the 
decision of the government that all those who pay property 
taxes should see some rebate. And as a result we made that 
decision to support SUMA’s recommendation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I guess it’s no wonder that people 
who own agricultural property are very skeptical of your current 
solution to high property taxes because they have seen how 
these short-term solutions really have no long-lasting effect. 
The owners of agricultural property have experience with your 
government’s previous program. There was some property tax 
relief for a couple of years, then they were right back to paying 
the full shot. And again, as I said, in many instances they’re 
paying at least . . . At least two-thirds of their property tax bill 
goes towards education tax. 
 



2992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

Now we see another two-year program with no, absolutely no 
plan for a long . . . or no indication that your government has a 
long-term solution to this problem or have even started working 
on a long-term solution. And so therefore, Minister, as I said, 
they’re very skeptical as to . . . that you have anything beyond a 
two-year plan. 
 
You had indicated through news releases and I believe in this 
House that . . . and you’ve just mentioned that SUMA was 
involved and SARM were involved in how this $110 million 
has been allocated. So you brought them together for that. And 
my question is, have you brought them together along with the 
School Boards Association to sit down and try and find a 
long-term solution to this dilemma that we find ourselves in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the question that the member is 
asking about long-term property tax relief is one that we need to 
grapple with. I want to say this though about the comparison of 
the program as it’s structured today as we have the legislation 
before the House and the program as it was structured when it 
was a rebate. 
 
One of the consequences of the previous program is that the 
payments went to the individual property tax payer as opposed 
to going to the school boards. The consequence of that was that 
school boards continued to escalate their mill rates during that 
time period. 
 
This current program is designed to make the payment on 
behalf of the property tax payer to the school board. This 
should, should help to mitigate any upward migration in mill 
rate because what we are essentially doing is putting the 
pressure on the school boards to hold the line on the mill rates 
and for us to move in with more provincial money. That’s what 
we’re seeing with this program. 
 
And so what we should see out of this is if school boards hold 
the line on their mill rate increases, on the property tax 
increases, we should see the provincial share of education this 
year rise from 42 per cent to 47 per cent. And that’s been 
largely what our objective was in terms of structuring the 
program with this kind of a payment. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I must admit I fail to follow your logic. 
I mean it doesn’t matter where the school boards are getting 
their revenue from. Whether it’s from property owners or part 
of that comes from your government, that really has nothing to 
do with their needs and their needs to adjust mill rates whether 
they be up or down. 
 
I can tell you probably what’s a better . . . what probably is 
impacting more so on perhaps holding the mill rates, at least in 
certain areas of the province, is reassessment. Reassessment is 
doing that in at least . . . for one of the school divisions in my 
constituency. I just talked to their administrator and that’s 
exactly what they told me. In fact their revenue needs are 
greater than they were last year but they were able to slightly 
reduce their mill rates because their assessment rose by 8 per 
cent. The provincial average for all school divisions, the 
assessments have risen 9 per cent. That’s what will keep . . . at 
least hold the mill rates. It has nothing to do with your rebate 
because whether the school divisions get the money from the 
property tax or property owners or in part through a grant 

system has nothing to do with what their needs are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I’m not sure what the question is 
in there that the member has. It’s an interesting debate and 
that’s fine. We can have that and if the experience he identifies 
is true on the east side of the province where reassessment is 
seeing land values go up, it’s not true on the west side; we’re 
going down. 
 
What we’re saying is that overall as the provincial money 
moves in, there should be less need for school boards to take 
money from the property tax base, regardless of what that mill 
rate is set at. That should be the overall purpose. I mean 
obviously if we’re adding $55 million worth of provincial 
money into school boards, there should be a need to take $55 
million less from the property tax base. That seems to be pretty 
straightforward. 
 
The question of how that works from school division to school 
division, east side to west side, is something that will need to be 
worked out. Some boards are still proceeding to increase mill 
rates to deal with other expenditure costs. That’s something we 
need to look at but what I think is beneficial is that the 55 
million is allowing that to be mitigated and we’re not seeing as 
large a set of increases as we might otherwise. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I guess we’ll agree to disagree on 
this. I have one further question. 
 
I understand, and I’m not totally familiar with the way your 
department handles grants for capital purposes to school 
divisions. I have been told that they’re called a B-1 grant and 
my question to you is, is the approval of these grants occurring 
in the same time frame as they normally do in other fiscal years 
or are they being delayed? And if so, what is the reason for 
those approvals being delayed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The process for determining who 
accesses capital has remained the same. I don’t think that’s 
changed for a number of years. 
 
The only change that we made this year was to advance and 
accelerate the funding for this year. And so what the member 
may be identifying is that there will be a number of months now 
until we get into the next funding cycle. But this year we 
actually accelerated the funding to move the block grants up. 
 
So it may be perceived by some that there is now, I don’t know, 
a larger lag time or whatever we may say until the next 
application process or until the next funding process. But the 
criteria remain the same. All we’ve done is accelerated the 
funding this year. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’ve been listening to you describe the system that will 
be in place in financing education in our school divisions for 
this year and the previous year. And I listened to you say that 
the $55 million will help school boards not have to increase 
taxes. 
 
Are you suggesting that there is $55 million more to the boards 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2993 

of education? Or in fact is the reality that $55 million break will 
be given to all taxpayers based on the assessments that you just 
described and as a result of that tax break to those individuals, 
the boards will receive the 55 million now, not directly from the 
taxpayers but from the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
So how can you imply that boards of education now will have 
to hold their mill rates and not increase taxes when in fact we 
know that the price of fuel has skyrocketed, cost of 
transportation is higher, there is a 2.2 per cent increase in cost 
of living, there are going to be huge increases at the division 
level, and the foundation grant, according to your estimates, has 
not increased? 
 
So where do you expect boards of education to find that new 
money to operate? Are you suggesting then that if they are not 
to increase mill rates, that they must: number one, delete 
program; number two, eliminate staff; or number three, close 
schools? Could you explain and clarify for the people of 
Saskatchewan where indeed the extra money will come from to 
meet the increased costs for school divisions in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t understand what the concern is 
the member’s identified. There’s no cost of living attached to a 
school board. I mean the amount of money that’s being passed 
on . . . The member identifies gas costs is fine; that’s an issue. 
He identifies increases in terms of salary; we’ve identified 
previously that that’s being funded through the contract. The 
member identifies that there are other pressures. Well these are 
normal pressures. 
 
What we’ve seen a number of boards respond by doing is 
saying they’re passing on the full 8 per cent reduction. That’s 
what the member is, that’s what the member is asking about. 
There’s still 55 million being transferred from the provincial 
treasury this year over to the school boards. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Minister, a board of education 
receives its money from two sources: the Government of 
Saskatchewan or taxpayers. Now you’re saying that in the case 
of taxpayers, you’re going to take over $55 million of that 
revenue the taxpayers would have normally provided. You are 
now saying that the government will provide that $55 million 
and it will not come out of the taxpayers as it normally would 
have. 
 
You know, when you talk about increased costs, Mr. Minister, 
you know, when you start to look at the purchasing of supplies, 
go into any school system and ask what changes have occurred 
in the prices of materials, in the prices of driver training fees, in 
the prices of all kinds of product and the fact that we have 
power increases, telephone increases, all of those other costs 
that are met by the board of education. 
 
Never mind the support staff. Now that there is a 2, 2, and 2 
contract in place for teachers, I’d suggest that support staffs are 
going to be looking for some sort of compensation that will be 
equivalent or nearly equivalent. 
 
There will be increased costs to school divisions. And if you’re 
suggesting that boards of education should not change their mill 

rate and their assessment does not change, how do you expect 
them to produce a balanced budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well boards will do what boards are 
required to do in order to deal with it. And this is one of the 
issues. 
 
The other things that the member . . . surely the member must 
recognize is the fact that there are 3,500 fewer students in the 
system. That must by necessity drive down some of the costs 
within the system because we don’t reduce the overall grant 
provided despite the fact that we see reducing student numbers. 
That provides more money on a per pupil basis to fund the 
system. So there is additional money there on a per pupil basis 
to deal with this. 
 
I mean obviously if you have 3,500 fewer students — we’ve 
had 25,000 fewer students in the last decade alone — that 
surely must mean that there is able to internally manage some 
of the cost pressures that are identified, which is why we see 
boards being able to hold the mill rate. 
 
Boards decide to raise their mill rates, that’s within their right to 
do so. What we’re trying to do is shift the balance over onto the 
provincial coffer. And this year what I said is if the boards held 
the line, the number would move from 42 to 47. If they don’t, 
then it’ll shift a little bit upward. 
 
But I don’t otherwise understand what the member’s concern is, 
is that boards will obviously set their budgets as they feel 
appropriate. They’ll determine the program that they think is 
appropriate. They’ll take advantage of the additional monies 
provided through the declining student numbers as they see 
appropriate to redirect into instructional costs or otherwise. And 
they will have the 55 million that we are providing to them to 
be able to pass on to reduce the cost to taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, when a school division of 
significant size — 1,200, 1,300 students, 900 students — loses 
80 students across the entire school division that does not mean 
that proportionately the cost of providing education to the 
remaining students is going to drop by the equivalent. You can 
ask any of your officials that are with you who have been in a 
school system and have been directors of education. They’ll 
clearly tell you that when you see that kind of change and a 
particular school of 150 students now has enrolment drop of 
five it doesn’t mean any savings at all. And as costs increase to 
provide education, in fact costs will go up. 
 
So don’t use the example that because the province has 
suddenly lost 3,000 students that there should be that kind of 
savings because it’s not true. That’s number one. 
 
Number two. If you’re suggesting by your comments a short 
while ago that boards of education across this province should 
not increase mill rate because the Government of Saskatchewan 
is now providing $55 million, the reality is you are providing 
the $55 million to the taxpayers. The normal 55 million that 
would have come from the taxpayers is not coming from the 
taxpayers any longer. It is now coming from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think the point that you must clarify for trustees in this 



2994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

province and boards of education and taxpayers is that the $55 
million will have absolutely no bearing — none whatsoever — 
on the cost of education within the school system, and secondly, 
the mill rate that those boards will decide upon. 
 
And you’re right, boards of education will do what they have to 
do because of the fact that there is no additional monies being 
provided. There might be in some instances where a school 
division has lost a significant number of students and can adjust 
their teaching staff component by reducing teaching staff. If 
that’s true there may be a savings, I’ll agree with you. But don’t 
look at it in a broad sense and suddenly say that the government 
is now adding $55 million to the pool of money and therefore 
boards of education should be able to hold the line on the 
additional cost that they are being confronted with in all aspects 
of delivering education, because you are wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the member makes an eloquent if 
somewhat angry argument as to why boards should be raising 
taxes. That’s not a perspective that I have. The member uses 
some unparliamentary language from his seat and that’s fine if 
he’s embarking on that. 
 
He presents an argument that is saying that what we are doing is 
asking the 55 million be provided to reduce taxes to individual 
property tax payers. This is correct; that is what we are asking 
to be done. That is not going to mean that all boards are able to 
hold the line. The boards that we are seeing bringing in their 
budgets now for the most part are, I think, doing an exceptional 
job in terms of managing the costs that they’re looking at. We 
are not seeing dramatic increases, although we are seeing some 
increases in the mill rates, and that’s the decision the boards are 
going to need to make. The member makes an interesting 
argument but it’s not one that I personally subscribe to. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
apologize for that comment. I should have said that you . . . 
your comments may be misinterpreted by boards of education 
by you suggesting that there is an additional $55 million that is 
somehow now added to the pool. That is not true. The money is 
in direct comparison to the $55 million the taxpayers will 
receive in the way of a reduction in their taxes, and I think you 
agree with that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now therefore a board of education who is now left with 
balancing its budget, if it doesn’t do anything, if the assessment 
does not change and the mill rate does not change and the fact 
that now $55 million that would have come directly from the 
taxpayers is now coming from the government, they still have 
to produce a balanced budget. And if their costs have gone up a 
significant amount based on the fact that they have a large bus 
fleet and there is cost of gas or there is a SaskPower increase or 
a SaskEnergy increase or there is maintenance projects or there 
are supplies that are being bought across that entire division and 
their costs rise by a significant amount of dollars, the only way 
that that school board can balance is to increase its mill rate. Is 
that not true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t disagree with much of what the 
member opposite has said. What we are seeing in this year with 
the experience of now having the budgets brought in is that mill 
rates across the province, the average mill rate has now 
declined. It has actually dropped in the province largely, as has 

been identified, because of reassessment. And what boards are 
doing is, I think, a very good job of managing with the 
resources they have and, for the most part, seem to be passing 
on almost entirely the 8 per cent reduction. This is what we 
would expect to be seen but this is a decision individual boards 
need to make. 
 
The argument isn’t . . . I don’t completely understand what the 
member’s argument is. Yes, we are adding $55 million worth of 
provincial funds to replace $55 million from the property tax 
base. That’s what the objective of the program is, is to try and 
increase the provincial share. And as a result taxpayers will see 
whatever amount that the boards pass on. But we suggest that it 
should be about 8 per cent. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know our time is 
running short and I just actually just have a couple of quick 
questions. And one of them, I know the situation . . . I know the 
minister is certainly well aware of that being the problem that 
arose at the Davidson School Division when money was paid to 
an administrator who had retired and then had been rehired on a 
contract, and then a gratuity of some 120-some thousand dollars 
was paid to that same person. 
 
And I know I’ve seen the minister’s comments on it and, by the 
way, I’m not being critical of the minister for your comments. It 
might have been the best and proper way to handle that 
situation. But I also want to say that that’s a situation I’m very 
familiar with and I can say that there was a huge amount of 
concern from the ratepayers in the Davidson School Division 
over the issue. And it was more of a question of fairness rather 
than anything else where some people would see that this, being 
a very unfair package paid out to one person and then others 
perhaps not getting that same kind of fairness. I’m talking about 
teachers and bus drivers and janitorial service and other 
employees of that division. 
 
My question though arises out of that situation in that, is there 
no mechanism in the department that would allow for the 
government, the minister, the minister’s office, the minister’s 
bureaucrats, to become involved in a situation like that and to 
try to alleviate that great amount of pressure that arose because 
of that situation? And as I say, I repeat again, I know that that 
was a huge concern and I know the member for Arm 
River-Watrous was certainly involved in that situation as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I share much of the sentiment 
that the member opposite has expressed. This was obviously an 
issue that people were concerned about and for very much the 
reasons the member identified — not only the unfairness of, or 
the perceived unfairness of it, but also the process that was 
handled. 
 
The Education Act does not provide any ability for the minister 
to intervene in individual decisions made by individual boards. 
The employees of boards are exactly that — they are employees 
of the boards. Our role is largely one of providing advice and 
direction, support, and certainly there is a degree of moral 
suasion that we can exercise on this. In this particular case we 
became aware of the situation after it had already been 
exercised . So in that regard there is very little that we could do 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2995 

to either correct or to intervene on this. That being said, I do 
want to just address the other comment raised by the member, 
which was my comments on it. 
 
I take the approach as a legislator, as a minister of the Crown, 
that part of what we need to have is an honest dialogue with 
Saskatchewan people. There is no day that goes by that I don’t 
end up with advice that says we should simply not comment on 
these issues. I have rafts and reams of correspondence that 
come in with draft responses back saying I can’t comment on 
this because this is the issue of an individual board. 
 
In situations like this where we end up with a peculiar situation 
that has been addressed — that the reporters were concerned 
was going to become an issue across other boards — I felt it 
was important to offer some comment without being 
specifically critical of the board that made the decision. I 
appreciate that the member may have preferred that I had said 
nothing, but I think, like most taxpayers and citizens, there was 
concern that we had about how this is done. And indeed we 
would have provided that advice privately if we’d known about 
it in advance. 
 
So I appreciate what the member opposite is saying. I regret 
that we were not able to . . . that there are not powers within 
The Education Act for the minister to intervene in those kind of 
situations, but if there is a safeguard to make sure individual 
boards have the authority to run their own affairs. And that goes 
as well for school closures and the rest of that. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you for that answer. By the way I just 
want to clarify, I was not being critical of your remarks in the 
media on that issue — not at all, in the least bit. In fact I was 
glad to see that you had commented. I was aware obviously as 
well that that was not within the jurisdiction of your department 
or your own ministry. So I do understand that your hands were 
sort of tied on that issue. 
 
My bigger concern though is that are there any mechanical 
things or safeguards that are going to be put in place for . . . 
once the amalgamations take place? 
 
Let me back up just a second. We all know that divisions . . . 
there will be school divisions who will become a part of a 
bigger division who have money in the bank. That’s a given. 
The question is how are those monies going to be distributed, 
and who will be responsible for making sure that things like the 
issue at Davidson do not happen wholesale right throughout the 
province, where we might see school divisions trying to spend 
huge amounts of money for no other reason than they will lose 
control of it once they become part of a bigger division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well this has been a concern of ours as 
well, as to how do we handle that transition so it’s seamless, 
and so that we don’t end up with a set of individuals who feel 
that they are being unfairly treated or may be unfairly treated by 
a new board, seeking some kind of redress in advance for what 
may well be a severance simply because of the number of 
positions that would be available. 
 
[19:45] 
 
One of the initiatives that we’ve been working with the 

restructuring coordinating committee on has been to try and 
establish a set of directives that boards can follow in terms of 
making sure that this is seamlessly dealt with. And I think over 
the last . . . Although it’s anecdotal, I would say over the last six 
months we have seen a lower level of anxiety about this. 
 
There seems to be a better understanding as to what the process 
is going to be that boards will be using to select, as to what the 
confidence is within LEADS [League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents] and SASBO 
[Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials] about 
how their members will be treated. And I think a better 
understanding now that the boundaries are seen as to what the 
options are likely within regions. 
 
But the human resource issues that the member identifies are 
going to be critical to managing the restructuring. We are going 
to need to make sure that boards are able to get the right people 
in the right places at the start. And they seem to be aware of 
that. And I sense a great deal of collaboration and co-operation 
among the senior members of the partner organizations to try 
and deal with this in a seamless way that we don’t end up with 
these kind of hiccups like we’ve seen in Davidson. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As the minister is 
well aware that there is three regions in the Saskatoon (East) 
School Division that have gone through a number of the initial 
stages of forming a separate Catholic school division. And I 
know a number of parents have emailed me as well as the 
minister with different questions and concerns about that 
process. So I’m sure that he’s watching it closely before he 
gives his final approval. 
 
However a question that came to me that I’ve been given two 
different answers for, so I’m just looking for clarification. One 
of the concerns, and rightfully so on both sides of the scenario, 
is where the property tax dollars flow or how they flow into 
which school division. So the question was, is there any set 
regulation on the question that will be asked on the tax notices 
once the separate Catholic school divisions are completed, like 
once they are actually in existence? 
 
One source told me that the question had to be, which faith do 
you support, Catholic or other? And someone else told me that 
it could say which division do you support, Catholic or other? 
So I’m just looking for clarification on that. What is the 
restrictions or guidelines that that must follow for the tax 
notices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This has been a very complicated 
process and it has a number of interesting dynamics to it within 
the communities, and we don’t need to necessarily go into those 
tonight. But I think we’re all well aware that there are a number 
of concerns about the impact on some of those local rural 
schools and whether it’s going to end up simply strengthening 
city schools; beyond that, the implications of the minority faith 
provisions of the constitution. 
 
The specific question the member has asked is about the form 
the taxpayers will fill in. They will have the ability to declare 
that they are Catholic school supporters. If they are, their 



2996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

property tax and the provincial resources that go with it transfer 
with . . . to that system. If they are not, they default to the public 
system. And so in that way there is a prescribed form, and that 
is essentially what the declaration is — are they a Catholic 
minority faith school supporter or are they a public school 
supporter? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Okay. Just to follow up on that and clarify 
it. If you had a Catholic family who wanted to send their child 
or are going to send their child to the public school, and their 
tax notice comes and it . . . will it say, which faith do you 
support, because they support the Catholic faith? Or will it say, 
which school division do you support, in which case they could 
then fill out the public school division, and their property tax 
dollars would follow their child? And that’s sort of the scenario 
that’s causing the most concern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is an issue of much debate in 
terms of how this works. In the case of — let’s pick a 
community — let’s say Clavet and you have a Catholic family 
living in the community that is currently sending their child to 
the public school and wants to continue to do that. They can 
continue to do that on the condition that they do not declare on 
the form that they are Catholic school supporters. If they 
declare on the form that they are Catholic school supporters, 
their property tax will go to the Catholic system. 
 
The question of where the student goes, the student can still go 
to the public system if the public system accepts them and they 
can work out the tuition arrangement for the funding, is usually 
what will happen. But this is going to be complicated. It is one 
of the real difficulties that we have with this section of the 
Saskatchewan Act and how it manifests itself and there is a lot 
of debate about where money goes and how you provide that 
kind of support. But if a Catholic family wants their child to 
continue to go to the school in the local community regardless 
of denominational faith, or in this case it being the public 
system, they would simply not declare. If they declare, then the 
tax money moves into the new Catholic division and what they 
would need to do then is work out how to keep the student in 
the local school. This is going to be a challenge because I 
understand that a number of parents are now in that situation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. I guess I need further 
clarification because you’re right — it is very, very 
complicated. So we’ll go back to the Catholic family that wish 
to send their child to the public school. Now if the municipal 
government issues the tax notice and the question is, which 
faith do you support, and they answer the question honestly, 
they’re going to say that they support the Catholic faith. If the 
question states, which school division do you support, they can 
answer honestly and say, we support the public school division. 
Can either question be asked without being challenged? Is it 
quite acceptable to word the question, which school division do 
you support? In which case those families that fall into that type 
of scenario could honestly answer that they support the public 
school division and their tax dollars would be directed. Would 
that question be challenged? Does it have to say, which faith do 
you support? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The clearest answer is no, that they 
cannot be asked which system they want. They are asked if they 
are of the minority faith. And this is one of the issues that falls 

under the way that the constitution is constructed and the 
Saskatchewan Act is constructed. And this is an issue that we 
have a great deal of discussion between the Catholic section and 
the public section as to what happens with students and families 
who want to go to particular schools and whether or not the 
question of the Catholic minority faith system is to provide a 
system of choice or whether it provides a constitutional access 
only for Catholic students to go to Catholic schools. This is not, 
unfortunately, a simple issue to resolve and there are a number 
of different views on it. 
 
There is a very significant discussion going on right now within 
the school association, within the School Boards Association, 
between the urban public boards and the Catholic section about 
how this should be interpreted. And there is no agreement on 
this. So the way it’s currently constructed is that the form says 
that they declare their support for the faith, in which case then it 
flows to the Catholic system. 
 
I do understand though in these cases — and this is one of the 
issues that really was a problem here — is that a lot of these 
parents live in these communities and want the schools to 
remain in these communities, and obviously if you see a large 
number of students or that money now flowing into a different 
division that that potentially puts at risk the viability of those 
schools. And that is a very difficult decision that these parents 
are going to face. So I don’t envy their position. And 
unfortunately because of the way that the Acts are constructed, 
we don’t have a lot of ability — frankly we have no ability — 
to intervene and make that an easier situation for them. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to start 
this evening . . . First of all if I may have leave to introduce a 
guest in the gallery. In the Speaker’s gallery, there is a 
gentleman that I have met from La Ronge, Gary Tinker, and I 
think he was known to many members here as the individual 
who made the trek from La Ronge to Regina on crutches about 
10 years ago to underline the need for additional support for 
people with disabilities. It was a long trek for someone that uses 
two crutches to get around in his world. I have a lot of 
admiration for Gary and I thank him for being here this 
evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the things that we were discussing this 
evening is the mill rate and the grant dollars. And I’m sure that 
the minister is well aware of the Lakeview School Division and 
the concern that they’ve had. In the last year they amalgamated 
and now of course with the changes in The Education Act 
they’ll be going to be amalgamating again. 
 
But the school division actually lost grant dollars. And I’m 
going to just give you a highlight of what the school division 
wrote in the local paper. They said as a result of the 2005 
provincial reassessment the Lakeview School Division went up 
by $91 million. That meant that the school division was going 
to be losing $1.144 million in provincial grant. That represented 
14.98 per cent decrease in grant compared to the 2004 level. In 
addition to losing that $1.44 million in grants, the education 
board was faced with an increase in utility rates, an increase in 
gasoline and diesel, plant and instructional costs, and 
non-instructional and salary costs. 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2997 

The most significant cuts that the board looked at when they 
reviewed their own budget, they decided that they could cut 5.6 
professional staff, that was the teachers; 5.85 support staff, the 
level of support staffing hours; point two five assistant director 
of education position; $75,000 in technology; two bus routes; 
10 per cent in decentralized school budgets; 33 per cent in 
grants to local boards; $84,000 in maintenance; and no bus 
replacements. They effectively cut $644,982. 
 
But at the same time they had to increase their budget and the 
cost to their people and their constituency — to farmers 
basically — and I was made aware of this because of a couple 
of phone calls I had one evening to my home, farmers that were 
saying that their school taxes went up considerably. Now I was 
concerned about this and I spoke to your colleague, the Minister 
of Government Relations, and asked him about the assessment 
increase and how it was determined. And the Minister of 
Government Relations said, let’s not forget that everyone wants 
assessment increases. This is a good thing for the province. It 
means that the value of our land and our businesses are 
increasing so assessment increases are a positive sign of a very 
productive and strong economy. 
 
My concern, Mr. Minister, and my farmers’ concern is that this 
reassessment means an extra $170 per quarter for education tax. 
Now I don’t think that anybody in this room is going to believe 
that the land values in this province, when the economy is in 
tough shape, it means that they can afford an extra $170 per 
quarter of education tax. 
 
So my question to the Minister of Learning is: does he agree 
with the Minister of Government Relations that this increase in 
assessment is of benefit to the farmers in our province? 
 
[20:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — One of the difficulties with the way 
that the education system is funded is that it is heavily reliant on 
property taxes. And I think we all recognize that that is a fact. 
 
The other difficulty that we have seen is that with the change in 
the way that assessment works, and the way taxes are now 
configured on top of that, is that as we go through these 
re-evaluations there are big swings in taxes. I accept what the 
member has identified as being $170 per quarter. Is that what 
she identifies? That may well be what the real impact is there. 
Yes, increase for taxpayers. 
 
The problem in the farm sector is — and frankly it’s the same in 
the residential sector where you have no ability to pass on that 
cost — is that there is no direct relationship between the value 
of your asset and the revenue you . . . or income you get from it. 
And that really is a problem that we have within the system. As 
property tax is reassessed as we go through the valuation 
exercises, we end up with these difficulties. And what the 
member has identified is, for the individual farmers, a very real 
problem. 
 
The question for the school board is somewhat different in that 
what they would see is the grant replaced by the property tax 
level, or by what they raise from the property tax. And this is 
one of the issues that we are trying to address through the 
foundation operating grant review, is that because it works as an 

equalization formula, as opposed to some per pupil or per 
capital funding formula, it has this . . . it has a close relationship 
to what the ability to raise money on land is. 
 
The member has identified a structural, systemic problem with 
the system that we have today. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I guess I can tell you that it’s not 
just myself that’s identified it. It’s the taxpayers, specifically the 
farmers in the area that are having a very tough time right now. 
And they’re not blaming the school boards who are trying very, 
very hard to make sure that they keep the increases at a 
minimum. But at the same time, the reality is they can’t take 
this issue that is a concern to the bank. They have to pay for it 
somehow. 
 
So my concern is that there are a great number of farmers in the 
area of Lakeview School Division that are going to be suffering. 
And at the same time they are expecting that their students will 
have the same educational opportunities as children right across 
the province. 
 
But I guess this issue is something that won’t be solved tonight. 
So I’m going to ask, can you tell me how many school divisions 
are getting less money this year than last year in their 
foundation operating grant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We’d have to generate that. I didn’t 
bring that. We didn’t bring that detail tonight but we can 
generate that for the member. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you identify for 
me, and because it was an issue that I was very involved in for a 
number of years, how many schools are getting . . . are part of 
the SchoolsPLUS program at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Forty-one of the existing school 
divisions are participating in the SchoolPLUS program. So across 
the number of schools . . . I don’t know that we track it by that. 
We look at how many divisions are participating instead. So 
about, about half are participating at this point in the SchoolPLUS 
programming. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that you are 
aware that the opposition is in favour of the SchoolsPLUS 
program. We’re just concerned about the actual costing of or 
paying for the cost of it. And I know you’ve spoken to my 
colleague from Melfort about the cost which should be carried 
by some of the other departments. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other issues that’s important to many of 
us is the issue of addictions and the education about, about 
drugs — crystal meth and other drugs. But I had learned about a 
week ago that your government is actually working on an 
education program. Is your addictions and drug information 
going to be given out to the schools before the end of this 
school year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes. In fact we have put some 
resources on the Web now but our intention is to make sure that 
a package of information, printed information is available for 
teachers and others for use, particularly in things like home 
school newsletters, newsletters to parents, those kind of things, 



2998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

so they can deal with this issue. Parents are still, I think all of us 
agree, in the best position to identify those children who are at 
risk and those who have difficulties. 
 
So yes, our intention is to have the package of information 
available to schools before the end of the school year. I would 
anticipate in a couple of weeks. We’re just waiting for printing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I had the opportunity 
to look at the Alberta curriculum and the information that was 
available in various grades. It’s actually a written part of the 
school curriculum and it’s something that I thought was very 
well done. And I’m hoping that your department has looked at 
it and we won’t have to re-invent the wheel or spend additional 
funding because there has been an enormous amount of work 
done. 
 
Mr. Minister, another issue that’s important is the mandatory 
treaty education. And I know that it is available in some of your 
schools at this time if your . . . if the teachers have taken some 
of the courses or the classes through the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner. Can you give us . . . can you tell me whether 
this is something that your department is looking at at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let me address the two issues that the 
member has identified. First of all, in the curriculum related to 
addictions and healthy lifestyles for students, we’re not 
considering, we’re not contemplating any change to our 
curriculum. Saskatchewan’s curriculum is among the best in the 
country in terms of dealing with drug and alcohol education. 
We have a number of active student groups across the province 
who deal specifically with alcohol issues, and we’re confident 
that the curriculum that’s in place is strong enough to deal with 
these issues as they arise. 
 
That being said, what we are doing is providing specific 
information to teachers they can share with parents and their 
students related to issues like crystal meth, which is a concern 
all members in this House share. 
 
On the issue of treaty education, one of the things that we have 
been very pleased to do is to fund much of this program. In 
terms of developing the program, we’ve contributed I think 
nearly a quarter, a little more than a quarter million — let me 
just see here — almost half a million dollars over the last three 
years to make sure that the program is up and running. We’ve 
been very pleased to do that. What we are trying to now gauge 
is the effectiveness of the program in terms of the results it’s 
achieving within the classroom. 
 
One of the pieces I would however caution the member, and I 
know that the Sask Party has taken the position that they want 
mandatory education . . . want this made mandatory. There are a 
number of requests that we get to add mandatory pieces into the 
education system, and we need to be mindful of what the local 
boards are doing and what local classrooms are doing. We 
certainly encourage and would like to see proliferated the 
treaties in the classroom, and I want to congratulate my 
predecessor, the member for Saskatoon Eastview, for the 
innovative work that she did with the Treaty Commissioner in 
bringing this about. It was really because of her leadership that 
we ended up with this being brought into the classrooms, and I 
think that that speaks to our vision, hopefully our shared vision 

on how this should be dealt with. But simply saying that 
something should be mandatory is more difficult to implement 
because it often means we’re shifting something else out and 
we need to be conscious of what that impact is. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure that 
we’ll take into advisement your caution about mandatory 
education but I’m hopeful at the same time that your 
department will understand that the lack of information and 
knowledge by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people in 
the province is adding to some of the frustrations that we have. 
And I think that the only way we can overcome some of the 
problems is by education. So it is our contention that the best 
way to do it is by starting with our children. 
 
Mr. Minister, also in your discussion about the drug education, I 
believe that we do have a fine education system but we can 
always get better and if somebody is doing something that 
works well then I think it’s something that we . . . should be 
looked at. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the other question that I have is with the 
growing number of Aboriginal students in our province and the 
number of schools that are on-reserve. Can you tell me how 
your department is working with reserve schools and especially 
how you’re documenting the number of graduations and the 
number of young people that are attending schools and 
specifically the dropout rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We have implemented a student 
tracking system to deal with both on- and off-reserve schools so 
that we have a better understanding of the student population, 
where they are, what they’re achieving in terms of results; and 
that is being put into place. 
 
I want to return to the issue about the treaties in the classroom 
and indicate for the member’s information that 94 per cent of 
the provincial schools and 99 per cent of the band schools have 
received the treaty resource kit and I’m advised that a minimum 
of one staff member per school has received in-service training. 
So this is a positive but we have not mandated it as such. 
 
It is my personal view and one that is I think fairly widely 
shared that we need to teach the treaties not as being something 
separate or apart from who we are as a nation, and in the fact 
that the treaties really do form an additional part of the 
constitutional framework of this country and should be 
respected and taught as such. And so this has been very good 
work. 
 
I have recently met with the Treaty Commissioner to encourage 
him to continue the work that he was doing there and for us to 
seek out how we can further support him in that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think one of the 
things that many people in Saskatchewan don’t know that it is 
not just First Nations people that are part of the treaties. We are 
all part of the treaties. We are a signatory to them and such that 
gives us the rights that we have in our country. And that is the 
type of information that maybe is not well known especially 
throughout the non-Aboriginal population. And I think that it is 
. . . any information that we can share is more than, is positive. 
 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2999 

Mr. Minister, can you indicate to me what the graduation rate is 
in First Nations reserves schools, if the rate is increasing or 
decreasing the last few years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Within the Saskatchewan schools, and 
we don’t have information for on-reserve schools, but within 
those schools that are under the Department of Learning’s 
purview, when we look at the longer term — within seven years 
of starting the program — we have a completion rate of 84 per 
cent. 
 
But we need to be careful in terms of interpreting that. That is 
talking about completion rate over a fairly long time period and 
should not be interpreted to mean that we have a seamless 
approach from 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Often the study is interrupted 
and what we are seeing is a large number of students that leave 
the system but come back in to do adult upgrading or come 
back into the system after some interruption. 
 
So this is one of those pieces where we get into having to define 
the terms a little bit. We certainly believe that it is better that 
students are able to complete year after year after year on a 
normal progression without seeing the interruption. Regrettably 
we’re still seeing a large interruption. 
 
The question the member asks, are the rates increasing? Yes, 
they are increasing in terms of completion but we need to do 
more work to quantify what that is, what the on-reserve 
qualification or completion rate is. 
 
Ms. Draude: — My final question for the minister is I’m happy 
to hear that you have a tracking system, that there’ll be a 
student number. When will that be in place? Will it be in place 
for this fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — October of ’06. 
 
[20:15] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’ve got a question 
here for you on the divisions. I’ve got a map here of . . . I’m not 
sure what the division, school division. It’s with Wakaw, 
Wynyard, and that area in it. And the RM [rural municipality] 
of Invergordon is in subdivision 2 but the children from the RM 
of Invergordon are attending in subdivision 1 — Wakaw. So 
now when the election comes the parents are concerned that 
they can’t vote for their member on the school board because 
that’s not part of their division. So they’re living in 2 but their 
children are attending in 1 and they can’t vote for the member 
that’s going to be representing 1. So is there going to be some 
correction made in this matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The subdivision boundaries are really 
simply electoral divisions. The trustees that will be returned 
will represent the entire division. And so in that regard there 
needn’t be a direct correlation between what the attachment 
area for local schools are and where the citizens vote. The 
divisions will represent all the schools within the area. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Yes they’ll represent, but the parents are 
concerned that they can’t vote for the one that’s representing the 

school where their kids are attending. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well that may be the case that they are 
not having a trustee that is representing the area . . . that would 
represent the area they live in, not necessarily where the school 
is. But this is an electoral system that we’re dealing with. 
There’s not a need for there to be a direct correlation between 
the trustee who represents the area that taxes are paid in and the 
area where the students represent. 
 
What we are working on currently through the panel on local 
accountability that we have underway now headed by Craig 
Melvin is to figure out how we deal with connection of parents 
to the schools that their children go to. And that would address I 
think more of the concern that the member has outlined in terms 
of how do we have that direct . . . a connection back to the 
school. 
 
So it’s the local accountability piece that will speak more to the 
parents that you’ve identified as opposed to how the 
representative . . . where the representative comes from to deal 
with that. 
 
As we’ve gone through the restructuring, there will be a number 
of schools within a subdivision and so trustees will represent a 
number of those areas as opposed to representing one specific 
school which has been in many cases the tradition in many of 
these areas. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, last 
night I had the opportunity to attend the board meeting for a 
separate school division that serves part of my constituency. 
And as a consequence of our discussion there, it appeared that 
there were some concerns that that particular division has as it 
relates to the impact of amalgamation on their operations. 
 
One of the questions that comes as a result of the anticipated 
amalgamation and the much larger school districts that will be 
formed as a result of amalgamation is how that size, that sheer 
size will impact on the existing separate school divisions. The 
analogy of the mouse sleeping next to the elephant comes to 
mind in their estimation. And they’re kind of concerned that 
existing arrangements that the separate divisions might have 
with existing public school divisions will be abrogated or 
somehow possibly shortchanged. 
 
Can the minister give us an indication of how the department 
plans to work in that area of concern for these boards? Is there a 
mechanism in place? Is there a support system or an agency in 
the department that will work with the separate system to try 
and maintain the very good co-operative arrangements that they 
have currently with public school boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We are aware of some of these 
concerns from some of the divisions. The process of 
amalgamation is also happening within the Catholic divisions 
and so they too are strengthening in terms of their size and 
resources they have available. 
 
In a number of areas though they will still need to work closely 
together to simply deal with geographic issues in terms of what 



3000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

the catchment areas are for local schools and particularly the 
high schools in terms of working out how the shared services 
are. I anticipate that good old common sense will prevail in 
many of these cases and that we’ll continue to see that 
relationship which developed between public and Catholic 
systems continue into the future. 
 
While I have lots of faith that that is going to be the case, we 
also are obviously putting some human resources into that to 
make sure that we are facilitating that so that that is in fact the 
outcome. But we are aware of this and are continuing to work, 
and will continue to work with them on that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I just had a little bit of 
interruption when you were speaking. Did you indicate that you 
are planning to put resources into a mechanism that will 
facilitate these ongoing shared services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We’re going to help facilitate the 
process. It won’t be new financial resources to encourage it. It 
will be a case of us working with the new divisions to make 
sure that that relationship or a relationship is able to be worked 
to the benefit of students in the area. This is about making sure 
that we have high-quality services, educational services and 
high-quality schools for our kids. And I anticipate the boards 
are going to respond in that as that being their core mission as 
opposed to worried about building fiefdoms. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I know that in many jurisdictions 
the working relationship has been very solid between the public 
and the Catholic school boards and they work to a mutual 
benefit quite often. I know there have always been a few bumps 
or the likelihood of a few bumps along the way has been 
realized. But nevertheless I think the working relationship has 
been generally pretty good, especially in some of the smaller 
communities. 
 
I think the concern really is not based on the track record or the 
history of that relationship. It is probably driven primarily by 
what they see as a very disparate relationship in terms of size, 
just sheer size. 
 
And as the public school boundaries, the divisions get much, 
much larger, some of those good working relationships may not 
be quite as easily carried forward because good working 
relationships often depend on personalities involved. And if that 
personality changes or there is a new mandate or a different 
direction, some of those difficulties that we readily encounter 
might be realized in this particular arrangement as well. 
 
So while I would share with the minister the optimism or the 
hope that those arrangements that have existed previously will 
continue to exist, I think the concern is that the Catholic school 
districts or divisions might be completely overwhelmed just by 
the size of the public system. 
 
I guess the other question that came out of our discussions was 
that given the fact that many of the Catholic school divisions 
will be extremely small, as we’ve already discussed, they’re 
wondering if the minister or his department have given 
consideration to addressing some of the inequities that might 
arise. You know we’re going to have considerably smaller 
assessments available to the public school . . . I’m sorry, the 

Catholic school divisions as opposed to the public divisions and 
that might impact shared services. It might impact capital 
projects, transportation delivery, those types of arrangements 
that have worked reasonably well in the past. So is the 
department contemplating providing services to the divisions 
and a solution to resolving those kind of inequities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is one of the sensitivities that we 
are mindful of as we’re looking at the foundation operating 
grant reform system. The grant today compensates for that 
smaller assessment now. I think we need to be clear that the 
assessment for Catholic divisions will not decline as a result of 
the restructuring; it may because of revaluation but it’s not 
because of restructuring. 
 
The question around shared services, and if we think about the 
Holy Trinity Division in particular, which today is in three 
different divisions and even after restructuring will still be in 
two different divisions, there are certain considerations we will 
need to make as to how that’s going to work. I am encouraged 
by the fact that the Catholic system is continuing with 
amalgamation. I think that that’s a wise move on their part in 
terms of dealing with making sure they’ve got a broad range of 
services available within the Catholic, the Catholic system, 
particularly outside of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
We are just going to have to work through how this deals . . . 
how we deal with these funding issues as we look at foundation 
operating grant reform. And this is one of those considerations 
we are going to have to be mindful of. 
 
The second issue though that the member has raised is about the 
shared services arrangements that are in place. Where there are 
contractual obligations, the new boards will have a 
responsibility . . . the new public boards that are restructured 
will have a responsibility to maintain those. And that is part of 
what we’ll need to get . . . will need to be worked through. But 
there are, there are a number of issues. Every board has a 
slightly different set of arrangements and it’s going to take 
some time to work through. That’s why we have allowed these 
new public boards a four-year term to deal with that, and why I 
anticipate that we’re going to continue to need to work in the 
next 18 months to 2 years to really make sure that we have a 
truly seamless functioning. 
 
I don’t know what to say on the fear that Holy Trinity and I 
guess one other board, Catholic board, has expressed to me 
about the possibility of the public boards now — because they 
are becoming so much larger and having more resources — 
being able to go it alone. Which is essentially the argument that 
Holy Trinity makes, that the new boards in those areas won’t 
need to co-operate with the Catholic board because they’ll have 
the resources available to offer their own services. In many 
ways I’m pleased to hear that those kind of resources are going 
to be available, that the new boards in those areas won’t need to 
co-operate with the Catholic board because they’ll have the 
resources available to offer their own services. In many ways 
I’m pleased to hear that those kind of resources are going to be 
available, that the public boards will be able to offer it 
themselves. 
 
What I trust they’ll do is to continue to work to make sure 
students — whether they’re in the Catholic system or the public 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3001 

system in those locales, within those catchment areas of those 
schools — are able to provide that service. So we are able to 
find still efficiency and that broad range of services that 
students today are experiencing and that parents are expecting 
to continue into the future. 
 
The Chair: — This concludes the estimates for Learning. I 
would invite the minister to move that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I want to thank my officials for coming out this afternoon and 
tonight. And I would move that we rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[20:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 102 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 102 — The 
Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to have this Bill 
go to committee this evening. 
 
We recognize that this Bill serves a very useful purpose. This 
Bill . . . we’re pleased to recognize that the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] had read our policy platform and taken this 
idea right out of it. And of the various things that they’ve done 
this session, Mr. Speaker, adopting this one is certainly one of 
the, one of the better and more credible things that they have 
done. 
 
And we had prepared a draft private member’s Bill that we 

were going to be introducing, and obviously we used the same 
precedent because the private member’s Bill that we were going 
to introduce was virtually identical to this. So it’s going to be 
very difficult, Mr. Speaker, for us to offer any serious 
opposition to this when we’re in fact very supportive of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill offers a reasonable balance, in balancing 
the rights of a person who may have bit or spat upon a law 
enforcement official or an ambulance worker, a health care 
worker. It gives them some reasonable protection in allowing 
samples to be taken. But the important thing, Mr. Speaker, is 
that it ensures that samples can be obtained from people that do 
those type of things. It provides for notice requirements to be 
given to them, and provides a timeline and a specific process. 
There is also a provision in the Bill to allow the timelines in the 
notice provision to be waived or bridged if there is a likelihood 
that the person may leave the jurisdiction of the court. 
 
The applications are brought in the Court of Queen’s Bench 
which will ensure a reasonable balance. 
 
A comment I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, on this Bill is dealing 
with the costs of the application. Under the statute the costs are 
to be borne by the applicant. It is our understanding and our 
expectation that in most cases the employer of the affected 
police officer or health care worker would actually bear those 
costs and we’ll be watching with some interest to ensure that 
that actually in fact happens, and if it does not happen we may 
well be looking for a legislative amendment to make sure that 
that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is one that we are pleased to be 
supporting because it is one small way that MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] can recognize the hard work and 
commitment of health care workers and the fact that health care 
workers, police officers, and emergency technicians put their 
lives and their safety at risk for the rest of the population on a 
daily basis and we’re pleased to be supportive of this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is our hope and expectation that this Bill can be 
proclaimed into force this session. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have no objection to this going to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 102, The 
Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Could we just finish the process on this and 
I’ll ask the member to make his introductions in a moment. To 
which committee . . . Pardon me. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 



3002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
102, The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily 
Substances) Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill 102 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
And the Chair recognizes the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast for introductions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Meewasin has 
risen and introduced guests, in particular has on occasion 
introduced my spouse and has made certain comments about 
her ability to choose spouses and the life that she leads. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce the member 
from Meewasin’s spouse, Cheryl Hand, who I see in your 
gallery. And, Mr. Speaker, I note that it is their 25th wedding 
anniversary, and I would like to ask all members and yourself to 
join with me in wishing them all the best for another 25 years, 
and we’d like to welcome her to this legislature. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I rise, Mr. Speaker, technically to join 
my colleague in introducing my wife, but mostly to thank him 
for his kind invitation of her to this House which she certainly 
deserved; I’m not sure I did. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 109 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 109 — The 
Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pleased to rise 
tonight and say a few words on Bill 109 which is The Criminal 
Enterprise Suppression Act. Mr. Speaker, there is obviously 
some very good and solid points in this Bill that come to my 
immediate attention having been involved in either the 
corrections end of Justice or the correctional facilities end for 
all the time that I have been an elected member both in this 
House and both federally. Obviously some of these Bills that 
my colleague from Saskatoon Southeast will be speaking about 
tonight are near and dear to my heart as well. 
 
One of the things that I have noticed in my work in corrections, 
both in the province and in the country, is the growing numbers 
of gangs, both in Saskatchewan and in the country of Canada. 
And of great concern are the number of gangs and the seeming 
lack of ability by governments, maybe of all stripes and of all 
jurisdictions, in order to control them. 
 
Part of this legislation is geared towards suppressing gang 
activity which in itself is an admirable goal and one that we can 
never rest or take rest in because we do know for instance that 
Saskatchewan has the highest number, per capita number of 
youths involved in gangs — 1.34 youths per 1,000 people — 
which is not something that we ought to be proud of in 
Saskatchewan. According to the Criminal Intelligence Service 
of Saskatchewan, we have 1,315 youth gang members within 
Saskatchewan. One is too many, Mr. Speaker, and we could 
never rest, we could never stop until we do everything within 
our power to alleviate that problem. According to that same 
group, there are about 12 known gangs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that we have with this Bill and 
something that we’re going to want to talk to some of the 
stakeholders about — we’ll want to talk to police chiefs; we’re 
going to want to talk to the police associations; we’re going to 
talk to Crown prosecutors and lawyers and also victims of 
crime about this Bill — is that we see the concern possibly 
being that people who may have . . . business owners for 
instance that may have a lack of opportunity to actually defend 
themselves from this Bill. 
 
Under the abilities of this Bill, it gives the court, at the request 
of a police chief, the right to withhold provincial tax, a liquor 
licence, the ability to store liquor in a place of business, those 
kinds of things, if an owner or a manager is found to be 
involved in organized crime. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s all well 
and good if that person is in fact proven to be a part of 
organized crime. Then well that should be that we ought to take 
any and all steps in order to make sure and ensure that that 
person is no longer in business. 
 
I know other Bills that have passed through this House — 
profits of organized crime, profits of crime Bills — both in 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3003 

Saskatchewan and in the federal government have been very 
good and well received, I might add, by most people, regardless 
of which end of the law you’re on, whether you’re a Crown 
prosecutor or a lawyer that would be acting on behalf of 
someone who is charged with these types of crimes. 
 
I just want to spend a couple of minutes, Mr. Speaker, talking 
about organized crimes in correctional facilities. I had the 
opportunity over the last good number of years as an elected 
member to visit many and various correctional facilities, both 
provincially run, state run, and federal facilities, and that is a 
concern. I can tell you wherever you go, you’ll ask people what 
are their biggest concerns within the walls, the physical walls of 
a facility, and they’ll tell you on many cases that it is 
gang-related activities that are a major, major, major problem. 
 
On a trip that I made to Alberta to some of their provincial 
correctional facilities a year and a half ago, Mr. Speaker, 
something of interest that I noticed and I asked the people who 
were running the facility, I asked them how they dealt with 
gangs within their walls. And they said that they had gone to 
great lengths to alleviate that system, and they found that one of 
the most simple solutions was the most effective solution. And 
what they did is they took and they dressed every inmate in the 
same clothing. In this particular case they were coveralls, and I 
think they were a blue coverall. And by just eliminating the 
accessibility to wear gang-related colours and clothing, they 
eliminated some of the problems that come from gang-related 
activities in Alberta. 
 
And I notice the Minister for Corrections and Public Safety and 
I have talked about this in the past when I was the critic for 
Corrections and Public Safety. And I know that those are some 
of the things that hopefully that that department will be looking 
at in the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just say then that, you know, we 
want to spend a little bit more time talking to the stakeholders 
because we’re obviously a little bit concerned obviously as well 
that some of the things that the government has failed to do 
when it comes to justice-related activities are obviously a 
concern to us, and we want to talk about those as well, such 
things as your promise for the last two elections — three 
elections I guess now — to hire an additional 200 police 
officers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that they will stand up on a given day and 
say that they’ve hired so many. And they have; I understand 
that. But the problem comes where they’re going to have to 
backfill a huge hole left by retiring members of the force. 
 
So those are things that we would like to ask the government 
and to discuss before we move this Bill on to the next stage and 
so, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time at this stage, I’d like to 
move that we adjourn Bill 109. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley that debate on second reading of Bill 109 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 110 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 110 — The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, tonight we’re going to be having 
a number of Bills go to committee. This will be among those 
Bills. Of the Bills that are going to committee tonight, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the one that we have the most concern and 
reservations on. We wish it to go to committee, so we can have 
further discussion and seek input as it goes along. 
 
This Bill allows for the forfeiture of property on the application 
of a police chief. It is a marked shift from the approach where 
applications of this nature and tools are given to the Crown 
rather than to a police chief. We recognize, Mr. Speaker, that 
the purpose of this is to enable communities to take a greater 
role in policing and public safety. Having said that, there is 
always a concern when we shift away from the fundamental 
role of the Crown as being primarily responsible for law 
enforcement and safety. We’ll be looking to see, as this Bill is 
proclaimed into force, how it is going to work. 
 
[20:45] 
 
Another concern, Mr. Speaker, that we have with this Bill is 
that it allows for goods to be seized, and there is a different 
onus of proof. Primarily in criminal law for years, we have had 
requirement that things be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. 
In this particular Bill, it changes the onus of proof to requiring 
only a proof on the balance of probabilities — a significantly 
lesser burden of proof than we do for convicting someone. So 
we naturally have some concerns about how civil liberties are 
going to be affected. 
 
We also have concerns with other parties that may have an 
interest in goods or land that are seized and how their rights are 
going to be affected. There is notice provisions and protection 
provisions in this piece of legislation, and we will be looking to 
see how those are applied and would certainly welcome 
comments in that regard. 
 
The crux of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is section 7(1), and that is 
the section that we look at to determine the force and effect of 
this Bill. And I’ll read that section: 
 

. . . if the court finds that the property is proceeds of 
unlawful activity or an instrument of unlawful activity, 
 

it can be seized or otherwise dealt with. So we look to see what 
will happen with that. It creates some additional difficulty 
because it blends civil and criminal law, and it may well be that 
this Bill does not stand up to a court challenge for the 
constitutional argument that it is outside of the jurisdiction of 
the province to enact pieces of criminal legislation. 
 
We have concerns about what will happen with the proceeds of 



3004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

crime. We feel that there should be an expectation that forfeited 
property be used either to fight crime or for the victims of 
crime, and this Bill does not necessarily address how that is 
going to happen. 
 
We feel it’s of some significant importance to make a public 
statement that proceeds of crime be used primarily to support 
and to return victims of crime back to the position they were 
before the crime had taken place. 
 
We appreciate that there needs to be a balance between what 
police might need for resources to continue their fight against 
organized crime. We’ll be watching to see whether the 
government will enact formulas or enact methodology that’s 
there. 
 
We of course have concerns about gang participation and 
growing problems with gang participations. We have extremely 
young people involved in urban gangs . . . and the young people 
involved in gangs. We have the highest per capita number of 
youths involved in gangs — 1.34 per 1,000 people. According 
to Canadian intelligence service of Saskatchewan, we have 
1,315 youth gang members, which is second only to Ontario 
which has 12 times the population. 
 
We have some adult oriented gangs, and they include the Native 
Syndicate, Indian Posse, Redd Alert, Saskatchewan Warriors, 
Crazy Cree, Mixed Blood, Tribal Warriors, and West Side 
Soldiers. And there’s younger, junior versions of those gangs as 
well. And, Mr. Speaker, it is our goal to have the police given 
every possible tool and resource that’s necessary to deal with 
that. 
 
One of the problems that we do have, Mr. Speaker, is the lack 
of commitment on the part of the NDP to live up to their 1999 
election promise for 200 new police officers. We think that if 
you’re going to have a Seizure of Criminal Property Act and a 
piece of legislation of this type, it’s absolutely essential that 
there be sufficient resources for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have raised on many occasions in this house 
the NDP practice of saying one thing and doing another. They 
often use as an excuse that they intend to do something over 
their mandate. This is something that goes back to the 1999 
mandate, not the 2003 mandate. So it’s abundantly clear that 
this is an election promise from the 1999 election that was not 
filled. I certainly don’t wish to go back through the debate that 
we’ve had over the actual number of officers that were provided 
by the department. But no matter whose numbers you use, the 
promise remains unfulfilled, and we’re still lacking many police 
officers as required. 
 
The best that we have seen from this government is a small 
token gesture of 18 positions, which is a long way from the 200 
that’s there. If they continue on at this rate it’s going to be a 10 
year process to have a 1999 election promise fulfilled, which is 
unfortunately a classic and rather offensive way of saying one 
thing and doing another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to be certain that we recognize the need 
to be proactive in addressing organized crime. We want to make 
sure that we limit the ability of organized crime to carry on and 
prosper in Saskatchewan. We want to take every step to address 

youth gang activity. 
 
In his second reading remarks, the minister said: 
 

. . . all efforts should be made to assist our police services 
in their quest . . . [for] safer Saskatchewan communities. 
 

We think a good way to answer that would be by having the 
department live up to the minister’s commitment for 200 new 
police officers, and we want to see how that comes to pass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the concerns that we have with this Bill. 
Our most significant concern is the lack of commitment and the 
lack of funding to ensure that the police officers are put on the 
street and that the police have the resources to actually use the 
benefits that this Act may bring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have no objection to this Bill going to 
committee at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 110, The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Act, be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill 110, The Seizure of 
Criminal Property Act, be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 110 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried, therefore this Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 108 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 108 — The 
Business Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3005 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Act is mainly a 
housekeeping Bill. We support it going to committee this 
evening. This Bill deals with amendments that are needed and 
are necessary to bring our provincial legislation in line with 
changes to the federal business corporations Act. 
 
This Act alters and deals with residency requirements for 
directors of a corporation. It deals with the requirement that the 
directors have to be Canadians. It makes this Bill consistent 
with the federal legislation in this regard. It also deals with 
national security rules that have now been adopted by the 
Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission. 
 
We support the consistency between our legislation and the 
federal business corporations Act, and deals with a number of 
issues that are there, that we are largely supportive and are 
pleased that the government is lifting restrictions or relaxing 
restrictions in making the Bills consistent with federal 
legislation. And we are concerned that the government does 
everything they can to be supportive of business in a general 
sense. 
 
We deal often, Mr. Speaker, about a number of other issues that 
affect the viability and the ongoing ability of businesses to carry 
on in this province. So we’re pleased that The Business 
Corporations Amendment Act does not have any of the things 
that we were dealing with before like the job-killing monster on 
available hours and the royalty schedule which they changed for 
oil revenues. They addressed this by referring to reducing 
royalties as dealing with an issue of revenue leakage which is 
certainly something that most taxpayers and business people in 
the province find somewhat offensive. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, is Bill 87. One day the minister 
says it includes seizure. The next day the minister says that it 
does not. Mr. Speaker, this is a troubling way for a business 
corporation amendment Act to deal with things. We’re glad that 
this portion of it is going there. 
 
But I point out that we still have many difficulties with other 
business issues in this province and certainly want to see to it 
that there are as few impediments to businesses in this province. 
And we encourage the NDP government to try and come 
forward with other Bills and other pieces of legislation that 
would be more proactive and more supportive of creating jobs 
and creating business opportunities within the province rather 
than driving business away as unfortunately has been the past 
practice for most of this government’s mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill can go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 108, The 
Business Corporations Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 108, The Business 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 108 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on Bill No. 113 
— The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005/Loi 
de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but 
lucratif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this once again is another 
housekeeping Bill which we will be consenting to going to 
committee this evening. It is a companion piece of legislation to 
The Business Corporations Amendment Act. It also deals with 
Canadian residency requirements and clarifies certain rules on 
the election of directors and probably takes some steps to 
ensure that people don’t become directors of non-profit 
corporations without knowing that they’ve become directors. 
There’s been issues in the past with directors’ liability and it’s 
probably a step in the right direction that there be a greater 
notice provision to ensure that people are aware that they’ve 
been elected as a director. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are significant liabilities and responsibilities 
that go with being a director. Those include ensuring that 
payroll remittances are filed, that other various government 
filings are completed on behalf of the corporation. In the event 
that those things do not happen, there is a personal liability on 
the part of the director and this Bill goes a ways to ensuring that 
those people may not have been volunteered without their 
knowledge. 
 
We think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill be reflective 
of the fact that our province’s charities and public organizations 
are very . . . very much need the support and hard work of 
volunteers. And this Bill addresses the need for those people to 
have some protection and some knowledge without totally 
removing the responsibility that goes with them. We think it’s 
of some benefit to recognize the hard work and support that 
volunteers give our various charities and we’re pleased that this 
Bill does that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill can go to committee and we support that. 
 



3006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 113, The 
Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 113, The 
Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister of human 
services that Bill No. 113 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
[21:00] 
 

Bill No. 112 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 112 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to speak to 
this Bill this evening. This is another Bill that can go to 
committee. 
 
The purpose of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to allow for a civil 
section within the Provincial Court. It will allow judges to be 
. . . develop better expertise, better timing in dealing with civil 
matters and then . . . as separate from criminal matters, and will 
probably give some benefit to scheduling and to ensuring that 
there is a quick flow of matters through the courts. 
 
The basis of this Bill and its companion piece of legislation is 
some amendments to The Small Claims Act, the small claims 
process where the Provincial Court civil procedure will be to 
ensure and to maintain that that process becomes user-friendly 
and a process that people can use without the requirement and 
the expense of hiring a lawyer to look after their matters as they 
go to court. 

Mr. Speaker, we have developed a system in our province of a 
Small Claims Court that has been very effective for regular 
citizens that don’t need to or want to go through the process of 
hiring a lawyer. The process is largely shepherded through by 
the court clerks, who should be commended. Their practice is to 
schedule an appointment with the applicant plaintiff. They 
prepare and draft the documents on their behalf and upon 
payment of the appropriate fee, which is a reasonable fee, issue 
the documents and give them to the plaintiff so that the plaintiff 
can arrange for service of the documents. 
 
The process after that is a mediation process and on to trial. So 
the process has in fact worked well in the past. And this Bill 
will ensure further streamlining and a better availability of 
judges. 
 
The concerns that we have, Mr. Speaker, are with the monetary 
limit currently in Small Claims Court. We note that there is 
legislation that’s been passed to raise that limit. And our 
concern would be when things will come into force to raise the 
limit and make things more affordable on a larger scale. 
 
Another thing the province should consider is clarifying the role 
of corporations that appear before Small Claims Court, either as 
a plaintiff or a defendant, and at what point those people can 
appear through an agent and at what point they are required to 
appear through a solicitor. It may well be appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker, for a further amendment or another piece of legislation 
to specifically allow or enable corporations to be represented by 
an officer or a designated employee. The practice right now 
through the province, Mr. Speaker, is somewhat haphazard and 
could certainly use some clarification and cleanup and 
streamlining. In any event, Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased that this 
Bill can now go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 112, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill 112, The Provincial 
Court Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 112 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3007 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 111 — The 
Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 modifiant 
la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is the last Bill that I will be 
speaking to this evening. Some of my colleagues may regard 
that as merciful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a result of a Small Claims Court review 
committee that made certain recommendations with the purpose 
of trying to improve the efficiency and access to Small Claims 
Court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the processes that has been highly effective 
in Small Claims Court has been pre-trial conferences or 
management meetings. And the purpose of this Bill will 
enshrine that in legislation and will ensure that a case 
management meeting between the parties and a judge takes 
place. 
 
Prior towards a trial, the judge will at that process attempt to 
settle a case before the trial actually takes place, and the judge 
will have additional powers at that pre-trial meeting that if a 
settlement cannot be reached the judge could make orders that 
would manage the dispute. He could require additional 
disclosure of evidence, additional parties being added, could 
require specific pleadings or directions to be filed by the parties. 
He can also deal with the disposal of trial exhibits that usually 
are required to be held until the expiry date of an appeal. 
 
These changes, Mr. Speaker, are ones that are designed to make 
the court more accessible, more friendly, and more efficient for 
a non-lawyer to use these claims. 
 
There is also provisions in the legislation that enable the courts 
to strike out frivolous or vexatious claims as well as some 
provisions that allow for the payment of non-lawyer and 
non-legal costs, so that if somebody had a claim that was 
unsuccessful, they may well be ordered to pay the other party’s 
lost wages to appear in court. So there’s some incentives to 
either settle matters or to ensure that your claim is valid before 
you go forward with it. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to report to the Assembly 
that most of these recommendations came as a result of the 
review committee and certainly not as the result of any hard 
work or due diligence on the part of the NDP, and I want to 
make sure that it’s the committee that receives the credit for 
these things rather than the government. I will, however, 
concede the government did authorize the committee to go 
ahead, and I’m pleased that they did. 

And I’m very pleased that they came back in the form of a Bill 
that we are able to support, and would like to at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, commend the staff and judges that work in Small 
Claims Court dealing with these matters. Sometimes these 
claims would, on the outside to a lay person, appear to be 
relatively minor and trivial, but I can assure you that for the 
person that’s involved in this type of litigation, it’s sometimes 
the most difficult or emotionally wrenching things that they go 
through. So it’s imperative that the process be made with some 
compassion and just treatment and dignity for the people that 
are using it, and would like to commend all of those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this matter can certainly go to committee at this 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill 111, The 
Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that Bill No. 111, The Small 
Claims Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 111 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 118 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 118 — The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 118, an Act respecting Water Rights and the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, and making consequential 
amendments to certain Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has just introduced this Bill very 



3008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

recently, and it’s a very lengthy Bill. It has, I believe, 13 parts 
to it and it’s very encompassing. And this is going to take a lot 
of studying, and we certainly are going to want to take this back 
to the stakeholders in the province and get their opinion about 
the changes that this Bill is going to make. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about water rights, the 
first thing that comes to my mind is in the springtime when 
there is this flooding. And it’s in various parts of the province, 
but it’s certainly a greater issue in the eastern portion of the 
province where there’s flooding every year, and there’s been 
many problems and concerns in that area about landowners 
digging dikes, draining water off their land. Other people have 
problems when their water is drained. 
 
So it’s really a touchy situation where it’s really pitting 
neighbour against neighbour, farmer against farmer, and quite 
frankly farmer and neighbour against the government or the 
government against them when they take legal action against 
individuals concerning the drainage of flooded areas. Now these 
are generally areas that are seeded every year, and so naturally 
the landowner or the farmer wants to drain these areas, so they 
can put a crop in. So it’s certainly a very large economic factor 
for farms that have these concerns, but also it has to respect the 
rights of people downstream, you might say, from the flooded 
area that this water must run through. 
 
And so we’re certainly going to take a long look at this Bill and 
just see where it goes and what changes that it is proposing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I personally think of the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority, I only have to think back to the problems 
in the Asquith-Grandora area concerning the construction of 
caverns, the salt caverns in that area to store natural gas. And 
quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, my constituents in the 
Grandora-Asquith area, when you say Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority it’s basically a dirty word to them because they feel 
that they have been mistreated by the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority. They feel that they have been very heavy-handed and 
not respecting their rights. 
 
We talk about water rights. Well is there any rights for 
landowners in this province that have wells that are producing 
clean water and then through the actions of a government 
Crown corporation by producing these caverns they lose their 
water totally or it’s a very poor quality of water? And I’ve 
spoken many times about this and asked many questions 
concerning this situation in the Grandora-Asquith area, and 
quite frankly the people in that area are not happy with the 
result. 
 
We understand there is more action taking place to help 
mitigate the poor wells, but the people in that area certainly 
don’t feel that the Watershed Authority, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and TransGas are doing their bit in order to 
mitigate their problems. It’s one thing we all agree that we . . . 
Saskatoon needs those storage caverns for the storage of natural 
gas. But on the other hand, the local landowners, the small 
holdings, and farmers in the Grandora-Asquith area also have 
rights, also have a very . . . not only a health issue but a basic 
economic issue concerning the water that they are wishing to 
produce for their own families and for their businesses and for 
their livestock. 

So, Mr. Speaker, certainly as I mentioned before, there is many, 
many areas in here that need to be looked at, and we will 
certainly be asking the stakeholders in this province what they 
think of this Bill. And we will, as I said earlier, we have just 
received this Bill and haven’t had the time to do due diligence 
on this Bill and get a grasp on the changes and the effects these 
changes to the Bill will have on property owners and also on the 
powers of the government over the water that the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan rely on. So at this time I would like 
to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill 118, The Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority Act, 2005 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 96 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 96 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 96 is a fairly complex and large Bill, but thankfully 
I’ve got an hour and 15 minutes to do it in, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think I may have time to express my views on this particular 
piece of legislation before the House wraps up for the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan and the Executive Council of Saskatchewan and 
makes consequential amendments to other Acts. Basically, Mr. 
Speaker, what it deals with is the entire operation of the 
Legislative Assembly itself, how people are hired, how MLAs 
are entitled to compensation, and actually, Mr. Speaker, who is 
entitled to run to become a member of this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s a fairly comprehensive and fairly broad Bill. It 
also deals with setting out the guidelines for the Board of 
Internal Economy and how it operates as sort of the managing 
body for the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mentioning, Mr. Speaker, who may or may not be eligible to 
seek a nomination to become a member of this legislature I 
think is worth noting, Mr. Speaker. In particular it deals with 
the ineligibility of people who work for the Crown — either for 
a department or for a Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
Somebody who reads this, Mr. Speaker, quickly and without 
studying it and understanding the terminology I think would 
have some difficulty with this particular clause because it says 
that to even seek to be nominated, Mr. Speaker, you can no 
longer hold a position with the Crown, either as a department 
employee or as an employee of a Crown corporation. 
 
And on first blush, people that are familiar with the political 
process think of nomination as being the nominating meeting 
for a particular party so that when you go to seek the 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3009 

nomination to represent your party of choice, at that point of the 
nomination day you would have to cease being an employee of 
the Crown. That’s the interpretation most people would place 
on this, Mr. Speaker, at first blush. However that’s not the case. 
 
And I think it needs to be clarified, Mr. Speaker, that the 
nomination that this legislation is talking about is the 
nomination day during the writ period for the last day in which 
anyone could become a candidate during that election. So it’s 
not a party nomination; rather it’s the nomination that you put 
your name forward during the election writ to represent either a 
political party or as an independent member seeking the 
election as an independent person. 
 
So it’s roughly three weeks, Mr. Speaker, prior to the time that 
had been the case previously. Previously this requirement came 
into play the day of election day — that once you were elected, 
you could no longer be an employee of the Crown in any way, 
shape, or form, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s moved ahead from that 
point approximately three weeks to the nomination day during 
the writ period, the nomination day when you have to turn your 
papers in with the signature of your party leader or, if you’re an 
independent, pay your $100 and have your name placed on the 
ballot for that particular election. That’s the day that it refers to 
now. 
 
But on first blush I think that people could be a bit confused and 
a bit concerned about that, Mr. Speaker, so I think it needs to be 
clarified. And I guess the question will have to be asked to the 
minister when this eventually gets to committee as to what the 
reasoning was that the minister, that the government moved it 
from election day to nomination day. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
one of the areas that needs to be clarified. 
 
And it goes on with some other qualifications as to who can or 
cannot be an elected member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a couple of other areas as well that I think are worth 
noting, Mr. Speaker, on this particular Bill. One of the areas is 
division 3 that deals with the committee that could be put in 
place to review salaries, indemnities, and allowances for 
members. This piece of legislation as previously . . . well 
certainly sets it out in a manner that’s clear and understandable, 
that the Lieutenant Governor in Council can appoint a review 
committee, Mr. Speaker, to review the salaries and indemnities 
and allowances of members of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
But there doesn’t need to be an additional motion put forward 
before the legislature or an additional piece of legislation passed 
that allows for the establishment of a review committee, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s done by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, and 
no more than five people, none of which can be a member of 
the Assembly, can be appointed to this committee, Mr. Speaker. 
The committee would do its deliberations and make a report 
back to the legislature. 
 
And it says here, Mr. Speaker, that the legislature can then do 
one of two things with the report that is received from a review 
committee. The legislature can either approve the report, or it 
can reject the report, Mr. Speaker. There is no provision in here 
to allow for any amendments or any changes to the report by 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. The report of the review 
committee can be dealt with in either accepting it or rejecting it 

and that’s all. You either take the whole thing, or you take none 
of it, Mr. Speaker. You’re not allowed then to pick and choose. 
 
So the members of this Assembly could not pick and choose 
which parts of the report they wanted to take and implement. 
We either take it all, or we take none of it. And I think that’s 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker, because this review committee, if and 
when one is established, is to be an independent review process 
outside of this Assembly, outside of the purview of the 
members of this Assembly. And I think it’s appropriate then, 
Mr. Speaker, that the legislature would either accept or reject as 
the case may be, but not tinker with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have to admit though that there is a point further on down the 
road once a report was accepted, Mr. Speaker, and 
implemented, then the Board of Internal Economy can come 
into play and make changes, Mr. Speaker. I would think that if a 
review committee came back with a full set of 
recommendations for the salaries and indemnities of members 
of this legislature, that there would be very little if any need 
then for the Board of Internal Economy at some future date to 
interfere with that process. 
 
We have seen the results of that. We had a process in place, Mr. 
Speaker, from 1995, the McDowell Commission, that set out 
the proper procedures for members of this legislature, and then 
the government interfered with it two years ago, Mr. Speaker, in 
their mandate of 0, 1, and 1. And that has now reached us to the 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that it’s time to have another review 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier talked of another review process be called in the 
near future. The Leader of the Official Opposition has also 
called for that, Mr. Speaker. So I believe that it’s time, Mr. 
Speaker, that there could be another review process put in place 
in the near future. And we certainly need to be looking at that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that there are other members that are very interested in 
this debate. One other item that I do need to mention though, 
Mr. Speaker, is that this legislation continues to hold to the fact 
that if a vacancy occurs, that the vacancy needs to be filled with 
a new . . . a by-election needs to be called within six months. 
But that, Mr. Speaker, that by-election only needs to be called 
though within the first 40 months of a parliament, of a 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, even though we could go on for 
another 50 per cent longer than that. We could go on to 60 
months. 
 
And I think it would be appropriate . . . We’ve argued this, Mr. 
Speaker, in the House previously. The government has decided 
not to change this. But I think it would be appropriate if the 
six-month rule had no exclusions in it, Mr. Speaker. That once a 
seat has been vacant for six months, there is a by-election, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that would be appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think these are questions and concerns that can 
be raised in Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I 
believe this Bill can move ahead. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 96, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 be now 



3010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2005 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
96, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 96 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Why is the member for Regina Dewdney on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Dewdney has asked 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly an individual that I know has been introduced earlier 
tonight, the wife of a good friend of mine, the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. But, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin in my introduction asked me to pass on a 
message to his wife on this very special day, her 25th wedding 
anniversary. He wanted all members of the Assembly to know, 
and his wife, that he loves her very, very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 97 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 97 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 sur une modification 
corrélative découlant de la loi intitulée The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 97, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2005 be read now a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
97, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the Government House Leader that Bill No. 97 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill No. 97 stands 
referred to the Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 116 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 116 — The 
Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 116, The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act. 
Mr. Speaker, our information says the repeal is an Act that 
governs the practice of osteopaths in the province, and the 
Health Minister has told the media it is outdated, and we no 
longer need any osteopathic doctors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. During a scrum, after the 
minister introduced the Bill, he was asked to define what an 
osteopathic practice or doctor was, and well the Minister of 
Health didn’t know. So I’d just like to give some information to 
the Minister of Health about what an osteopath is. 
 
It’s a therapist who manipulates the skeleton and muscles, the 
treatment of injuries to bones and muscles using pressure and 



May 10, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3011 

movement; a system of health care that focuses on treatment of 
the physical body, joints, muscles, and connective tissue using 
hands-on pressure, stretching, and manipulation; considered a 
complementary medicine or treatment. Applications include 
treating muscular contraction after periods of immobility, 
increasing range of motion, breaking down scar tissue after 
trauma. Considered an official health practice in France, 
training institutes there, Mr. Speaker, train many osteopath 
doctors which are practicing around the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, the reason for the 
repeal is because the minister said the Act is obsolete. And 
currently there are no osteopathic practitioners in the province. 
There have not been for many years. 
 
And should a Canadian trained osteopath wish to practice in the 
province, he or she would not be able to because the current Act 
requires licensing in accordance with an education program 
approved by the American Association of Osteopaths. 
Osteopathic training in the US [United States of America] is 
now broader in scope. 
 
According to the minister, the repeal of this Bill would not 
prevent an osteopath from establishing a practice in the 
province, as long as they do not engage in any treatment that 
encroaches on the scope of practice of any other regulated 
professional. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if someone that has been going to see a 
chiropractor for many years, some of these techniques and 
professions after a fair length of time become quite generally 
accepted. And that’s the situation with chiropractic treatment 
and many other types of procedures that help people with 
muscle and bone problems and/or skeletal problems. And not 
that I’m that familiar with osteopathic treatment, but I 
understand it’s complementary to massage therapy and 
chiropractic treatments. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of questions that we’d like 
to ask the minister in the future. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
we’d like this Bill to go to committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 116, The 
Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
116, The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill 116 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill then stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:32.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2989 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2989 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2990 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2992 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2994 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2995 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2996 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2999 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2999 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 102 — The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act  
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3001 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................3002 
 Bill No. 109 — The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................3002 
 Bill No. 110 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3003 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3004 
 Bill No. 108 — The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3005 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3005 
 Bill No. 113 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3005 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3006 
 Bill No. 112 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3006 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3006 
 Bill No. 111 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3007 
  Quennell (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................3007 
 Bill No. 118 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act, 2005 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3007 
 Bill No. 96 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3008 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................3010 
 Bill No. 97 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur une modification corrélative découlant de la loi intitulée The Legislative Assembly and 
 Executive Council Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................3010 
 Bill No. 116 — The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3010 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................3011 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3002 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................3002 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................3010 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




