






















































Hansard: November 07, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 119A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3263 
 November 7, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Her 
Honour is here for prorogation. 
 

PROROGATION 
 

[At 10:01 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. Her Honour was 
then pleased to deliver the following speech.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated.  
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislature: 
 
It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the First 
Session of The Twenty-Fifth Legislature. 
 
In thus relieving you, I would like to thank you for the work 
done and progress made. 
 
This Session’s work included preparation for, and celebration of 
a milestone event — Saskatchewan’s Centennial; a year in 
which to remember our heritage, pay tribute to our past, and to 
thank our citizens who have contributed much to the success of 
our province. It was a year to honour the uniqueness and 
diversity of the citizens of Saskatchewan by celebrating the 
accomplishments of our past, with a forward look to the next 
generation and our future. 
 
It was also a year in which you recognized and celebrated the 
remarkable achievements of Aboriginal peoples and the  
immigrant pioneers of our province. We were proud to 
designate 2005 as the Year of the First Nations and Métis 
Women. This year was also made memorable in marking the 
Year of the Veteran, which gave us the opportunity to recognize 
those generations who dedicated and risked their lives for the 
sake of our future. We can all be proud of the significant 
progress made in readying our province for generations to 
come. 
 
This year’s accomplishments focused on providing our youth 
with quality educational and training programs, accompanied 
by employment opportunities, and to continuing our 
commitment to provide a green and prosperous economy, and 
improving the quality of life for our youth, elders, seniors and 
families, with supports that enable and facilitate healthy rural 
and urban communities. 
 
You unveiled an “Action Plan for the Economy: A New 
Century of Opportunity”, in response to the successful 
Centennial Summit of January, 2005. The plan contains 81 
actions to encourage economic growth and to build on our 
natural strengths and the competitive advantages of our key 
economic sectors. 
 
Along with the recognition that Saskatchewan is an affordable 
place, boasting a clean environment in which to live and raise a 
family, you continued to promote the fact that feeling safe in 
one’s community is a right, not a privilege. In carrying out this 

commitment, legislation was passed that directly supports 
keeping our communities safe for all citizens of our province. 
 
The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act improves 
community safety by providing for additional tools for police 
and justice agencies to utilize, in the goal of targeting 
residences, buildings and lands that are routinely used for 
specified illegal activities and prohibit and put a stop to illegal, 
criminal activities occurring in our neighbourhoods. 
 
To ensure the safety of emergency service workers, good 
Samaritans and victims of crime, you passed The Mandatory 
Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act. This 
legislation protects those who help others and provides peace of 
mind to those who may be exposed to another person’s infected 
blood or bodily fluid. If there is cause to believe that an 
individual may have come into contact with an infectious 
disease and the person who may already be infected refuses to 
be tested voluntarily, this legislation will set out a Court guided 
process for the source person to be tested on a confidential 
basis. 
 
The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act provides that, if 
the Court is satisfied that the owner or manager of a business is 
a member of a criminal organization, the police can apply to the 
Court to cancel and withhold licenses needed to operate the 
business. In addition to this, you passed The Seizure of 
Criminal Property Act, which takes the profit out of crime by 
allowing for property that is the product of an unlawful act, or 
property owned by an individual committing unlawful acts, to 
be seized and sold by order of the Court. 
 
In your commitment to have an inclusive, fair and just society 
that serves all citizens of this province, you amended The 
Police Amendment Act, 2005, to increase First Nations and 
Métis community input into the police complaints process. 
 
To enhance consumer protection, promote privacy, accuracy 
and fairness in the consumer credit marketplace, you passed 
The Credit Reporting Act. 
 
You recognize and take seriously the problem of addictions and 
substance abuse, and as such, appointed a Legislative Secretary 
on Substance Abuse and Prevention. The Legislative Secretary 
was given the task of meeting with and consulting with 
stakeholders, health care providers, experts in the field of 
addictions and substance abuse, families and individuals 
affected by addiction, to create and implement practical 
solutions and recommendations on how to alleviate, treat and 
heal individuals, families and communities from the devastating 
effects of addictions and substance abuse. Those concerns were 
heard, and Project Hope was created; a new three year, $10 
million plan to prevent and treat substance abuse. 
 
In maintaining the commitment to healthy citizens and healthy 
workplace environments, you passed The Tobacco Control 
Amendment Act, which prohibited smoking in public places 
effective January 1, 2005. This legislation also bans the sale of 
tobacco and tobacco-related products to youth-frequented 
establishments, thereby encouraging our young people to make 
healthier lifestyle choices. 
 



3264 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2005 

To provide confidence in the spending practices of government, 
you passed The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 
which will assist to improve administrative efficiency and to 
demonstrate the Government’s continued commitment to sound 
financial management, transparency, accountability and 
controlled spending. 
 
To assist in making our province a youth-friendly work 
environment, you amended The Labour Standards Act which 
requires the Minimum Wage Board to review minimum wage at 
least every two years. This legislation also provides for an 
appropriate balance between work and family, by ensuring 
those who access compassionate care benefits under The 
Employment Insurance Act are protected to a maximum of 16 
weeks in a 52-week period. 
 
To assist, enhance and promote private sector industries, you 
passed The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005. 
This legislation restores tax equity in the oil and gas industry. 
The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 
Amendment Act was also passed to facilitate and sustain the 
growth and development of the provincial venture capital 
industry. 
 
To maintain your commitment to education and our youth, The 
Post-Secondary Graduate Tax Credit Amendment Act, 2004 
was passed to increase the post-secondary graduate tax credit in 
each taxation year from 2004 to 2007. 
 
To provide the highest level of legislative protection for all 
ecological reserves, ensuring the reserves cannot be reduced in 
size without approval of the Legislative Assembly, you passed 
The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Municipalities Act represents a significant step in 
advancing the municipal – provincial relationship, and presents 
a significant opportunity to strengthen our urban and rural 
opportunities and to create opportunities for more effective 
local government. 
 
Saskatchewan’s producer-led agricultural agencies have done 
an excellent job of promoting and benefiting their industries and 
this province’s producers through research, market development 
and extension services. The Agri-Food Act assists these 
agencies by providing increased flexibility, through effective 
legislation, to enable them to take a stronger leadership role in 
the development of those industries. 
 
To demonstrate your commitment to providing the lowest cost 
utility bundle by setting out in legislation public ownership of 
our Crown corporations, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act was passed. 
 
You also had the privilege of welcoming Her Majesty The 
Queen and His Royal Highness, the Duke of Edinburgh in May, 
2005. Highlights of the Royal Visit included the unveiling of 
the statue of The Queen and her Saskatchewan-born horse, 
Burmese in Wascana Centre, unveiling of the Centennial Mural 
in the Legislative Building, the announcement of the Queen 
Elizabeth Centennial Aboriginal Scholarship, a visit to the 
Synchrotron in Saskatoon, and the official opening of the 
Government House Centennial Project. 
 

I was also honoured to take part in hosting Her Majesty The 
Queen and His Royal Highness, the Duke of Edinburgh, in this 
Centennial Year. 
 
Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for the 
diligent manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 
activities of the Session, and wish you the full blessings of 
Providence. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly: it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 7th day of November, 2005 at 
2:30 p.m. This Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:14.] 
 



 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


