















































Hansard: May 02, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 103A  MONDAY, MAY 2, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2767 
 May 2, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Highway 32 that runs from Swift 
Current to the community of Leader continues to present a 
serious concern to the people of that area. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
residents of the communities of Abbey and Lancer, as well as 
people from the community of Herbert and the city of Prince 
Albert. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Eston 
Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions signed by 
people who are concerned that the size of the proposed school 
divisions is far too large to retain any local input into the 
education system. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Forgan and Wiseton, and I’m very pleased to 
present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have a petition regarding the forced amalgamation of schools, 
and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to rescind the decision to force school 
boards to amalgamate. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this is signed by citizens of Radville. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today with citizens concerned about the exorbitant amount of 
money that was paid for a consulting contract to the CEO [chief 
executive officer] Jim Fergusson. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Dundurn, Grandora, 
and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation 
of school boards. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to rescind this decision to force 
school boards to amalgamate. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by the residents of Weyburn, 
Radville, and Minton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens calling on this government to repair and resurface 
Highway 15 from the junction of Highway 11 east to the 
junction of Highway No. 2: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired or resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazards to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by residents from the town of 
Kenaston. I so present. 
 



2768 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Grandora and Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 
regards to the excessive contract of Mr. Jim Fergusson of the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray.  

 
Signed by the good people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again regarding the 
contract of Jim Fergusson. I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon 
Eastview, Saskatoon Nutana, and Saskatoon Southeast. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 72, 76, 666, 715, 716, 720, and 730. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 108 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: according to the strategic plan 
on crystal meth, The Mental Health Services Act can be 
used to force a person into treatment for drug abuse. How 
many attempts at involuntary treatment out of this Act 
were there in 2004? How many of those attempts were 
successful? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 108 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: did any 
Saskatchewan immigration officials attend any 
conferences, fairs, or meetings in Europe or Asia in 2004, 
and what was the purpose and costs of these trips? 

 
I have the same question for going back to 1999. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 108 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: how many 
people were working in Saskatchewan in the year 2004 on 
temporary work permits and what type of permit? 

 
And that also goes back to 1999. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 108 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Liquor 
Board Superannuation pension liability was funded in 
2002, and what portion of the pension liability was funded 
in 2002 ? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what was the portion of Liquor 
Board Superannuation Plan pension liability was unfunded 
in 2003, and what portion of that pension liability was 
funded in 2003? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Liquor 
Board Superannuation Plan pension liability is projected to 
be unfunded in 2010, and what portion of the pension 
liability is projected to be funded in 2010? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Workers’ 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

Compensation superannuation plan pension liability is 
currently . . . and what portion of the pension liability is 
currently funded? 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Workers’ 
Compensation superannuation plan pension liability is 
projected to be unfunded in 2006, and what portion of the 
pension liability is projected to be funded in 2006? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 106 ask . . . or 
108 rather, ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Workers’ 
Compensation superannuation plan pension liability is 
projected to be unfunded in 2007, and what portion of the 
pension liability is projected to be funded in 2007? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Members 
of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Plan pension 
liability was unfunded in 2002, and what portion of the 
pension liability was funded in 2002? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Members 
of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Plan pension 
liability is projected to be unfunded in 2011, and what 
portion of the pension liability is projected to be funded by 
2011? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Public 
Service Superannuation Plan pension liability is currently 
. . . and what portion of the pension liability is currently 
unfunded?  

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the Public 
Service Superannuation Plan pension liability is projected 
to be unfunded in 2011, and what portion of the pension 
liability is projected to be funded in 2011? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the STC 
superannuation plan pension liability was unfunded in 
2004, and what portion of the pension liability was funded 
in 2004? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 ask the 
government the following question: 

To the Minister of Finance: what portion of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation supplementary 
superannuation plan pension liability was unfunded in 
2003, and what portion of the pension liability was funded 
in 2003? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: what portion of 
the SaskTel pension plan pension liability was unfunded in 
2002, and what portion of the pension liability was funded 
in 2002? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 108 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what portion 
of the Power Corporation Superannuation Plan pension 
liability is currently and what portion of the pension 
liability is currently funded? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for similar years. And I so 
present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the House, 35 grade 12 law 30 students up in the 
west gallery. Now some of these law 30 students are here 
studying at Campbell Collegiate, but many of the other students 
are actually studying law 30 through distance education. They 
come from, I understand, Mankota, Stoughton, Wawota, and 
Churchbridge. 
 
And they are accompanied today by teachers, Mr. Bolander, 
Mr. Miller, and Constable Campbell; and the chaperones, 
Brenda Johash, June Balsher, Janet Blake, and Holly Fraser. 
 
So I’d ask all members to give them a warm welcome here to 
our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Mental Health Week in Canada 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mental Health 
Week is a great time to start practising mind and body fitness. 
In our efforts to be more physically fit, do we stop to think 
about our mental fitness? This is a question the Canadian 
Mental Health Association is asking us to ponder as it launches 
its 54th annual Mental Health Week today, May 2. 
 
This year’s Mental Health Week theme is Mind and Body 



2770 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

Fitness, which focuses on the connection between physical and 
mental well-being. “Mental fitness is just as important as 
physical fitness, but . . . is not typically given the same 
recognition and support that we give our physical health,” says 
Penny Marrett, the CEO of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association’s national office. 
 
She goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

This year, during Mental Health Week, we are telling 
people [across Canada] that it is time to consciously focus 
on keeping our minds, as well as our bodies . . . [fit] — to 
start practicing mind + body fitness [Mr. Speaker]. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there has been a commission or a 
report done in the last number of years in Canada on the health 
care system that they haven’t identified the mental health area 
as being underfunded, mainly in resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would call on all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
recognizing Mental Health Week this week here in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this is North American 
Occupational Safety and Health Week, or NAOSH Week. 
 
Ensuring worker health and safety is an important issue to the 
people of this province. One workplace fatality, one workplace 
injury, is too many. 
 
Last Thursday on the National Day of Mourning For Workers 
Killed Or Injured On The Job, the Minister of Labour read out 
the names of 21 workers who died last year as a result of injury 
or illness suffered on the job. The minister also stated that over 
14,000 Saskatchewan workers suffered an injury or an illness 
severe enough to take them off the job in 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, NAOSH Week, much like the successful 
WorkSafe Saskatchewan partnership between the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and Saskatchewan Labour, is about 
raising awareness to reinforce the importance of safe and 
healthy workplaces. 
 
The NAOSH Week theme this year is Equip, Educate, and 
Empower. And Mr. Speaker, I think it describes in very 
concrete terms the work we all must continue to do to promote 
the importance of preventing injury and illnesses in workplaces 
and in the home. Mr. Speaker, this province’s social and 
economic well-being depends on healthy and safe workplaces. 
 
Throughout the week, a variety of education and awareness 
activities are being held in communities throughout the 
province. I encourage all members to support the NAOSH 
Week activities taking place in their communities. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Volunteer Award to Star City Resident 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the northeast parks and 
recreation association recently recognized Ann Osborne with a 
volunteer award because of her enthusiastic commitment and 
tireless hours spent promoting sport, culture, and recreation 
within the community of Star City. 
 
For 14 years, Ann served on the Star City Recreation Board. 
She was also the organizer and supervisor of the summer 
playground program, chaperoned bus trips to swimming 
lessons, organized babysitting courses, and was involved in 
starting and supporting the Star City youth group. Ann was 
heavily involved in the minor sports, CanSkate, served a 
two-year term as treasurer for minor sports in Star City, and 
served for four years on the board of NERPA [North East 
Recreation and Parks Association]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ann still found time to serve on the Star City 
School Board, became a volunteer firefighter, a member of the 
royal auxiliary, and raised a family. If there was a local pancake 
breakfast, fundraiser, or community event, you can count on 
Ann’s face being among many of the hard-working volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the legislature, it is my pleasure 
to ask you to join me in congratulating Ann Osborne and 
thanking her for her many contributions to her community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Former MLA Elected Mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well he’s 
back. I’m very pleased to rise in the Assembly today and say a 
few words about a former colleague and a great friend who was 
recently elected as the mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Ron Osika has devoted 
much of his life to public service. And while he has had a long 
and successful career, he has more to give. Mr. Speaker, shortly 
after his election Ron said that his intention was to continue 
with the excellent work that the late mayor, Jim Wira, had 
undertaken on behalf of the people of Fort Qu’Appelle. And 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the good people of Fort Qu’Appelle 
will benefit enormously, not only from Ron’s intelligence, 
expertise, and experience, but also from his honesty, good 
humour, and sense of fair play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, knowing Ron as well as I do, I have no doubt 
whatsoever that he will do an outstanding job as mayor of Fort 
Qu’Appelle, as he did as a member of this Assembly. As 
government, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we have been put on 
notice that His Worship, Mr. Osika, will be knocking on our 
doors — perhaps knocking down our doors — to move quickly 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2771 

on issues facing his community of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all members of the Assembly will join 
me in congratulating Ron Osika on his election as mayor of Fort 
Qu’Appelle and wishing him all the best in his new role in 
public service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Nokomis School Wins Youth Enviro-Action Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am proud to 
recognize the remarkable achievements of the students at the 
Nokomis School. The students have been active in two 
environmentally green projects, the student for hire program 
and the town clean-up program, which have been a great benefit 
to the Nokomis community. 
 
On April 20, SaskEnergy communications coordinator, 
Candace Weimer, recognized the volunteer commitment of 
these students to help bring a positive impact to our 
environment. The students were awarded the SaskEnergy Youth 
Enviro-Action Award, an award that was warmly accepted by 
the Nokomis School SRC [student representative council] 
president, Jessica Richter. 
 
The award included a cheque for $500 and a picture. Nokomis 
School was one of eight schools across Saskatchewan to receive 
this award. And I’m pleased to see these dedicated students 
pitching in to help keep our rural communities clean and 
beautiful, while showing a sincere interest towards maintaining 
our natural environment. 
 
I believe that our students across Saskatchewan are very 
interested in the well-being of their communities, so we must 
continue to encourage their efforts towards taking pride in their 
volunteer achievements. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
students of Nokomis School on receiving the 2005 Youth 
Enviro-Action Award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Energy & Our Environment Poster Contest Winners 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, each year as part of its 
ongoing work to educate Saskatchewan young people about 
energy production and its impact on the environment, 
SaskPower’s Shand greenhouse sponsors the Energy & Our 
Environment poster contest for grades 5 and 6 students here in 
the province. 
 
This year over 500 students from across the province submitted 
posters with an environmental theme, demonstrating the 
importance of energy conservation as a way to take action 
against climate change. 

Mr. Speaker, the posters these students designed illustrate how 
in our day-to-day lives we can all help protect the environment 
by making responsible choices such as walking instead of 
driving a car, using energy wisely, recycling, and planting trees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s grand prize winning posters were 
submitted by Brody Starr from Balcarres Community School, 
Elisabeth Fortier from École Zenon Park School, Brett 
Westman from North West Central School in Plenty, and 
Cassandra Sullivan from St. Henry’s Junior Elementary School 
in Melville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, climate change is an important global issue. It 
affects all of us. I ask all members of this Assembly to join me 
in congratulating all the participants in the Energy & Our 
Environment poster contest, in particular Brody, Elisabeth, 
Brett, and Cassandra for their grand prize winning entries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

A Saskatchewan General Store 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Big Beaver is a hamlet located in the beautiful Big Muddy just 
a few minutes from the US [United States] border. The general 
store, one of the last of its kind in Saskatchewan, was recently 
featured in an article by Anne Kyle of the Leader-Post. 
 
The store was opened in 1928 and has served Big Beaver in the 
RM [rural municipality] of Happy Valley ever since. It has been 
owned and operated by the Aust family for the last 50 years, 
first by Roy and Lena Aust and now their son and his wife, Ron 
and Gail. 
 
The RM of Happy Valley, once home to 1,800 people, today 
only has 198 residents. Big Beaver was a main gathering point 
at one time for ranchers to market and ship their cattle. It has 
suffered the same fate as many other towns in Saskatchewan 
and has suffered a great, inevitable loss of people. 
 
But Aust’s Store has stood the test of time and remains the heart 
of the community. Residents and visitors alike come to Aust’s 
Store to shop, have coffee, play cards, catch up on the local 
news, keep in touch with friends and neighbours. Aust’s Store 
has everything from groceries, gifts, toys, cowboy boots, nuts 
and bolts, and veterinarian supplies. 
 
Stories abound about people looking for that elusive something 
and then finding it at Aust’s Store. Very fittingly, above the 
door of Aust’s Store is a sign that reads, “Our motto is: ‘if we 
don’t have it, you don’t need it.’” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would encourage members of the legislature and 
people across Saskatchewan to visit one of the best kept secrets 
in Saskatchewan, the Big Muddy. And when you do go to the 
Big Muddy, stop at Aust’s Store. It’s like taking a step back in 
time. It portrays a special way of life and the strong, undaunting 
people who made it so — a way of life, Mr. Speaker, which is 
sadly slipping away. 
 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last year Bob and Doreen 
Harrison of Nipawin tried to get help for their son, Wes, who 
was addicted to crystal meth and to cocaine. Although the 
Harrisons were able to get their son into detox, they couldn’t 
make him stay. The mother said: “We weren’t there for three 
minutes and . . . [the] counsellor turned around and said to Wes: 
‘You can leave whenever you want.’” Three days later their son 
was gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these parents watched helplessly as their son lost 
weight; he lost his teeth; he became psychotic and full of rage. 
As parents they wanted to get the treatment for him that he 
needed, but in the end they couldn’t do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week I presented a Bill that would help 
parents like Bob and Doreen. When will this government debate 
this Bill? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I emphasize that we agree with parents’ desire to have 
more tools in dealing with drug-addicted youth. And certainly 
we take that very seriously and want to make sure that whatever 
we do is going to be effective, and that we are going to be able 
to provide the necessary financial and human resources in order 
to carry out the prescribed action. 
 
I’m looking at two things, Mr. Speaker: one is the short-term 
response and the other one in the context of the Alberta Bill. 
We are already in discussions with Alberta on why they have 
decided to take until 2006 to institute these changes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, every day we wait there’s the 
chance another child is going to be lost. Bob and Doreen 
Harrison said that if they could have forced their son Wes into 
treatment he may not be where he is today and a 56-year old 
Nipawin man might be alive today. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, those parents couldn’t get their son help. 
Last April when he was high on meth, Wes Harker stomped a 
man to death on the streets of Nipawin. Now he’s serving 11 
years for manslaughter in a Saskatchewan penitentiary. His 
mother said: “ . . . empower the people who can help them . . . 
Don’t empower [the drug users] because they don’t know how 
to help themselves.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister: does she believe the parents 

should have the right to put their children into treatment? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very sad 
case that the member has represented to us. And there were 
provisions under the mental health Act that I believe could have 
been used if there is a desire to do that in that instance. 
 
But I just say that we take this very seriously and we want to 
make sure that what we do is going to work, that it’s going to be 
effective and that it will be a useable tool for parents, and will 
also keep in mind the protection of youth who don’t always 
share the same view of when they’re in need of protection. 
 
So we need to find that balance between the parents’ rights and 
the youths’ ability to make some of their own choices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what parents are 
asking for in Saskatchewan. They’ve got lots of responsibilities 
but they have very few rights, and that’s what they’re asking 
for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a mother in Prince Albert agrees with Doreen 
Harrison. Louise Roy’s daughter has been addicted to crystal 
meth for two and a half years. She could not force her daughter 
into treatment, so in order to get her daughter help she turned 
her over to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] for 
drug possession. Can you imagine how that would break a 
parent’s heart? She said, and I quote: 
 

We need a government to allow us to [be] parents by 
saying, okay, you’ve got . . . [a] problem, let’s allow you 
to do what you have to do to help . . . [your children] out. 
Don’t let them have a choice. They can’t. They’re 
incapable. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when will this government give the parents the 
tools they need? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, these are not 
easy issues. The facts are that in our society you’re generally 
considered innocent until you’re proven guilty. When you are, 
in fact, guilty of an offence, yes, you can be charged, Mr. 
Speaker. And then the repercussions are court ordered. And in 
some instances that is, in fact, what happens and what has to 
happen. 
 
We’re trying to find a more parent- and youth-friendly method 
to use to accomplish . . . I think we all have the same goal and 
outcome to accomplish here. But I will take the time to do that, 
but I can assure the members that very soon I will be bringing 
forward a recommendation under section 18 of The Child and 
Family Services Act and dealing with the larger legislative 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

framework subsequent to having a quicker, short-term solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, whatever the government is 
going to do, they have to do quickly. We know that the parents 
in Lloydminster said the mental health Act didn’t work the way 
it is right now. And we don’t have the luxury of waiting. For 
over a year we’ve been waiting. Parents in Saskatchewan need 
the right to be parents in situations like this. Parents have many 
responsibilities, and what they need is rights. 
 
We’ve now heard from two Regina mothers who say their 
daughters are so hooked on meth, they can’t make a decision to 
go into treatment. We’ve heard from grandparents and a 
grandmother and a mother with their fight to get their daughter, 
Mary, into treatment. And now we’ve heard from families in 
Prince Albert and Nipawin saying that enforced treatment is a 
must. We have a leading meth expert from UCLA [University 
of California, Los Angeles] saying that forced treatment is what 
can help. 
 
And I can’t believe that this government believes that they can 
think better than parents in situations like this. We have to 
hurry. 
 
When will this government start listening to the families and 
give them the help they need so they can help their children? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would, with all due respect, remind the member that most of us 
here are parents and grandparents so we’re not thinking with 
some other mind. We’re thinking with the mind of a parent and 
a grandparent. And don’t think for a moment with an adolescent 
granddaughter that I’m raising that I don’t think about this. This 
is very present in my mind what I would want to do in this 
situation and so have I discussed it with her. 
 
But I still say, Mr. Speaker, we have a system right now that is 
set up to respond to the laws we have. And if we’re going to 
change those laws we must also change the system that 
responds. And so that is why I have to look at the resources that 
we would bring to bear as well to make this a reality, not just an 
idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
February this government promised to wipe 
government-directed hours from the books once and for all. 

Here we are into May and this government still has not acted on 
this commitment. 
 
We hear rumblings that perhaps it’s because there are members 
in the NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus that can’t bring 
themselves to vote to scrap government-directed hours. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s time this government lived up to its promise 
instead of saying one thing and doing another. 
 
Last week I introduced a private member’s Bill to repeal section 
13.4 of The Labour Standards Act. Mr. Speaker, our Bill is 
ready to go. Will the NDP government pass it and if not, what’s 
the holdup? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
as usual the opposition says one thing and the facts say another. 
 
I would remind the member to review the blues that are in the 
binders that the staff leave on our desks every day. The Bill was 
introduced on Friday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, a comment to the minister. In 
fact there is no mention of anything in these blues, these are the 
blues that are presented to us today, Monday, May 2. In the 
Votes and Proceedings of Friday, the minister has listed Bill 
No. 122. We have seen Bills that have sat on this paper for a 
long, long time so the minister needs to clarify where this Bill 
will go and if indeed we’re going to see it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 87 is another Bill that expands the power 
of the Labour Relations Board so that the board would have the 
power to make its own regulations, Mr. Speaker. The board 
would make its own regulations, not this government. We know 
Bill 87 would also expand the power of the LRB [Labour 
Relations Board] so that it could enter workplaces to search for 
evidence, an extremely intrusive power for a quasi-judicial 
tribunal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell this Assembly who asked for 
these specific changes and what problems were identified as 
needing fixing? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I apologize. It’s listed in Votes and Proceedings, the 
white pages, Bill No. 122 we gave notice on Friday, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very clear on the reasons that we have 
put forward Bill 86 and 87. Bill 86 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very clear on 
why we’ve put forward Bills 86 and 87 that were tabled in this 



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

legislature in the fall session. Bill 86 corrects a definition of 
lawful authority for a case that is currently before the Supreme 
Court of Canada. Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the opposition 
would oppose a Bill that allows an employee the . . . protection 
when they are reporting an illegal activity. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
absolutely appalling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I made reference to Bill No. 87, 
an Act which will allow police state intrusion. That’s what Bill 
No. 87 says. It says that the police can . . . the Chair of the 
Labour Relations Board or his director can enter a place and 
search for evidence. This is not a common practice in a free and 
democratic society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another controversial aspect of Bill No. 87 — so we’ve 
clarified the minister so she’s on the right page — will allow 
the Labour Relations Board to force collective bargaining 
agreements. If a union is awarded certification and has not been 
able to come to an agreement with the employer on its first 
collective agreement, the LRB will then be able to impose one 
on them. Doesn’t this defeat the purpose of collective 
bargaining? It also seems unreasonable, Mr. Speaker, when 
current collective agreements can sometimes take up to one 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question: why would the government then 
want to force an agreement onto employees and employers after 
only 90 days? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there’s really two points 
that I’d like to make on this. When the member is asking about 
why Bill 87, I would refer him back to some of the opposition’s 
written questions where they have asked the length of hearings 
to be decided and issues to be decided and decisions put 
forward from the Labour Relations Board, the length of time 
that it may take. 
 
They have asked questions over the last number of years. Mr. 
Speaker, one of the issues that this will deal with, it will 
improve the processes at the board. 
 
And then the member brings up the issue of first contract and 
why the 90 days when the member was just on his feet the other 
day wanting the Government of Saskatchewan to get involved 
in an agreement in Yorkton with the ambulance drivers. We 
said then, please support first contract language. It would help 
mediate some of the issues in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One day they agree; one day they don’t. It depends on who’s in 
the gallery and what audience they’re speaking to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 

Revenue from Oil Royalties 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
during the entire month of April, world oil prices remained 
substantially higher than was estimated in the budget prepared 
by the Finance minister. The range for the month was $49 to 
$58 US, well above the $41 US price used by the Finance 
minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Finance minister tell this Assembly the 
total amount of extra windfall revenue this government has 
received over the last month and commit to a monthly report on 
these substantial revenues? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member should know that it’s not a 
question of where oil prices are on any particular day. The 
question is, are those prices sustainable for 365 days of the 
fiscal year? That is the real question, as to what kinds of 
revenue the government will have. 
 
The member will know that a few weeks ago, he stood in this 
Assembly and said look, oil is $55 a barrel. By his reckoning, 
you have an additional $400 million. He wanted to know where 
it is that we would spend $400 million. 
 
Now the oil is at $49 a barrel or at least it was at close on 
Friday that I saw, just over $49 a barrel. Now we have 
something less than $400 million. The question is, what would 
he have done with the $200 million that he would have spent? 
What would he do? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very surprising 
that the minister won’t want to give this Assembly that 
information. My information is $29 million net to the province. 
The average closing price for a barrel of oil in April was $53.14 
US, Mr. Speaker. I can appreciate the Finance minister’s 
well-known conservatism, small “c” as it is. However, this 
budget is no longer a useful document. It’s way off the mark. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan need to have the information to 
properly evaluate the fiscal performance of this government and 
the decisions flowing from it. Will the minister commit to 
monthly reporting of excess oil revenues? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a very 
curious question. There is a budget you see, Mr. Speaker, and 
the budget has a number of revenue sources. One of those 
revenue sources is oil royalties. And oil royalties, by my 
reckoning, in the budget constitute about 8 per cent of all of our 
revenues. 
 
Now the member says, if that particular revenue source goes up, 
then we should be able to spend that money and we want to 
know about it on a monthly basis. But he doesn’t mention any 
of the other revenue sources, whether those revenue sources 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

might have changed. Or for that matter what might have 
happened to expenditures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to stay on the course that we are, that 
we have with respect to budgeting, quarterly reports, mid-year 
reports. We’re going to continue to budget prudently and 
cautiously, and continue to receive credit rating upgrades — 
something that member knows nothing about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, $29 million in extra 
revenue to the provincial treasury. What is the minister trying to 
hide? By the end of this quarter, by the end of June 30, if oil 
prices stay in the same range that they did in April, this Finance 
minister will have 87 million more dollars than he budgeted for 
on oil alone. Meanwhile, low- and medium-income earners in 
Saskatchewan pay the highest tax rates in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. Small businesses continue to pay the highest tax rates 
in the country. 
 
If the situation remains the same for the fiscal year, a possibility 
that many say is extremely likely, this minister will have more 
than $350 million in unbudgeted oil revenue — $350 million. 
More than enough to fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization]. And who knows, maybe even enough for this 
government to start looking at long-term property tax relief for 
business owners and for taxpayers across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister going to report monthly to the 
people of Saskatchewan so they can have an accurate view of 
the province’s finances? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t 
heard that kind of fiscal reckoning and that kind of fiscal policy 
since the 1980s when you too had a government that said, well 
if you get this one thing, then maybe it will result in something 
else, so therefore let’s spend the money. You know, all the ifs in 
the world could also add up to zero. And you have to, at some 
point, Mr. Speaker, yes you have to at some point — quarterly, 
mid-year — take all of the information that you have and 
determine where you are and then make the appropriate 
decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that particular party, when their leader was asked 
about debt reduction and where it would factor in among their 
100 ideas, their leader said — the member from Swift Current 
— he said, um, I’m not sure. I’m not sure if it’s on or what 
number it is. Well exactly, Mr. Speaker. These people across 
the way have absolutely no sense of fiscal management — none 
whatsoever. It’s the same old story from the Devine days — 
promise the people everything but never, never deal with the 
questions of prudency and cautiousness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 

Financial Assistance for Farmers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning the Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan came to the legislature. The association brought a 
petition signed by over 2,000 people and it called on this 
government to make a strategic investment in the agriculture 
industry. It called on the Minister of Agriculture to take a 
leadership role. It called for an immediate cash injection to help 
Saskatchewan farm families. Mr. Speaker, what was the 
Agriculture minister’s answer? No, not likely to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s this minister’s standard answer when it 
comes to helping farm families. Has the minister had time to 
reconsider that answer? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The fact is that the agricultural producers do represent a number 
of people who are having great challenges this year in 
agriculture. But the facts are also, Mr. Speaker, that there has 
been significant amount of money rolled into the agriculture 
sector as well — record numbers in fact — $650 million over 
the past year to the agriculture sector. Plus, Mr. Speaker, the $1 
billion that the federal government rolled out put about 280 
million into Saskatchewan. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that there are regions and areas of 
this province that are facing even more difficulty, and any of the 
supports that are given, we think, will apply to those who have 
suffered the most. And they can access those, Mr. Speaker — 
and they are accessing the funds that we’re investing through 
the CAIS program. And, Mr. Speaker, the 2003 payments are 
paid out about 95 per cent, and producers are also able to access 
CAIS cash advances at this point. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to bring it to the 
minister’s attention that he’s talking about the 2003 CAIS 
program. This is 2005. Last year it froze, last year we had BSE 
[bovine spongiform encephalopathy], last year we had 
low-quality grain. We can’t move the grain. Many farmers have 
full bins of low-quality grain that’s worth next to nothing, Mr. 
Speaker. And the minister says that the CAIS program — from 
2003 that they’re still dealing with — is going to solve the 
problems. Well we know, and the farmers know in this 
province, it’s not dealing with the problems. APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] was here 
this morning saying, CAIS from 2003 is not dealing with the 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister reconsider? Just once in 
Saskatchewan, as an NDP government, take a leadership role in 
this country; come out ahead of everybody else and help our 
farmers in Saskatchewan. It doesn’t matter what goes on in 
Manitoba. It doesn’t matter what goes on in Alberta. 
Saskatchewan farmers are hurting. Will the minister, today, 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

commit to helping Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly we will commit and we have committed to helping 
Saskatchewan farmers. Mr. Speaker, the funding that I was 
talking about, contrary to the statement by the member 
opposite, is not just about 2003 CAIS. It’s about 2004 CAIS, 
and about 2005 CAIS. 
 
And in fact, this government has taken leadership, Mr. Speaker; 
leadership in trying to make sure that these programs are 
affordable not only for the people of Saskatchewan but all 
across this nation, Mr. Speaker. We have taken leadership. And, 
Mr. Speaker, those issues will be dealt with at the July meeting 
where affordability of these programs is highest on the priority 
list. 
 
We have taken leadership, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the amount 
of money we have put in for the BSE programs. Mr. Speaker, 
we have been there. We will be there in the future. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, according to APAS this 
morning and Terry Hildebrandt, their president, there’s much 
hurt out in rural Saskatchewan and we agree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the input costs that farmers are dealing with this 
spring, Mr. Speaker: fertilizer costs have gone up once again; 
fuel costs have gone up — where a farmer paid 43 cents a litre 
last year, they’re almost 70 cents a litre for that same litre of 
fuel. Mr. Speaker — seed costs have just skyrocketed because 
of the frost last year. We have canola seed out there, certain 
varieties, that have gone as high as $300 a bushel, Mr. Speaker. 
We have flax seed out there. 
 
Prices are skyrocketing and these farmers are asked to deal with 
these issues, those costs, different than any other province in 
this country because this government does not fund the 
programs in Saskatchewan. 
 
The question that APAS asked that minister today, I think was a 
fair question. Are farmers in need . . . Will you consider, due to 
the extra revenue you have coming into the province, would 
you consider putting additional money in for farmers to put this 
crop in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again the 
member opposite simply does not have his facts right. This 
government has supported agriculture and will continue to 
support agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Record numbers of dollars put 
into agriculture in the last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there are people out there hurting, 
but we also know that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has been 
reporting that input sales are higher than normal. Mr. Speaker, 
we have been checking with the lenders. They are dealing with 
the producers on an individual basis and they are providing the 
resources for most to be able to do the inputs. 
 
Now the member opposite is right in terms of some of the facts 
there, that the input costs are going up, Mr. Speaker, and the 
costs for fuel are higher than they have been in the past. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, every business in the country has to deal with 
those things and plan appropriately. The same is true in this 
business. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it should 
be a surprise to that minister that farm incomes are going to be 
down over $400 million this year. At the same time, he even 
acknowledges that input costs have skyrocketed. How on earth 
are farmers supposed to make business decisions — as he said 
Friday, it’s just a business decision — how are they supposed to 
make those business decisions when they don’t have the money 
to do it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They’re going to cut the inputs they put into crops. You know 
what that’s going to do, Mr. Speaker? It’s going to cost the 
CAIS program more money down the road, because yields are 
going to be lower and the income next year is going to be 
affected. 
 
Wouldn’t it be a better idea to try and help farmers right now 
get through this crucial time, get this crop in, and maybe we’ll 
all see the benefit down the road? Would the minister consider 
that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we will certainly see if there are a variety of ways that we can 
deliver support to farmers to enable them to move forward this 
spring. We recognize how important this industry is to the 
whole of Saskatchewan, and we have been providing support 
and will continue to provide a high level of support to this 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also recognize that in order for this industry to operate 
effectively, we have to have the support of the federal 
government in this situation. Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government charges on the fuel not only a fuel tax, but a GST 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

[goods and services tax] on top of that, Mr. Speaker. It seems to 
me that they’ve used a portion of their surplus from last year to 
help out. It would really help out, Mr. Speaker, if they would do 
something about their fuel tax. We do not charge, we do not 
charge fuel tax, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the supports that we 
give to producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw Wakamow has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as many people will be aware with the member’s 
statement, today was the kickoff for NAOSH week which is 
North American Occupational Safety and Health week. And at 
the kickoff luncheon today, Mr. Speaker, we had a very special 
guest, and she is sitting in your gallery accompanied by the 
deputy minister of Highways and Transportation, Mr. John Law 
— Candace Carnahan from New Brunswick originally, but now 
Candace works out of Ontario for a program that’s called 
Passport to Safety. 
 
Candace was injured quite severely in an industrial incident in a 
paper mill in New Brunswick. Mr. Speaker, after some very 
rough times, she has come through it with flying colours and 
now is here in Saskatchewan to kick off NAOSH Week, and 
she’s made the effort to get out and speak to a couple of high 
schools in the Regina area. She is a great ambassador for young 
people and to express that ever-important understanding that 
safety is important and that young people need to be prepared 
and work safely, whether it’s recreation, whether it’s entering 
the workforce, or whether it’s at home. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all of my colleagues to please 
welcome Candace to Saskatchewan and to the legislature. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 100 — The Police Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 100, 
The Police Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 100, The Police Amendment Act, 2005 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill read a second time? The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 119 — The Election Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 119, 
The Election Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 119, The Election Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
Recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 120 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
120, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 120, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act be now introduced 
and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 121 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 121, The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 121, The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When will the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Next sitting of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I stand on behalf of the government and table responses to 
written questions 1,023 through 1,026 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to written questions 1,023, 24, 25, 
and 1,026 have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Access to Embargoed News Conferences and 
Technical Briefings 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The motion that is before the Assembly at this point 
has to do with the question of access by members to technical 
briefings that might be offered by government departments or 
Crown corporations. 
 
The issue arose a few weeks ago when a member of the 
opposition caucus staff, one of their staff members attempted to 

attend an embargoed press conference or technical briefing for 
the media and that staff member was — how shall I put this? — 
disinvited to attend that particular technical briefing, Mr. 
Speaker; in fact he was not allowed to enter the technical 
briefing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, subsequent to that, the opposition members 
raised a question of privilege in the Assembly. They made the 
point that, given a recent ruling by the Speaker, Speaker 
Milliken . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
The Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, subsequent to a 
ruling by Speaker Milliken in Ottawa where a similar situation 
had arisen, the Speaker of the House of Commons, parliament 
ruled that if information was being provided on an embargoed 
basis for the media, then it followed that members should have 
access to the same information, which was contrary to previous 
practice in Ottawa and also contrary to previous practice here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker there took the position that members have rights. 
They have a right to know what is taking place. It’s not 
appropriate that members of the media are provided with 
information that’s not then made available to members of the, in 
that case, members of parliament, in this case members of the 
Legislative Assembly, and therefore made the ruling that he did. 
 
It was on that basis that the opposition put forward the question 
of privilege. The legislature took the point of view that that 
matter should be referred to a Committee on Privileges that is 
an ongoing or a standing committee of the Legislative 
Assembly. And that committee met to examine the issue in 
question. The committee reported on . . . I believe it was April 
20 and indicated that the . . . the committee indicated they had 
been unable to come to a decision on its order of reference. The 
order of reference was that they examine this question and then 
report back to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I might point out that in the meantime following that first 
briefing for SaskWater, the government has taken the position 
that members should in fact be provided with the same 
information that is being provided to members of the media on 
an embargoed basis in their technical briefings, and since that 
time has organized technical briefings for members of the 
oppositions, in that particular case of Crown corporations that 
were presenting their annual reports. So prior to the media 
technical briefing, the members were provided the opportunity 
to attend a technical briefing of the same material that was 
being provided to the media. And a number of those briefings 
have in fact been held and attended, I think with one exception, 
by members of the opposition and their staff. 
 
The motion before us would essentially attempt to formalize 
this practice. As a government, we agree that it’s not 
appropriate to provide information on an embargoed basis to 
members of the media without also that information being 
provided to members of the Legislative Assembly on a similar 
basis. And we agree, and we took that position when the issue 
was first presented to the House, that it should be done. And 
since that time, as I’ve indicated, the government has made it a 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

practice to in fact provide that information to members of the 
opposition and for members of the government caucus too, 
should they so be interested in attending such a briefing. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So the motion before us attempts to formalize this practice. The 
practice would be consistent with the practice that is now in 
place in Ottawa, subsequent to the ruling by Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look here, Mr. Speaker, at Guidance for Deputy Ministers of 
the National Library of Canada, where the Privy Council Office 
indicates that: 
 

Technical briefings on government legislation [in that 
particular case] are often offered as part of the legislative 
process following introduction of bills. Such briefings 
should be organized by the Minister’s office, and should 
always be offered to all party caucuses at the same time 
and before or concurrently with media briefings. 

 
So that’s the process that is now in place in Ottawa. We propose 
to put the same process into place here in Regina. Members on 
the opposite side in speaking to this motion will make the point 
that if they’re not attending the same technical briefing as the 
media, that they’re somehow deprived, is something that might 
affect their functioning in the House. That is not the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again we intend to ensure that the practice that is now being 
put in place, that that practice be put down as a request, a 
formal request from the Legislative Assembly so that members 
will have the same access to information that is being provided 
to the media. That is the position that we take. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move, seconded by 
the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That an order of the Assembly dated April 12, 2005, 
instructing the Standing Committee on Privileges to 
consider the matter of the rights and privilege of members 
to attend embargoed news conferences and technical 
briefings, be rescinded for a reason that the said committee 
could not agree to recommendations before the specified 
deadline of April 20, 2005, had expired; and further, 

 
That in the absence of recommendations from the Standing 
Committee on Privileges, this Assembly request that the 
government instruct its officials and Crown corporations 
to acknowledge and respect the rights and privileges of all 
members of this Assembly as follows: 
 
That technical briefings and news conferences that deal 
with matters to be considered by the Assembly be made 
available to all members of the Legislative Assembly and 
their staff in advance of or concurrently with any media 
briefings; 
 
And further, any technical briefing provided to the media 
that exclude members and their staff shall not be 
considered a breach of privilege as long as an advance or 
concurrent technical briefing is provided to members and 
their staff. 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, again seconded by the member for 
Moose Jaw North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the 
member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That an order of the Assembly dated April 12, 2005 
instructing the Standing Committee on Privileges to 
consider the matter of the rights and privileges of members 
to attend embargoed news conferences and technical 
briefings, be rescinded for reason that the said committee 
could not agree to recommendations before the specified 
deadline of April 20, 2005, had expired; and further, 
 
That in the absence of recommendations from the Standing 
Committee on Privileges, this Assembly request that the 
government instruct its officials and Crown corporations 
to acknowledge and respect the rights and privileges of all 
members of this Assembly as follows: 
 
That technical briefings and news conferences that deal 
with matters to be considered by the Assembly be made 
available to all members of the Legislative Assembly and 
their staff in advance of, or concurrently with, any media 
briefings; and further, 
 
Any technical briefing provided to the media that excludes 
members and their staff shall not be considered a breach of 
privilege as long as an advance or concurrent technical 
briefing is provided to members and their staff. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a motion to 
amend the motion and it will be seconded by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. I move: 
 

That all the words after the first “that” be removed and be 
replaced with the following: 
 
this Assembly condemns the government for its continued 
refusal to honour the privilege motion passed on April 12, 
2005 urging the government to respect the rights and 
privileges of all members of this Assembly by ensuring 
that official members and their staff, official opposition 
members and their staff, are allowed to attend any 
embargoed news conferences and technical briefings open 
to members of the news media; and further, 
 
That this Assembly condemns the government for its 
continued practice of saying one thing and doing another, 
as evident by its actions in this matter. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that later today this motion and 
the amendment will be voted on and that the motion that the 
government put forward will be passed and our amendment will 
be defeated. In reality 29 will beat 28 every, every single time, 
Mr. Speaker. In and of itself, this is not a major event in this 
legislature. But today we’re going to witness a small but 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

significant and telling erosion of the democratic rights of the 
members of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go through a little bit of the history of 
what took place with this particular motion. As MLAs [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] we have a right to know facts and 
to have information at or before the time that information is 
made public or, Mr. Speaker, as is given to the media. The 
governing party, in this case the NDP, should not use its 
governing position of power to preclude other parties or other 
members of the legislature from access to information that will 
allow those members to fulfill their roles as MLAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past, technical briefings have been provided 
to the media to supply significant and important background 
information. That is a practice that has gone on for many years. 
And in the past, there has been a sporadic and varied method of 
availability, of making that available to members of the 
legislature. 
 
In early April of this year, it became very apparent that there 
was some discrepancies in how the practice was being 
followed. The Finance minister and Government House Leader 
expressly consented — and in fact, Mr. Speaker, he consented 
in writing — to members of the opposition attending the budget 
briefing. This was satisfactory, and this, Mr. Speaker, was 
consistent with what opposition members’ rights should be. 
 
Then at a later and unrelated technical briefing, a Saskatchewan 
Party staffer was denied access. To use the House Leader’s 
word, he was disinvited. Not sure about his choice of language, 
but if he wishes to call it disinvited, you can call it barred, 
kicked out, booted out, whatever else you want. The fact is, that 
staffer who was there to try and gain information for the 
opposition was denied any of that information. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party promptly and rightly raised this matter 
as a point of privilege in the legislature. Mr. Speaker, on that 
day I was proud of the position that my party was taking. I was 
extremely disappointed and frankly, Mr. Speaker, somewhat 
shocked that the NDP did not share this fundamental view of 
the democratic process. What they did instead was came to us 
informally and offered concurrent or earlier briefings which 
they represented would be the same as the media briefing, and 
sort of held out this outrage that we would even question that 
the information might be different or that there was some other 
facts being presented or that there was any kind of an issue with 
that at all, and we’re somehow holding out — that they were 
somewhat surprised that we wouldn’t be enamoured with this 
idea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier was adamant that the 
opposition would not be in the room when the media was going 
to receive its technical briefing. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, 
what they were afraid of. I don’t know whether they were afraid 
that we as the opposition party might try and spin the media, or 
whether we might learn something by being there on the basis 
and hear something that the media would ask, and that we 
might try and cater or alter our position to make it consistent 
with something that was more reflective of the position that the 
media had taken. 
 
I didn’t know until shortly afterwards when we got into further 

discussions what the real concern on the part of this NDP 
government was. And it soon became apparent when we made 
an offer that we wouldn’t participate, that we would sit back, 
we would listen. And we feel it’s quite appropriate to listen to 
the questions put forward to the media as it is for the 
government. That is how you learn what questions and what 
information the public wants to know, where the media is 
going. And of course both sides should be entitled to that 
information as well. But they were adamant. We were not going 
to be there. We were not going to get the benefit of any of the 
questions that were there. 
 
Unfortunately that appears to be based on a high level of fear 
and paranoia on the part of the New Democratic government. 
And if this is where the unfortunate mentality of the NDP 
government are, well in my view, Mr. Speaker, they’ve already 
lost the next election before it’s been called. Because there’s no 
doubt if that’s the level of fear, that’s the level of paranoia, 
that’s the level of mistrust . . . If they don’t have any better 
confidence in themselves as politicians and in themselves as 
members of the legislature that they have to be afraid of that 
type of thing, and are willing to put the democratic basis on and 
sacrifice democracy for that, they don’t deserve to be in 
government any further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 12 the privilege motion was debated at 
significant length in the legislature and various amendments 
were made and the process went forward. In summary, Mr. 
Speaker, the motion that was passed on April 12 simply stated 
that all members of the legislature had the right to attend 
technical briefings and that they would be made available and 
that the matter — and I use the word as exact put — the matter 
would be referred to the Standing Committee on Privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that committee was convened and attended shortly 
afterwards. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that is a committee 
that has not been adjourned and has not been in practice in this 
province for a quarter of a century, so in effect we were making 
some significant legislative history. There’s not very many 
people around today that have any significant recollection of 
what took place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what was referred to that committee was the 
matter; it was not if members get to attend technical briefings, 
or whether they should or whether they shouldn’t. The 
preamble of that motion and the motion itself firmly stated the 
position of what members were entitled to and that position is 
consistent with and, surprisingly enough, it was supported 
unanimously by all parties. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party arrived at the standing committee in 
good faith with the full expectation that we would be debating 
and discussing how this would be put into place, whether the 
members would sign an embargo agreement. Would we sit? 
Would we have the opportunity to ask questions? How would 
we ensure that the media had full rights to participate? Would 
the questions be asked before? Would they ask earlier? What 
might the remedies be for a breach? Would contempt be a 
solution? What else would take place? How would we do it to 
ensure that both members of the legislature got full, complete, 
frank, and open access? And further how we would do that in 
such a manner, Mr. Speaker, that the members of the media 
would not be in any way limited or in any way prejudiced by 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

what their rights were as far as trying to gain their information 
as required? 
 
Mr. Speaker, just sort of an interesting aside, because this was 
something that happens only once in a century, this was a 
chance for this committee to create and take a little pride in 
creating some legislative jurisprudence. And it’s an unfortunate 
tragedy that that didn’t take place, that there was a deadlock 
right from the beginning; that the members of the government 
chose to deadlock the committee by refusing to debate what 
they were there to debate. 
 
And the mark of that is now going to be something that will be 
reported in the next issue of Beauchesne on various 
parliamentary websites and the effect of that will be . . . is the 
deadlock that was there, how people voted those things, how 
ties are broken. And that’s the legacy that that committee left. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that committee’s deliberations are reported 
in Hansard and will be there on an indefinite basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that committee meeting the NDP demonstrated 
its paranoia and its surprising will to trade democracy for some 
minor, perceived political gain by attempting to pass a motion 
altering the terms of reference of the committee to if, not how, 
and to offer some kind of bizarre alternate briefings. 
 
While I don’t disagree with the suggestions and the discussions 
that were put forward as being in addition to what was being a 
basic right of the opposition, but certainly the debate should not 
have been whether that was in substitution for. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee harangued for several meetings 
with no success. The paranoia and petty politics of the NDP 
carried the day and we ended up back in the legislature with an 
unfortunate and unnecessary deadlock that is a discredit to the 
NDP members of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after that happened, the NDP has now crawled out 
from underneath the rock and, in this House, has actually shown 
in writing where they stand. They put their position in writing 
by putting forward a motion, Mr. Speaker, that will effectively 
rescind the motion that was passed earlier. Mr. Speaker, what 
they’re asking us to vote on today is a denial of the fundamental 
rights that were there. 
 
But this time, that vote, Mr. Speaker, will not take place in 
committee. It will be here in the Chamber, where each and 
every member will be voting and will be held accountable. 
They will not have the luxury later on of saying, oh this was 
something done in committee; I didn’t know about it; I didn’t 
understand that this was going to be put forward. Mr. Speaker, 
each and every one of those members opposite later today will 
be called upon to vote on this motion, and each and every one 
of them can demonstrate their fear and their paranoia and their 
willingness to trade democracy for petty, perceived political 
gains. Mr. Speaker, it is an embarrassment for them to be in this 
House, taking that position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at this and we say, why is this a big issue? 
Why would we even fight this? This isn’t going to make or 
break the next election. It’s not the end of the world. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the reality of this is that it’s a small but significant 
erosion of parliamentary rights. If the NDP is willing to do this 
and if they’re allowed to get away with this and nobody calls 
them, what else might they be willing to do? What other rights 
might that government be willing to trammel on for the sake of 
their political future? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of those issues might be Bill No. 87, an 
indication that they don’t care about people’s rights of privacy 
in their home, their rights to maintain their records — that 
they’re giving bizarre search and seizure records to a 
quasi-judicial tribunal. They’re giving, in that piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, the rights of that tribunal to enter by 
force people’s homes, people’s places of business. So if the 
same kind of mentality that erodes our parliamentary 
democracy continues on through things like Bill 87, where else 
does it go to? 
 
Another example would be, for pure politics they’re not looking 
at Bill 87 . . . or the Bill dealing with crystal meth and the 
treatment for crystal meth. They’re standing up saying, oh, 
we’re worried about the rights of 16- and 18-year-olds. What 
about the rights of MLAs? What about the rights of business 
owners? That they don’t care about, but they’ll stand up 
because it was somebody else’s idea, and for pure political 
motive and nothing else, are willing to trammel on something 
that they should be supporting, they should be getting behind, 
and should never mind about whose idea it is or where it came 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would submit to the electorate of this province 
that these people should be disinvited from forming government 
the next time, and maybe dis-elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader stood up in this 
House today and talked about what happens in the Parliament 
of Canada. If he reads the material that’s there, he will see and 
he will learn that what takes place in the Parliament of Canada 
is that there is technical briefings for the media, there is 
technical meetings for other members of Parliament, and those 
meetings can all be attended. And they’re open to members. 
 
And the quotes that he’s taking are from other places in the 
book dealing with other issues, and while nobody disagrees 
with other briefings, what a strange and bizarre argument to put 
forward that we wouldn’t be entitled to these things. 
 
Today a basic democratic right, small albeit that, will be taken 
away. We don’t know what’s next. We don’t know how low 
this government will go. We don’t know where they will stoop 
to for the next position that they want to put forward. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a travesty in a small sense, because this is not 
something that will bring down a government, but it’s 
something the people of this province should know about. 
 
They will know about it. It will be in Hansard. We will see to it 
that, come the next election, people know that this is a 
government that doesn’t care about people’s rights, that doesn’t 
care about knowledge, doesn’t care about background, doesn’t 
care about fundamental democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move the amendment to this 
motion. That motion . . . that amendment will be seconded and 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

will be spoken to by the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
The Speaker: — Could I have the amendment delivered. 
 
Order, please. As I read through the amendment, I find that 
there is a portion of the amendment that is out of order and that 
is the last sentence: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for its 
continued practice of saying one thing and doing another 
as evidenced by its action on this matter. 

 
In that it does not address any of the issues in the motion. If the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast is agreeable, I will simply 
strike that portion and we will proceed with the debate. 
 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on the rest of the motion, the 
rest of the amendment stands. If the Speaker is ruling the 
portion out there, we would like to proceed with debate and 
deal with the rest of the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . has been stricken. The reference for 
members, purpose of members is Beauchesne’s 6th Edition, 
page 174, in citation 566, the authority for this procedure. 
 
It has been moved by the member for Saskatoon Southeast, 
seconded by the member for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That all the words after the first “that” be removed and 
replaced with the following: 

 
This Assembly condemns the government for its 
continued refusal to honour the privilege motion passed 
on April 12, 2005, urging the government to respect the 
rights and privileges of all members of this Assembly by 
ensuring that official opposition members and their staff 
be allowed to attend any embargoed news conferences 
and technical briefings open to members of the news 
media. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question on the amendment? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate having the opportunity to speak on this motion 
today. And the original motion by the Finance minister today 
was: 
 

That the Order of the Assembly dated April 12, 2005, 
instructing the Standing Committee on Privileges to 
consider the matter of rights and privileges of members to 
attend embargoed news conferences and technical 
briefings, be rescinded for reasons that the said committee 
could not agree to recommendations before the specified 
deadline of April 20, 2005, had expired . . . 

 
First part of their motion Mr. Speaker. And I find that 
somewhat interesting because in the House, the original motion 
that we were voting on in the House where all members, both 
government side and opposition side, and that motion being: 
 

. . . that this Assembly urge government and Crown 
corporation officials to respect the rights and privileges of 
all members of the Assembly, by ensuring that [the] 
official opposition members and their staff are allowed to 
attend any embargoed news conferences and technical 
briefings open to members of the news media. 

 
And at that point, Mr. Speaker, in sending it to the committee 
on rights and privileges, both government members and 
opposition members voted in favour of that motion. 
 
So what I found somewhat astounding, that when we get into 
committee, and why we’re here debating this actual motion 
today, is because the vote in committee was actually three to 
three and was tied, where the three government members voting 
against that motion. 
 
So I found it somewhat odd that in front of the cameras on the 
floor of the legislature that the members opposite, the 
government members would find it fine to vote in favour of that 
motion — to be open and accountable and agreeing with that 
motion, Mr. Speaker — and then getting behind closed doors to 
a degree where yes, the media was allowed to come in but the 
cameras weren’t on, it was far easier I think for them to feel that 
they could vote against that same motion and probably the 
public in general would not realize what they were actually 
voting against. 
 
But I guess, Mr. Speaker, this goes back to possibly when a 
government’s been in power far too long. It’s not the one big 
thing in most cases they do, but it’s an number of little things 
that the government does that maybe shows the public — and 
for sure shows the opposition — that maybe it’s time that they 
were moved somewhat out of the position of government for 
the little things like this, where it’s just being a little less 
accountable, a little less forthright in . . . kind of an arrogance 
that comes forward, Mr. Speaker, in not wanting everyone to 
know exactly what’s going on behind closed doors. 
 
Because I can think of no other reason why they would vote 
against this motion that we had in rights and privileges 
committee. I mean if there was nothing to fear, nothing to hide, 
if there was no fear of something coming out that they didn’t 
want out, then probably we would be having one embargoed 
media and opposition information session where we all got to 
sit in. 
 
And we weren’t asking to take part, Mr. Speaker; we were 
asking to listen, get the briefing as the same as the media were 
allowed, hear the questions that the media had put forth. 
 
And I guess that’s maybe where the problem seems to come 
here with the members opposite on the government side, Mr. 
Speaker, is they seem to have a fear of what of the media would 
ask them, how in depth they would delve into what they were 
being told, and what the media was allowed to hear that we 
weren’t allowed to. They didn’t want us in to hear the same 
information that the media was there to receive. And I guess 
that’s another question, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure in most cases we 
would get the very same information that the media would get. 
But we have no guarantee that that would happen, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think that’s partly why we were . . . why we are where we 
are today. 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

If you’re open and you’re accountable and you’re a government 
that’s hiding absolutely nothing, you have nothing to fear. Why 
would we spend the money of having two embargoed sessions, 
one for the opposition and then one for the media, where one 
open embargoed session would be suffice. It would do, Mr. 
Speaker. At a time when the Agriculture minister said we have 
no money for agriculture — and a number of other areas. The 
crystal meth situation where it seems they can’t have any 
money to fix that problem because they’re doing absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’m talking about today is if we’re worried 
about things like saving money, here’s a perfect example where 
one media and opposition information session would do both. 
 
And as I said before, Mr. Speaker, this is just an example of 
maybe where we have an old, tired government. Been around a 
bit too long, probably would be not so bad had they lost the last 
election, knowing full well they’re going to lose the next one, 
Mr. Speaker. And problems like this will resolve themselves, 
but we may have a couple more years and I think what we’re 
worried about, Mr. Speaker, is the two years being . . . 
especially since we are also, we are also elected MLAs on this 
side of the House. Not just the government side MLAs are 
elected, but on this side of the House, 28, 29, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know as you’re fully aware, we’re elected to represent the 
people in our ridings. And I think those people expect that the 
government to be accountable, give us the information we need 
to make judgments — such judgments as we made . . . An 
example would be, Mr. Speaker, with the tobacco issue and the 
Bill . . . the tobacco Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go back to the motion that we’re talking about 
here today because I’d hate to wander off too far and have to 
have the Speaker rule on that. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll go back to 
the motion that we’re talking about today, and actually the 
original motion, Mr. Speaker, because in the rights and 
privileges committee as you’re well aware of, we actually put 
an amendment into this motion. And I’ll go through this motion 
again and then talk about the amendment that we put into that 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge government and Crown 
corporation officials to respect the rights and privileges of 
all members of this Assembly by ensuring that official 
opposition members and their staff are allowed to attend 
any embargoed news conferences and technical briefings 
. . . 

 
And where we put the amendment in, Mr. Speaker, is we had in 
this initial motion that we had and that we were debating, it 
actually said that opposition members and their staff be 
allowed. And that really wasn’t our full intention. Our full 
intention was that all members — backbenchers on that side, 
anyone, any elected member that wished — could come to the 
media briefings and take part as we would be. So that was an 
amendment we put in. We thought if the government members 
had any problem with that, we didn’t want that to be the 
sticking point why they might vote in favour of this. 
 
[15:00] 
 

Members on the other side on the committee, Mr. Speaker, took 
great lengths to speak about why this wouldn’t be a reasonable 
motion to accept in committee. And I may remind them again 
that they voted in favour of this when it left the floor of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, and again saw fit to vote against it 
down in committee. 
 
But it’s somewhat astonishing to me when a government’s been 
around so long that they can find a number of reasons, 
absolutely make no sense to anyone out there, why you would 
want to take this and split it up, have two — the media 
conference, the information session for the media, the 
information session for us — how you could even justify that. 
 
The government is always saying, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 
to the fact that the opposition always wants to spend money, 
we’re actually finding a way here, where the one information 
session would be suffice. It would be great; it would do exactly 
what we’re wanting. And I haven’t heard one member of the 
media, Mr. Speaker, saying that they didn’t want opposition 
members, they didn’t want backbench members coming to that 
same information session. At least if they have a problem with 
that, we certainly haven’t heard that problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, today I think what we’re actually debating is 
something that should be common sense. It shouldn’t even be to 
this point. It should’ve went down to committee, to rights and 
privileges committee, Mr. Speaker, debated the motion that was 
already voted on by all members in the House, all agreed to at 
that point. Very straightforward. I don’t think it’s nothing we’re 
asking that in the House of Commons they don’t already have, 
and yet here in Saskatchewan at this point we are told we can’t 
have. 
 
So I go back, Mr. Speaker, and I reiterate that I don’t think 
anybody was purposely trying to hide anything, although it 
sometimes makes us wonder what actually is being swept under 
the rug here. Because if we were out front with all of the 
information that were provided to the media, I can’t see where 
the problem is providing that to the official opposition. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the amendment we had put in today . . . and 
I’ll just read it back into the record, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That all the words after the first “that” be removed and 
replaced with the following: 
 
That this Assembly condemns the government for its 
continued refusal to honour the privilege motion passed on 
April 12, 2005, urging the government to respect the rights 
and privileges of all members of the Assembly by ensuring 
that official opposition members and their staff be allowed 
to attend any embargoed news conferences and technical 
briefings open to all members of the news media. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so that’s the amendment we have put forth today. 
And I guess I go back to, Mr. Speaker, when the members on 
that side saw fit to vote in favour of the motion that was sent 
down to committee to discuss and debate, and then saw fit 
behind closed doors to actually vote against that motion. Really 
what that boils down to is, once again — as we’ve been saying 
on many occasions — it’s saying one thing and doing another, 
Mr. Speaker. 



2784 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

So I take this opportunity to second the motion put forth by my 
colleague from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
stand briefly today to say that once again the opposition say one 
thing, and the facts are something completely different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m a member of the Standing Committee on 
Privileges. I want to set the record straight. And the record is 
this. Government offered media briefings to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly . . . all technical briefings which are the 
same technical briefings that the media get. We offered to put 
all of these technical briefings to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly — opposition; third party, when there is a third party; 
private members, if there were . . . Well there are private 
members, but independent members, if there’s such a situation 
where there are independent members, and there have been 
from time to time in the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Government proposed that the technical briefings would go to 
elected officials first. We have the situation where the 
opposition says, first isn’t good enough. They’re saying, first 
isn’t good enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, technical media briefings have come about . . . 
Many, many years ago, legislation and legislators . . . It was a 
simpler process, if I can describe it that way because we relied, 
we had . . . I remember when the radio was up in the balcony 
over where the Speaker is now seated. I can remembers radio 
broadcasts when I was a child and listening to members of the 
Legislative Assembly speaking to issues. 
 
Now . . . pardon me, we also had weeklies where we got most 
of the in-depth reporting. Now we’re in a situation where the 
media happens immediately, and the turnaround time is, the 
cycle is less than an hour. And what we want is to have . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The members say, what are we 
hiding. Just listen up, and I’ll try and explain it so . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. I would 
ask that the member for Coronation Park address all his remarks 
to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. The media, the 
technical media briefings came into effect because there’s a 
belief that what governments need, what all governments need, 
is to have a better informed media because a better informed 
media on the technical background of what legislation is or, 
more typically, budget or any issue of the day, the better 
informed the media is, the better the reporting that they will do, 
the more accurate the reporting they can do. 
 
So if they’ve got the technical background, Mr. Speaker, then 
they can report more accurately. And more accurate reporting 
means a better informed public. Mr. Speaker, it is always in the 
interests of good governance anywhere and everywhere to have 
the best informed media and the best informed public. 
 

Government members, as I said, wanted private members; they 
want third parties’ members, independent members of the 
legislature to have first right at information. That’s why we 
proposed to make all elected MLAs first on the technical 
briefing — first, not second. And now today what we’re 
proposing is that it will be first or at the same time — ahead of 
or at the same time as the media. Mr. Speaker, I just can’t get 
through how first isn’t good enough. 
 
The opposition, Mr. Speaker, have said that they need to be in 
with the media. They’ve even offered . . . oh, but let us in and 
we won’t ask questions. We’ll just sit there and listen to the 
technical briefing, and we’ll listen while the media ask their 
questions. I’ve heard that. I’ve heard that even including earlier 
today. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to suggest that the 
opposition should then do the honourable thing and resign and 
let the real opposition, the media, do their job and collect their 
pay. If that’s the way they want it, then they should do the 
honourable thing and let the real opposition step up. 
 
They should be ashamed of where they’re at, Mr. Speaker. First 
is first. And all throughout the British Commonwealth, there’s a 
history of parliamentarians getting the information, getting the 
technical briefings first, ahead of the media, and that’s what we 
have been trying for. 
 
Please, I urge all members and including members of the 
public, don’t be fooled by the rhetoric. What the government is 
offering is for all members, not just official opposition, but it 
could include third party in situations where there is such a 
thing. It could include independent members and certainly does 
include private members would get the first technical briefing. 
The media get the second. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am grateful for the opportunity as a member of 
the Standing Committee on Privileges to have set the record 
straight. Obviously I’ll be voting in support of the government 
motion, but I cannot support the opposition amendment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first off 
before I get into the heart of my remarks, I’d like to comment 
on some of the comments by the member from Coronation 
Park. 
 
He stands up and he says something about first. Well I’d like to 
read . . . Again here’s a story where the government says one 
thing, but really it’s a hidden agenda or another thing because 
I’d like to read from their own motion, and surely to goodness 
he read his own motion. And it says as long as advance or 
concurrent. So I ask the member over there, if concurrent, what 
is first? If they’re concurrent, what is first? 
 
And I’m sure that the member must understand that concurrent 
means at the same time. And yet he went on a rant about, you’re 
getting your briefing first. Well it says in their own motion, 
concurrent. So if there’s a technical briefing that’s concurrent, 
why aren’t people allowed in the same one? That is absolutely 
asinine to have two briefings run concurrently . . . 
 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2785 

The Speaker: — I would just ask the member to temper his 
language somewhat. Would the member withdraw that 
particular adjective? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’ll withdraw that adjective, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So what the government is obviously doing, they’re trying to 
hide something. They have to be trying to hide something 
because why would a government want to have two briefings 
conducted concurrently that’s saying exactly the same thing? 
And that’s what members over there are trying to relay to us 
and to the media, that the briefings are going to be identical. 
Well if they’re identical, why have two? It really does not make 
any sense, and I don’t know how anybody on that side of the 
House could stand up and say, well it’s the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to get into some of my remarks as to how 
and why we got to the position that we’re at here now. It was on 
April 11. There was a SaskWater annual report that was tabled 
in the Assembly. And the 9:30 briefing . . . SaskWater officials 
held an embargo technical brief on the 2004 annual report for 
members of the news media. The official opposition sent Mr. 
Dustin Duncan, a member of our caucus staff, to attend this 
technical brief. Mr. Duncan was advised by a Ms. Marie 
Trafford, an Executive Council member, staff member, that he 
was prohibited from attending — prohibited from attending. 
 
Although this may have been practice in the past, I believe the 
government’s decision to prohibit official opposition MLAs 
and/or staff from attending technical briefings on matters that 
come before the Assembly constitute a clear breach of 
members’ parliamentary privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speaker of the House of Commons ruled on a 
very similar situation in 2001, and I would like to read that into 
the record. The federal Department of Justice held a technical 
briefing regarding a Bill that was to be introduced in the House 
of Commons later that day. Opposition members and their staff 
were denied entry to the technical briefing. An assistant to a 
government member was granted entry. 
 
The Speaker of the House of Commons found these events to 
constitute a prima facie contempt of the House. Repeat — a 
contempt of the House. In his ruling on March 19, 2001, the 
Speaker stated, and I quote: 
 

. . . the issue of denying members information that they 
need to do their work has been the key consideration for 
the Chair in reviewing this particular question of privilege. 
To deny . . . [any] members information concerning 
business that is about to come before the House, while at 
the same time providing such information to media that 
will likely be questioning members about that business, is 
a situation that the Chair cannot condone. 
 

The matter was then referred to the Standing Committee on 
Procedure and House Affairs. They, I think, meet more often 
than once every quarter of a century. That committee found the 
member’s privilege had indeed been breached. The committee 
report on this matter stated: 
 

The major difficulty in this case arises from the fact that 

the pre-introduction briefing was offered exclusively to 
representatives of the media. Not only were Members of 
the House of Commons not offered or invited to such a 
briefing, their staff was explicitly denied entry to the 
technical briefing that was given. 
 

Kind of sounds familiar to what happened on April 11, right? 
 

Members were, therefore, predisposed to disadvantage and 
embarrassment in that they could be questioned about 
business to come before the House or just introduced, 
without being provided with the same information as those 
asking them had. This is precisely what happened to Mr. 
Toews who was the Official Opposition critic for the 
Justice portfolio. 
 
The provision of the briefing to the media and not to 
Members on legislation before its introduction . . . [to] the 
House of Commons, undermines the pre-eminence of the 
House of Commons in legislative matters, and the right of 
the House to be informed first. Such an action impedes, 
obstructs and disadvantages Members of Parliament in 
carrying out their parliamentary functions. In all of these 
circumstances, the Committee has come to the inescapable 
conclusion that the privileges of the House and of its 
Members have been breached in this case. 
 

[15:15] 
 

Parliamentary privilege is breached by “any act or 
omission that obstructs or impedes . . . any Member . . . in 
the discharge of his [or her] duty.” . . . The decision of the 
government to prohibit members of the Official 
Opposition from attending this technical briefing clearly 
impedes opposition Members in the discharge of their 
duties in exactly the same manner as the House of 
Commons case described above. 

 
Clearly, Official Opposition members require access to 
information about Crown Corporation Annual Reports. All 
Crown Corporation Annual Reports are subject to review 
by the Crown and Central Agencies Committee, which 
include members of the Official Opposition. Furthermore, 
the Official Opposition critic is usually questioned by the 
media about each Crown report when it is released. This 
creates the very real possibility that the Member may face 
questions based on information learned in the government. 
 
The government may argue that Official Opposition is 
provided with embargoed copies of all Crown Corporation 
Annual Reports, so Opposition attendance at the technical 
brief is not necessary. However, Crown officials clearly 
provide background and clarification that goes beyond the 
information provided in the budget documents. Otherwise, 
the media would see no value in attending the technical 
briefing, as they too receive the documents in advance. 

 
Therefore, pursuant to rule 7(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
please be advised of my intention to move the following 
privilege motion [which was presented to yourself, Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 



2786 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

Now I would like to go back into what was actually ruled on in 
Ottawa, because I think it’s very pertinent to the situation here. 
It’s on the question of privilege. And it summarizes events that 
led up to the question of privilege being raised: 
 

From the interventions of members it appears that the 
Department of Justice sent out a media advisory notifying 
recipients that there would be a technical briefing given by 
justice officials at 11.45 a.m. on Wednesday, March 14, 
with regard to the omnibus Bill, now Bill C-15, that was to 
be introduced in the House by the hon. Minister of Justice 
that afternoon. 

 
According to the hon. member for Provencher, members 
of parliament and their staff were denied access to the 
briefing. The hon. member for Yorkton-Melville added 
that while his assistant was denied access to the briefing, 
the assistant of the government member was granted entry. 

 
In any event, there is no disputing that the invitation to the 
so-called technical brief went out as a media advisory and was 
designed for members of the media: 
 

The hon. member for Provencher indicated that following 
the briefing media representatives began phoning his 
office and asking for his reaction to the Bill, a situation he 
found embarrassing not only for himself and other 
members of the opposition, but also for the House of 
Commons as a whole since they had not seen the Bill and 
were not privy to its contents. 
 
The hon. government House leader confirmed that 
opposition critics were given a courtesy copy of Bill C-15 
about an hour and a quarter before the bill’s introduction. 
 
The minister explained that during the briefing, the media 
had not received actual copies of the bill or any other 
documentation. He went on to indicate that the briefing 
itself was under embargo until the bill was introduced, a 
fact confirmed by the copy of the original media advisory 
that the Chair has obtained. 

 
The member for Provencher, as well as other opposition 
members who participated in the discussion, argued that 
by not providing information to members of parliament 
and by refusing to allow members to participate in a 
briefing where the media were present, the government, 
and in particular the Department of Justice, showed 
contempt for the House of Commons and its members. 

 
As I see it, there are two issues here: the matter of the 
embargoed briefing to the media and the issue of 
members’ access to information required to fulfill their 
duties. 
 
As members know, the use of media embargoes, as well as 
the use of lock-ups, have long played a role in the way 
parliamentary business is conducted. For example, it has 
been our practice to permit briefings in lock-ups prior to 
the tabling of reports by the auditor general. Similarly, and 
perhaps more on point, is the lock-up held on the day of a 
budget presentation. Two features of these lock-ups are 
that members are invited to be present and members of the 

media are detained until the event in question has 
occurred; that is the auditor general’s report tabled or the 
budget speech begun. These are the features one might 
argue that have made these lock-ups so successful and so 
useful to the conduct of parliamentary business. 

 
It must, however, be remembered that when the different 
arrangements have been made for early briefings, previous 
Speakers have consistently held it is not a breach of 
privilege to exclude members from lock-ups. I refer the 
House, for example, to the ruling of Speaker Jerome, in 
Debates, of November 27, 1978 . . . and the ruling of 
Speaker . . . February 25, 1981 . . . 

 
The House recognizes that when complex or technical 
documents are to be presented in this Chamber, media 
briefings are highly useful. They ensure that the public 
receives information that is both timely and accurate 
concerning business before the House. 
 
In preparing legislation, the government may wish to hold 
extensive consultations and such consultations may be 
held entirely at the government’s discretion. However, 
with respect to material to be placed before parliament, the 
House must take precedence. Once a bill has been placed 
on notice, whether it has been presented in a different form 
to a different session of parliament has no bearing and the 
bill is considered a new matter. The convention of the 
confidentiality of bills on notice is necessary, not only so 
that members themselves may be well informed, but also 
because of the pre-eminent rule which the House plays and 
must play in the legislative affairs of the nation. 

 
Thus, the issue of denying to members information that 
they need to do their work has been the key consideration 
for the Chair in reviewing this particular question of 
privilege. To deny to members information concerning 
business that is about to come before the House, while at 
the same time providing such information to media that 
will likely be questioning members about the business, is a 
situation that the Chair cannot condone. 

 
Even if no documents were given out at the briefing, as the 
hon. Government House Leader has assured the House, it 
is undisputed that confidential information about the Bill 
was provided. While it may have been the intention to 
embargo that information that is an essential safeguard of 
the rights of this House, the evidence would indicate that 
no effective embargo occurred. 
 
In this case it is clear that information concerning 
legislation [although denied to the members] was given to 
members of the media without any effective measures to 
secure the rights of the House. 
 
I have concluded that this constitutes a prima facie 
contempt of the House. [And I invite the hon. member for 
Provencher to move a motion.] 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the motion was moved and the Speaker ruled 
on the order, on the motion that breach of privilege had in fact 
taken place. 
 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2787 

So that brings us to the point as to . . . Again I want to go back 
to why. Why would the government want to provide two 
technical briefings, one to the media and one to members of the 
opposition and staff or some of their own staff? There has to be 
a reason for it. Is it that they’re hiding something? And I think 
that’s probably one of the key issues in this — is for what other 
reason, what other possible reason could there be other than to 
try and hide something? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know from technical briefings that 
sometimes all of the information doesn’t come out and some of 
the information, I know, we have to go digging for and looking 
for from our staff. For an example, and I’m going to read some 
into the record for some examples of . . . I don’t know if the 
government is trying to hide something but we’ve had to dig 
these out. And I’ll use, because it was SaskWater’s briefing that 
our staff member was denied into. 
 
The first thing one has to concern oneself with is, are they 
hiding something about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company]? Because SPUDCO, as we know in 
this province, is a huge, huge issue that cost taxpayers $35 
million. So the initial thought was, are they trying to hide 
something about SPUDCO? Is that the rationale that the 
government did not want any of our people or any of us in the 
briefing? Were they trying to hide something on SPUDCO, our 
$35 million boondoggle into the potato business? 
 
And we look at other Crown corporation technical briefings and 
media briefings that have happened in the past. Now I don’t 
believe they came right out and identified that tappedinto.com 
lost 6.7 million. And those are important factors to understand 
when a technical briefing is given — how much money have 
some of these Crown corporations lost. Persona, for an 
example, a $9.4 million loss. Now it’s very important that we 
have staff or MLAs in these briefings if in fact those questions 
would come up. In fact those are fair questions to ask, is what 
are the losses incurred by this Crown corporation, in a technical 
briefing. 
 
How about Navigata, for an example. I mean we could sit and 
we’d probably want to ask questions as to why they lost $43.4 
million. And again, is the government trying to hide some of 
this stuff? Is that why they would not want MLAs from the 
Saskatchewan Party or Saskatchewan Party staff in these 
briefings? 
 
How about Retx.com that lost 26 million? That would be pretty 
nice to ask questions and be upfront about one like that. How 
about Craig Wireless at 10 million? And these are all from 
SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. So when SaskTel provides a technical 
briefing, these are very, very fair questions that need to be 
asked and should be asked. 
 
How about NST [NST Network Services of Chicago]? A $16 
million loss. Clickabid, $1.9 million loss; Soft Tracks, $2.2 
million loss; Ag Dealer, $8.9 million loss. Mr. Speaker, these 
are questions, these are questions that need to be asked in 
technical briefings, and the media should be at the same 
briefing because it’s the media that also want to know what 
these losses are. 
 
So SaskTel alone, a technical brief with SaskTel would reveal a 

$124.5 million loss. And this is essential, Mr. Speaker, to the 
openness of the briefings, although they’re embargoed until 
such time as they’re brought forward in the House. 
 
How about a couple of the other ones, like when SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] is giving a technical 
briefing? It would be nice for everybody in the province to 
know that they lost $16.1 million on Coachman Insurance. And 
that’s something that we would want to see brought forward in 
a technical briefing for the media and for the opposition. This is 
key information to know. 
 
How about, like, mega bingo that lost $8 million? Where are we 
going to find that out unless we have the ability to attend 
technical briefings and find out exactly where those dollars 
went and what happened to those $8 million? 
 
How about Pangaea? I mean we’ve heard about Pangaea. We 
have to go digging to find that information and that should be 
something that we could ask for in a technical brief — $3.5 
million loss in Pangaea, also the jobs that were promised in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So those, Mr. Speaker, are very much reasons why we would 
want our people in technical briefings along with the media in 
the technical briefings, at the same time. Because again it’s 
very, very foolish to have two technical briefings if it’s an open 
and accountable government that says it’s going to be identical 
briefings. If they’re that identical, it’s pointless to have two. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to me it feels that they’re really, really trying 
to hide something. And I don’t what they would be trying to 
hide if they’re giving it to the media and not to us. It’s 
inconceivable that they would want to do that because it to me 
is a distinct breach of privilege. There is so much fear and 
paranoia on that side of the House that they are afraid we might 
hear a question or something like that brought forward by the 
media. That’s the fear and paranoia that exists over there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that is definitely not 
open and accountable. It’s been in power so long, it’s becoming 
a very, very arrogant government and very much the time for 
them to be removed from power. So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m 
going to take my place because I know there’s other people that 
wish to speak to this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
privileged to join in this debate speaking about the issue of 
member privilege in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to engage in this debate as the person that raised the initial point 
of privilege on April 11, Mr. Speaker. And other members of 
the legislature have spoken and read into the record the incident 
that sparked this whole concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I find objectionable in the motion that’s 
being proposed by the government are a number of things. First 
of all, Mr. Speaker, this is a matter of principle. It’s not 
something that we have gone to the NDP government for as a 
favour or some kind of ruling that would allow us a special 



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

consideration. This is not that. This is a matter of principle that 
a member of this Assembly has the right and the responsibility, 
and indeed the duty, to receive the same kind of information at 
the same time as members of the media or third parties are 
receiving it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government attempts by this motion to kind of 
put a smokescreen over the whole matter of the principle of this 
privilege motion and this privilege debate. Mr. Speaker, it 
doesn’t matter how you couch it, but when you go to a technical 
briefing, there are base numbers of facts that the officials of a 
department are going to share with those who are in attendance. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And the most important part of it is, is that questions are then 
able to be posed to those officials about more detail and 
different perspectives on the information that was provided. 
And, Mr. Speaker, depending on the nature of those questions, 
depending on the direction those questions take, the discussion 
and the details of information that are brought forward, an 
entirely different outcome in principle can occur from one 
technical briefing with a certain group of people in attendance 
as what would happen in another one with a different group of 
people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while the intent and the stated intent of 
these technical briefings for the media and for opposition 
members and backbench members is stated to be the same and 
could run concurrently, there’s absolutely no ability of any 
government to assure this Assembly or an assembly that the 
information that would come out of these two technical 
briefings in these two circumstances would be exactly the same. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in principle as long as you refuse to have 
one technical briefing that is held for all of the people that need 
the benefit of an update and more technical knowledge about 
what a certain topic is speaking to, you are not able ever to be 
able to ascertain or to assure members that you’re going to end 
up with the same identical briefing. Sure you can end up with a 
basic information the same, but depending on questions that are 
posed, outcome of a technical briefing could be quite different. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in that event there is an obligation that both 
parties should be . . . all parties, indeed, should be able to 
benefit from those insights. If I was a member of the media and 
I would be at the technical briefing — the same technical 
briefing that MLAs would be invited to — I might benefit as a 
member of the media from a direction or a line of questions that 
are posed to officials from the MLAs. 
 
Conversely, if I’m an MLA I might benefit in my understanding 
of the technical nature of the briefing by the questions that are 
posed to the officials by the media. And so each group, all 
parties to this information, would be given the benefit of the 
same total amount of information. And in that way, and only in 
that way, Mr. Speaker, can you assure members of this 
Assembly that their privilege is not breached by being excluded 
from one or the other briefings. 
 
There’s no principled way that you can get around the fact that 
in reality technical briefings, while they start off from the same 
points of information, are very likely going to take on a 

different dimension depending on how the questions are posed 
and what line of thought and priority and principle are going to 
be raised by either the media or MLAs in attendance, or staff in 
attendance. 
 
And the only way you can protect the matter of privilege for 
members is to make sure there is only one technical briefing at 
which all people who have an interest and a reason to be there 
are allowed to be there and to pose questions of officials in a 
respectful, appropriate manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard members opposite say, well they’re 
very concerned that the opposition wants to be there so they can 
see what line of questioning the media is taking, and therefore 
they can tailor their answers in regard to that line of questioning 
or line of thought that the media might pose. Well what is to 
fear from that? If you’ve got an open society and you’re not 
afraid of the answers, well why are you afraid of the questions, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it simply is impossible to imagine that it is 
somehow going to derail or railroad the process by having 
everyone at the same briefing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for the record, I also understand that there 
are protocols that have to be followed in terms of asking 
officials questions that are not appropriate to ask officials. For 
example, you ask ministers questions that have to do with 
policy. That is understood. It’s no different than, for example, 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts where officials 
from departments or from Crown corporations testify in front of 
the committee. There’s no minister present, but there is a 
certain respect and protocol that is adhered to in regard to the 
type of policy-related questions that can be asked. That’s 
understood. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, no one is suggesting for a moment that that 
important principle would be tolerated to be violated. The basic 
principle of the exercise is to say that it is important that no 
member of this House be given less information than anyone 
else receives. And the only way of doing it is to have one 
technical briefing for all of those who have a reason and a 
rationale to be there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also not a little bit disturbing that after the 
initial question of privilege was raised on April 11 and by 
unanimous consent of this House direction was given to the 
Standing Committee on Privileges, that the committee initially 
ended up and continued to have an absolute deadlock, whereby 
the members of the government on that committee were 
unwilling to deal with the direction from the House. 
 
It was clearly given that the House said, this is the principle 
that’s involved; now you folks are to find a way to make this 
work within those principles and that direction of the House. 
And unfortunately the committee came back to this House and 
said, we’re unable to report because we’re deadlocked. And so 
out of that reality, that lack of a willingness to look at the 
fundamental principle of privilege that’s involved here, we now 
have this government motion before us on the order paper that 
somehow tries to whitewash this whole situation and make it 
seem as if what the government is proposing deals with the 
issue of privilege. Well it doesn’t, Mr. Speaker. What it does is 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

just give us a sample of a little bit of information on a separate 
sort of venue and it doesn’t deal with the fundamental matter, 
the principle of the privilege of a member of this Assembly. 
 
And it also then says because the members of the Standing 
Committee on Privileges were deadlocked, we just rescind what 
the Chamber, the Assembly, had unanimously brought forward, 
and that it then enshrines the status quo, and for here on and 
ever forward that there cannot be a question of privilege 
directed as a result of this practice. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it might be a valid thing for the opposition 
or from any members of this House to accept some lesser, 
watered down version of what is simply and truly the privilege 
of all members of this Assembly. It’s not just a principle to the 
opposition. It should be a principle to government members, 
particularly backbench members as well, because they too have 
the right to that information and they too have the right to have 
it in the same kind of a venue as opposition members. We are 
all members of this House, and we all have responsibilities to 
our constituents and to this province, and as such we should 
have, as a matter of principle, the absolute right to those 
privileges. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I find it very disappointing that the 
government is taking this route which is circumventing the 
original direction of this Assembly; that it is circumventing 
what is in principle a matter of privilege for all members of this 
Assembly. And I certainly support the fact that we would go 
back to the original direction of the House on April 12. And that 
was passed and that’s what the amendment of the official 
opposition speaks to. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly am pleased to have been able to 
speak to this motion and to register my objection to the fact that 
this is not a favour that is being done to the opposition, to give 
us a little snippet of information. This is not sort of something 
that is a condescending kind of a move to say, okay, give these 
guys something, and that’s better than what the practice was in 
the past. That may well be true, Mr. Speaker, but it doesn’t deal 
with the fundamental principle of the matter of privilege of a 
member. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I certainly am going to support the 
amendment, and I’m very disappointed that I cannot support the 
government’s motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to make it 
very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the principle is access to 
information before the public, and this motion gives members 
of the Assembly access to the information before the public. 
And that is what it is all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
enter this particular debate. It’s been mentioned that this is 

maybe not a big matter of the House, but in the scheme of 
things, it is, when you look at the history of it. 
 
When I first came here, we were allowed to go to technical 
briefings if we wanted. The media, we could go and do them 
together. We could come and go. Just like every House 
throughout the provinces are allowed, through the House of 
Commons, it’s been allowed. In throughout all of democratic 
countries, it’s been allowed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At that particular day when that happened, when we weren’t 
allowed to go in, there was no warning of it. We were just 
assumed we were allowed to go in like normal. It had always 
worked in previous practice before that, Mr. Speaker. And 
whether the member, the Government House Leader, member, 
how would he call it, disinvited, whether you call it being 
disinvited, or told to leave, or kicked out, or sayonara, or 
goodbye, or get lost, it means the same thing. You’ve lost part 
of a privilege that should be granted to each and every one of us 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when that happened that particular day, you have to 
remember that the government didn’t say to him, he says, oh 
no, we’re going to give you a technical briefing on the side; 
we’re going to do it concurrently; or we’re going to give you 
one. No, they just said, you’re disinvited. That means, you’re 
gone; get out of here. 
 
You know, if there was a weak opposition on this side or maybe 
not many hardly, opposition members, what would have 
happened? Would they have taken that privilege away from us 
100 per cent for every member? Because that’s what they were 
intended to do that day, the way it looks at, Mr. Speaker. They 
intended to take a privilege away. And any time you take a 
privilege, a freedom, away from somebody, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
a sin, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what they were going to do that 
day. 
 
There was no mention of, we’re going to give you an extra 
technical briefing; we’re going to let you in later; we’re going 
to do any of this other stuff that came up. It was just, goodbye; 
we don’t want you in here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So then that day we brought up a point of order, Mr. Speaker, in 
the House, a point of privilege here in the House. And it was 
discussed. It was debated and it was a good debate. And do you 
know what came out of that debate, Mr. Speaker? A 
recommendation and a resolution that we should be . . . that all 
members, all members. When I talk about opposition I mean all 
members — third party, government backbenchers, government 
members — that you’re allowed the freedom of that. And that 
came out of that recommendation, out of this House, Mr. 
Speaker. It came out that day. That recommendation and 
resolution came out of this House from every member. It was 
voted on unanimously at that. 
 
And then from there it went to the Privileges Committee who 
then deadlocked because the government members changed 
direction that they were given from this House. To me you 
should follow out the direction of the House when it’s 
unanimous. They tried to change it after to make more political 
. . . I would guess more points or whatever. They all of a sudden 
dug their heels in and said no, now we’re going to offer you this 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

on the side instead of that. 
 
But you have to remember, at first they weren’t going to give us 
nothing. Till that was raised here in the House, there was 
nothing. They were going to take away a privilege, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s been in practice for many number of years of 
every democratic House, of everybody that belongs to Canadian 
Parliamentary Association — affordable right of access to all 
information. As an MLA you should be allowed access to all 
information that’s afforded to everybody. 
 
All of a sudden they wanted to control who goes in, when they 
go in, who’s going to be at the technical briefing — all that. It’s 
getting to be a power play. It’s getting to be an aging, older 
government that looks like . . . and I don’t like to use the word. 
I don’t know if they’re hiding anything but that’s the perception 
that’s going to be going out there to the public and that’s a 
perception that the public’s going to be . . . When that happens 
they’re going to say, well what difference does it make? The 
media’s there. You can listen in. What’s the problem? 
 
I talked to some constituents about it and they just say, well 
why are they doing that? That just doesn’t make sense. If this 
government is . . . They get up every day and they talk about 
being open and accountable. And if you’re putting out 
programs, if you’re putting out reports that you’re proud of, you 
should be able to answer any question on that. You should 
welcome, you should welcome the questions on it. You should 
welcome the information to get out there because that’s one 
more avenue of getting it out. 
 
When I go to a technical briefing as an MLA, sometimes I’ll 
ask on a program because I want to pass on to my constituents. 
They want to know what’s going on in the CAIS program, all 
the different little programs that are out there. And there are 
many little side programs for different initiatives — whether 
you’re a beekeeper or a grain farmer, organic farmer. There’s 
different things in there that you can ask, that deal with 
programs. 
 
And when you start taking that privilege away, slowly eroding 
it, because this is what this is dealing with — a slow erosion. 
It’s not like they’re taking a big thing but they’re taking a little 
thing but where’s it going to start next time? Because I said 
before at the beginning of this, they weren’t going to allow us in 
to any of them until it was brought to the House. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So what would have been the next one? No technical briefings 
for media? Maybe limiting more information? If you’re going 
to start down that slope — and that’s a slippery slope — you 
start sliding that one, you start trying to hide information or not 
willing to release it, Mr. Speaker, that’s . . . you’re going down 
a very slippery slope at that end of it. And I don’t think this 
House wants to go in that direction. 
 
I don’t know if the members opposite really want to limit access 
to information. Why wouldn’t you, why wouldn’t you want 
your people out there talking about your programs? You should 
be proud of them. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I think I would remind the 

member to direct his remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Speaker, this 
House should and this government should be proud of their 
programs. If you’re not, that tells me maybe they’re not, maybe 
they’re worried about the questions they’re going to be asked in 
there. They don’t want to shine any light on them. And that 
isn’t what a government is about, Mr. Speaker. That’s not what 
it should be. 
 
You look in the past. You look at some of the things that have 
come out of what this government . . . We dealt, you know, this 
was annual report where this particular incident happened. It 
happened at a SaskWater annual report. And I mean you 
mention SaskWater in the public and the first thing they think 
of, Mr. Speaker, is SPUDCO. You know, that’s the first thing 
they think of. And what happened there, Mr. Speaker, is there 
were . . . I think a member had to get up here and apologize. 
There was information that wasn’t, that came out later in the 
House. It took years to be brought out. The whole story wasn’t 
brought out immediately. 
 
And so that’s the first thing people think of and that’s what, 
that’s a misconception that, as a government, you should want 
to change. And so I can’t understand why the members opposite 
would want to bring a motion like this forward. Because do you 
want more trouble like SPUDCO? This shines light on it, be 
able to . . . for people to ask questions, the media to ask 
questions, us to ask questions. And maybe you would have 
caught some of that stuff in SPUDCO before it went as far as it 
did, you know. 
 
And you talk about lots of . . . There’s lots of money losers 
when you talk about this government, you know. You can talk 
about Navigata and the money it’s lost. I mean, maybe if some 
of these questions had been asked earlier, maybe there’d be 
some savings to the taxpayers. And you have to ask yourself, 
Mr. Speaker, is this why this government is bringing this 
motion up, because they want to try to limit the access of the 
opposition, try to hold them back? 
 
They tried to keep us out at all until it was brought to the House 
and a recommendation and resolution was sent from this House. 
Other than that, they may have not even let us in, period, at any 
time. So then they come out with this side deal saying, well 
we’ll give you the same time, maybe before, maybe sometimes 
after, maybe sometimes after the meeting, maybe at the same 
time, maybe before. Well then, you look at the cost, you know. 
 
This government’s always saying, well . . . wants to save 
money. What’s it doing? It’s going to be costing more money to 
do the same, very same thing that it was doing before. Why not 
just do it the way it was? Allow any opposition, any 
government member to come into a technical briefing along 
with the media, to sit there and listen to their program and the 
reports. 
 
Because I’m pretty sure that the bureaucrats that are there, 
they’re proud of the work they’re doing. They’re proud of the 
programs they’re trying to bring forward. They’re proud of their 
annual report. They should be able . . . And if they are, if they 
are proud of it, they should be able to defend it. They should 
want to defend it. As a bureaucrat, if I was one, I’d be offended 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

that this government is trying to limit access so people can ask 
me questions about my particular department. Why, why 
wouldn’t you want . . . You think you’d want to welcome 
questions to your particular department at that. 
 
So you look at, you look at history and the past, and the first 
thing that governments . . . the communist governments when 
they start taking control, they try to limit opposition. They try to 
start with little, little things, cutting them back. Or socialist 
governments, trying to access . . . trying to deny access for 
opposition, trying to put roadblocks in their way. Is that what 
this government, Mr. Speaker, is trying to do, is trying to put 
little roadblocks in the way of opposition? It’s trying to limit the 
information out there. Because when you look at this, you 
wonder if that is their intent and is their purpose when this first 
started, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think there’s any support, if you went around, any 
support anywhere in Saskatchewan that would say, well why 
wouldn’t you allow any member to sit in on a technical 
briefing. A member of this House — government member, 
opposition member, third party member, independent member 
— why wouldn’t you allow them just to sit in there and gather 
the same amount of information that the media is getting, that 
they should be allowed to, that they’re going to, that they 
should be allowed to get, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think there would 
be one person that would say, no I don’t think that you should 
be . . . opposition members shouldn’t be allowed in there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I don’t know where are they getting . . . They feel they have 
support for this. I don’t feel like . . . I think if they asked their 
constituents about this, I think a lot of them would be appalled 
at what they do. Because they listen, this government, and they 
talk about, oh, we’re open and accountable. And they talk about 
that all the time. And I know when they go door to door, they 
keep telling their constituents about that. Well I think maybe 
this is a message that maybe should get out to some of their 
constituents out there. And maybe these guys aren’t as open, as 
accountable as they like to say they are, at that end of it. 
 
Because any time you take away a tiny little bit of freedom — 
and that’s what you’re doing — a tiny little freedom, but it’s an 
erosion. Any time you start down that road, it just leads to 
further . . . They may think, well we’ve taken that away. How 
else can . . . What other little roadblock can we set up there? 
You know we can’t let the opposition, you know, ask too many 
questions because I mean that’s no good. They may actually 
find something out, you know. They may even find some little 
dirt on us. So let’s just try to put some little roadblocks in their 
way wherever we can, you know. And that’s what happened, 
and that’s what going to happen in the future if it’s allowed, Mr. 
Speaker, you know. 
 
And with some of the things that have happened with this 
particular government over the past years, I can maybe 
understand why they don’t allow, or don’t want people in there 
asking questions of the officials on some of the losses they’ve 
run through. And especially when you look at SPUDCO, some 
of the information . . . I mean, we can go back to Con-Force 
when they said that they were in a 51 per cent partnership, and 
we found out later on that they weren’t in at all with them, you 
know. That was just to get around a labour law, a particular 

labour law. 
 
You know, maybe if some of them questions had been asked at 
that time, or were allowed to be asked, you know, maybe that 
would have came out . . . [inaudible] . . . the losses that were 
there. 
 
And, you know, and after, they still tried to cover it up. I 
remember them first getting elected in ’99. I remember door 
knocking in Outlook. I mean, that was a huge issue. It was just 
starting to come to light then. The information was just starting 
to come out. The previous opposition that was in — I think they 
only had nine members — did an excellent job of dragging it 
out. And they had to work to find that information out. 
 
But I tell you what, the people already knew. They were starting 
to know out there what was going on with that. And this is just 
one more, you know, reason why that this motion should fail or 
the amendment should go ahead, Mr. Speaker, because as a 
House, as a legislature, as a legislator, you should be allowed as 
much information as you can get. 
 
I know when I was down in the States just at an exchange 
program and you talk to them, I mean, they have access to all 
kinds of information. They’re allowed to . . . which you should 
as a legislature . . . As a legislator, you should be allowed all the 
access to information because we’re the ones that are making 
the laws here, making the rules, getting the information out to 
people. We should have access to every piece of information 
out there. 
 
As a government, you should be using that tool. You should be 
proud to say, we want to get as much information out there as 
we possibly can. We want you to ask as many questions as you 
want of this government. You should be able to come and ask 
as many as you want or listen as much as you want at any time 
we’re giving a technical briefing because that’s what this 
government is about. That’s what a government that’s sitting 
. . . opposition would be like, Mr. Speaker. You know, you’d be 
not trying to hide things like it’s looking like this present 
government is trying to do at this particular time with this 
motion. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I can’t support that motion in all 
good faith. I don’t think anybody could. But I do support the 
amendment that stands for the freedom of all MLAs, elected 
officials that are in this House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think this is a very important debate for this legislature and 
indeed for parliamentarians in Canada and across the 
Commonwealth. Since we take the points of privilege, the 
established traditions and rules from each others’ Houses to 
make a determination on how each of our legislatures are going 
to operate, every time there’s a new ruling which takes place 
within a legislature, it affects all of the legislatures within the 
Commonwealth. It doesn’t affect, just in this case, 
Saskatchewan. It doesn’t affect just the provincial governments. 
It affects both provincial and federal governments, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, across the entire Commonwealth. 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

So the precedents that we set today, the precedents that will be 
set when this item comes to a vote will have an impact across 
the Commonwealth, which is the largest political body, Mr. 
Speaker, of nations outside of the UN [United Nations], Mr. 
Speaker, across the world. There’s 54 or 56 nations, I believe, 
that are part of the Commonwealth, representing some of the 
largest countries in the world, such as India, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we do today is not irrelevant. It’s not 
some minor, small thing that we shouldn’t be wasting our time 
on. This is a very important ruling, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
What I find interesting about this exercise is the motion that 
was originally passed in this House and referred to the 
Committee on Privilege to ensure that the motion of the House 
was carried out, Mr. Speaker, and that motion was passed 
unanimously in this House. The opposition presented a motion 
condemning the actions of the government and laying out the 
rights and privileges of the members of this legislature and 
asking that this government — which is not the legislature, but 
the NDP government — honour the rights and privileges, Mr. 
Speaker, of the members of this Assembly. 
 
And I would like to read to you what that motion, as amended, 
was: 
 

. . . that this Assembly urge government and Crown 
corporation officials to respect . . . 
 

I think that’s very important, Mr. Deputy Chair, that you take a 
look at that: 
 

. . . that this Assembly urge government and Crown 
corporation officials to respect . . . 
 

Because clearly, they had not been respecting the rights and 
privileges of members. And what were those rights and 
privileges as talked about in this motion, Mr. Speaker? A 
motion that I again say that every member of the New 
Democratic Party voting on that day supported totally, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact it was their amendment to our original motion, 
Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

. . . the rights and privileges of all members of this 
Assembly, by ensuring that official opposition members 
and their staff[s] are allowed to attend any embargoed 
news conferences and technical briefings open to . . . 
members of the news media. 
 

It clearly outlined what the rights were in that motion, Mr. 
Speaker, and it asked that government and Crown corporation 
officials respect those rights. Those rights again were that all 
members of this Assembly be ensured that official opposition 
members and their staff are allowed to attend any embargoed 
news conferences and technical briefings open to members of 
the media. 
 
Very clear what the rights were, that all opposition members be 
entitled, along with staff, to attend technical briefings and 
embargoed news conferences. The members of the government 
supported that. They wanted it known on April 12 that they 
supported democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not that they were 
trying to exclude people from news conferences. They wanted it 

known that they supported the rights of members to attend 
embargoed news conferences and technical briefings, not that 
there was a separation, not that there were two different 
qualifying groups, Mr. Speaker; everyone had that right. 
 
And that was the motion that was sent to the Privileges 
Committee. And the reason it was sent there was to urge the 
government and Crown corporations officials to respect those 
rights. Once it got to the Privilege Committee however, Mr. 
Speaker, the government members stonewalled the committee 
demanding that the mandate of the committee be changed, and 
then simply stonewalling the vote when that couldn’t . . . when 
the official members of the opposition refused to allow the 
mandate to be changed. The motion simply came back to the 
House as a failure. And that’s why we’re debating this today, 
Mr. Speaker, because the NDP members, the government 
members stonewalled the Privilege Committee demanding that 
the mandate as passed unanimously by this Assembly be 
changed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that committee, in my opinion, does not have the 
right to change that mandate. They have the right to deal with 
the issues of the mandate, which was to urge the government 
and Crown corporations’ officials to respect the rights and 
privileges of members, not to change the mandate. Yet the 
government members stonewalled that committee so that they 
could play their political games, so that they could try and deny 
access to members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Finance minister in his presentation early today talked 
about disinviting our staff person from the technical briefing. 
Well to disinvite someone — assuming there is even such a 
word called disinvite — assumes that that person was then first 
invited, Mr. Speaker; assumes that that person was first invited, 
that they had the right to be there, and then the government 
denied them that right. 
 
In the past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members of the official 
opposition and their staff have had the right to attend 
embargoed news conferences and technical briefings. It 
happened all the time with budgets. Our members and staff 
were entitled to attend budget-embargoed technical briefings 
and news conferences. That has been a long-standing tradition, 
although I have to admit there’s been a number of times that the 
government has had to been reminded that that was a 
long-standing tradition because they kept trying to waver away 
from it, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t want to give the opposition 
the same information and the same access that they were giving 
to the news media, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And clearly, as we have seen from the House of Commons 
debate on privilege and access, that that is not acceptable; that 
the members of this Assembly, and every Assembly, have the 
right to the same information that is given to the news media. 
 
So if you have a separate technical briefing or news conference, 
how do you ensure that the same information is provided? 
Because if you have two different people at two separate 
briefings asking questions, Mr. Speaker, you’re not going to get 
the same information because those people will tend to ask 
somewhat different questions. The answers will come back to 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

you in a somewhat different manner depending on who answers 
the question. So the information is not going to be the same. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this information that should be 
available to all members, as outlined in the House of Commons 
ruling, doesn’t say that you have separate briefings. It says that 
the members have access to the information at the briefings, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s what the government is trying to deny 
us. 
 
You know, you would think that a government who, 
theoretically at least, expounds their support for equality, would 
be supporting the fact that we all as members of this legislature 
should have equal access to the information. And yet they are 
trying to create divisions. The NDP Party is trying to create 
divisions in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If someone was to come forward and say men and women, you 
can have access to the same information but you can’t be at the 
same meeting where this information is provided. One group 
has to go this way, one group has to go that way. Mr. Speaker, 
that would be unacceptable in this society. 
 
If you were to say we’re going to divide you based on your 
religions and provide you with information, that would be 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. If you were going to divide people 
on their races and provide them access to the information that 
their legislator should have, that would be unacceptable. Any 
kind of separation like that, Mr. Speaker, in unacceptable in this 
society. 
 
The NDP Party proclaims their support for equality until it 
affects them, Mr. Speaker, and then they deny it. 
 
It’s our belief, Mr. Speaker, that this legislature should treat 
equality equally in all situations. That means that any member 
of this legislature should have equal access and opportunity to 
participate in any embargoed news conference or technical 
briefing at any point in time. Whether it is a separate briefing 
for MLAs or a briefing for the media, members of this 
legislature and their staff should have access to both and all of 
those entities, Mr. Speaker — those conferences and those 
technical briefings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You have to wonder what the NDP is afraid of. What are they 
afraid is going to be found out, either at a separate briefing or at 
a combined briefing, Mr. Speaker? Why . . . as my colleagues 
have asked, what do they fear? 
 
Well I guess if we look back at the history of the NDP, of this 
government, well perhaps they fear SPUDCO as has been 
mentioned, the information that was kept secret there for six 
years. Or perhaps what they fear is such a response as was 
given by the member from Athabasca — when he was the 
Minister of SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management] — well you didn’t ask me that question so I don’t 
have to answer it. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, if the question is asked in one briefing and not 
in another, then one of the parties doesn’t have access to the 
information. And that’s what’s critical in this motion, that 
everyone have access to the same information. That is what 
allows the members of this Assembly to carry out their duties, 

to carry out the duties as assigned to them by their electorate in 
electing each and every member to this Assembly. They expect 
each one to be treated equally, Mr. Speaker, and not to be 
denied information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, democracy is a slowly evolving creature. It started 
back when the nobility cornered King John at Runnymede and 
forced him to sign the Magna Carta which enshrined their rights 
and privileges. It didn’t, it didn’t enshrine the rights and 
privileges of the common people, Mr. Speaker, but it did tell the 
Crown and the monarch that some of your subjects have 
specific rights and privileges that you cannot abrogate. 
 
And slowly over time, Mr. Speaker, the power of the monarchy 
was reduced. The power of democracy and of parliaments was 
increased. And that didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker, without a lot of 
struggle. It didn’t happen without bloodshed. Take a look at the 
revolution led by Cromwell against the monarchy, which really 
changed England, Mr. Speaker, from the all powerful monarchy 
to the supremacy of parliament. 
 
Kings since that time, the monarchs since that time, continued, 
Mr. Speaker, to question and to pressure parliament not to 
exercise and to have those powers. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
Speakers wear the tricorne hat to commemorate a Speaker that 
carried the message from parliament to the king that the king 
did not want to hear and that Speaker lost his head, Mr. 
Speaker, literally. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the privileges and powers, the rights of 
parliamentarians has been hard won. No longer do we have to 
fear the power of the monarchy. Monarchs today are not going 
to supplant the power of parliament in our system. Not to say it 
doesn’t or couldn’t happen some other place in the world, but 
not here, Mr. Speaker, not in most of the Commonwealth 
nations. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we now have a new threat to democracy, and 
this question of privilege and right in this Assembly today 
demonstrates that danger to democracy, Mr. Speaker. And that 
danger, Mr. Speaker, is the demand for power by a majority 
government — not to serve all of the members of the legislature 
but to serve, Mr. Speaker, the party in power. And that is the 
erosion that we’re suffering today. That is the erosion that has 
been taking place in our parliaments for many years now. 
 
As power is centralized, Mr. Speaker, into the prime minister’s 
or the premier’s office, it’s an erosion of the power of 
parliamentarians, Mr. Speaker, and that is becoming a very real 
threat to democracy. The denial of access to information by 
members of this legislature, any other legislature or parliament 
in the Commonwealth, is an erosion of the power, the rights, 
and the privileges of all parliamentarians. And we cannot allow 
that to happen in this legislature on this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you talk to people across the country about the 
state of democracy in Canada, most of them believe there is 
very little left, other than the vote on election day; that they’re 
actually electing a dictatorship for four to five years; that the 
prime minister or premier exercises supreme power over their 
own party, over the majority party, and therefore over all 
parliamentarians. 
 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

And they have a great fear, Mr. Speaker, that we’re losing the 
rights of democracy in this country, that parliamentarians no 
longer serve their constituents. Rather they serve their party 
hierarchy and their leader, the prime minister or the premier or 
the leader of the official opposition. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a reduction in the 
number of people who vote. They don’t believe in the system 
any more. They don’t believe that they have the power to 
change the system. They don’t believe the system responds to 
their needs. And why do they believe that, Mr. Speaker? They 
believe that because power is being concentrated into the hands 
of the few, and that power has been removed and extracted from 
their legislatures and their parliamentarians, Mr. Speaker. And 
this privilege motion does that as well. It removes the rights and 
privileges of all parliamentarians in this legislature, all members 
of this legislature, whether they’re on the government side or 
the opposition side, from access to the information that they 
clearly should have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to pass this motion as the government has 
presented it is to fail in our duty as legislators and as 
parliamentarians. We would then allow a continued erosion of 
the rights and privileges — rights and privileges that the 
monarchs tried to take away and now are being eroded by 
majority government, and the rule of the leader of that majority 
party, be that the prime minister or premier in any jurisdiction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only time that we see a return of that power to the 
parliamentarians, it seems, is when a government is in trouble 
— when they have a minority. We see some of that return in 
Ottawa, where members of the legislature become again viable 
participants in parliament, in making legislation. 
 
But we also see, Mr. Speaker, the machinations and the 
contortions that a governing party will go through to try and 
maintain their power, such as we see happening in Ottawa 
today. We have seen the Gomery Commission been started 
because legislators there needed access to information and 
could not get it. The only information that was coming forward 
was information through the Auditor General. 
 
So the Prime Minister of the day strikes a commission — the 
Gomery Commission — to investigate, and then immediately 
calls an election so that the information would not be available 
for the voters to make a determination, Mr. Speaker. That 
happened just over a year ago. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, access to information is critical to the proper 
functioning of a democracy. It’s critical to holding governments 
accountable. And when majority parties in governments deny 
the opposition access to any information, it’s limiting their 
ability to hold governments accountable. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I know that majority governments do not want to be held 
accountable. They want to be able to slide through without the 
public becoming aware of certain bits of information, such as 
happened with SPUDCO. When questions were clearly asked, 
both on the floor of the legislature and in committee which is an 
extension of the legislature, the information was not provided, 

Mr. Speaker. So how do governments . . . how do oppositions 
hold governments accountable? How does the public become 
aware to be able to make intelligent, informed decisions, when 
the information is not being made available to them? 
 
All of those bits of information, all of the government’s 
operation is paid for by the tax dollars of the people, either in 
Saskatchewan or in Canada or throughout the Commonwealth, 
Mr. Speaker. They have a right, they have a privilege to have 
that information. And this government is now trying to deny the 
parliamentarians in this legislature full and equal access to that 
information. And we cannot allow that to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
As I said before, this is a clear erosion of what’s happening; it’s 
clear erosion of our democratic rights and privileges. 
 
Let’s take a look at the budget situation, Mr. Speaker, which is 
normally an embargoed news conference and a technical 
briefing. Under this new rule if it passes as is, Mr. Speaker, the 
government will have to have two briefings. Again, how do the 
parliamentarians get full access to the information if they’re not 
at both briefings, Mr. Speaker? Because around this room we 
ask questions. Each person has a particular experience and a 
particular knowledge and a particular interest in a topic, Mr. 
Speaker. So each of us ask questions from a different point of 
view. That’s why we’re individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That individuality leads to different answers. The minister, if 
he’s answering the questions, or the officials of the department 
will answer those questions differently based on the question, as 
I already mentioned. The member from Athabasca refusing to 
answer . . . providing all of the information unless he was asked 
a specific question. 
 
So you’re going to have people asking for different information 
in each of the different technical briefings, so one group is not 
going to have the same information as the other group, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s the rights and privileges of members of this 
legislature to have access to all the information, not just part of 
it, Mr. Speaker, not just the part that was asked in your briefing 
compared to the other briefing, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the flaw 
in the government’s argument. 
 
The government even supported that, Mr. Speaker, in the 
original motion that they proposed to this legislature and passed 
unanimously. So clearly some of the political operators behind 
the scenes in government — not the members on the floor, Mr. 
Speaker, because they all voted in favour of it — some of the 
political operators behind the scenes have obviously convinced 
at least three of the government members, who are on the 
Privilege Committee that they erred, that they should not have 
supported that motion in this Assembly, that they were wrong in 
voting for it in the first place. 
 
So I guess the question you have to ask them, if they were 
wrong, why did they all vote for it? Surely there must have been 
one of them then that disagreed with that motion and could’ve 
stood up and said no, I’m not going to support that. But, Mr. 
Speaker, they all voted for it, each and every one of them stood 
in their place and voted for this amendment that they presented, 
Mr. Speaker. So somebody then behind the scenes pulled the 
strings and they have changed their mind. 
 
What else, Mr. Speaker, do those people behind the scenes pull 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

the strings on when it comes to decision making in this 
government? That they can so easily pull those strings to 
convince those members that voted unanimously for our rights 
and privileges, that they were wrong — that it had to be 
changed — to deny the rights and privileges of members in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Clearly there is a flaw in that 
government, Mr. Speaker. That they are so easily swayed by 
somebody behind the scenes, Mr. Speaker, that they cannot 
think and make judgments for themselves. If they could, then 
they made that judgment on April 12th, when they voted 
unanimously in favour of the amendment to enshrine and to 
ensure our rights and privileges. 
 
I’m amazed at how weak the judgment and the moral fibre of 
the members opposite are, that they can be so easily swayed by 
someone behind the scenes, to completely change their vote, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m amazed at that lack of will, will to stand up 
for the rights and privileges of the members of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the amendment as presented 
by the member from Saskatoon Southeast against the 
government’s motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order then. The question before the Assembly 
is the amendment to the main motion as moved by the member 
for Saskatoon Southeast and seconded by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That all the words after the first “that” be removed and 
replaced with the following: 
 
This Assembly condemns the government for its continued 
refusal to honour the privilege motion passed on April 12, 
2005, urging the government to respect the rights and 
privileges of all members of this Assembly by ensuring 
that official opposition members and their staff are 
allowed to attend any embargoed news conferences and 
technical briefings open to members of the news media. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Question has been called. Those who favour 
the amendment say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe the nos have it. Call in the 
members for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:22 until 16:29.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The question before the 
Assembly is the amendment to the main motion as moved by 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast, seconded by the member 
for Melville-Saltcoats. Those who favour the motion please 

rise. 
 

[Yeas — 25] 
 
Elhard Heppner D’Autremont 
Krawetz Draude Hermanson 
Bjornerud Stewart Wakefield 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Merriman 
Morgan Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment, please rise. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble  
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please members. The 
voting will proceed. 
 
Forbes Wartman Belanger 
Higgins Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Morin Borgerson  
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the 
amendment, 25; those opposed, 28. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. Order, please. 
Order, please. The question before the Assembly is the main 
motion moved by the member for Regina Douglas Park, 
seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:32 until 16:53.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member for Regina Douglas Park, 



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North, with respect to 
technical briefings. Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 28] 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Nilson Beatty Hamilton 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Taylor Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 25] 
 
Elhard Heppner D’Autremont 
Krawetz Draude Hermanson 
Bjornerud Stewart Wakefield 
McMorris Eagles Gantefoer 
Harpauer Bakken Lackey Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Brkich 
Weekes Kerpan Merriman 
Morgan Dearborn Hart 
Kirsch   
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
28; those opposed, 25. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 114 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 114 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill 114, an 
amendment to The Education Act. 
 
I listened carefully, Mr. Speaker, when the minister gave a 
second reading on this Act, and he started off his comments by 
saying this is basically a housekeeping Act, Mr. Speaker. And 
he tried to downplay the provisions of the amendments that are 
contained in this Act. 
 
There are a number of housekeeping aspects to this Act, but 
there are also some fairly major amendments that deal with the 

restructuring of the Act to allow for the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions and the elections that are scheduled to take 
place that the minister announced back in February that we 
would have election of new boards of education on June 15 of 
this year, and that these boards would be put in place. 
 
And they really wouldn’t have a school division because the 
current boards of education are in place to run the school 
divisions until such time that the new boundaries that the 
minister issued through a ministerial order, which there are 
some questions around the fact whether the minister actually 
had the power to do that because of some of the amendments to 
the Act. It seems that perhaps to me be a question as to whether 
the minister actually had authority to restructure the school 
division, the boundaries of the school divisions until these 
amendments passed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this Bill is certainly anything but a housekeeping Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. The minister talks about a restructuring and 
coordinating committee that the government has set up and so 
on. There are a number of issues that need to be addressed, Mr. 
Speaker, and so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate on second reading of Bill 114 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for this Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — It being near 5 p.m., this committee stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2767 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2767 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2767 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2767 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2767 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2767 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2768 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2768 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2768 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2768 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2768 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2768 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2768 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2769 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2777 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mental Health Week in Canada 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2769 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2770 
 Volunteer Award to Star City Resident 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2770 
 Former MLA Elected Mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2770 
 Nokomis School Wins Youth Enviro-Action Award 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2771 
 Energy & Our Environment Poster Contest Winners 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2771 
 A Saskatchewan General Store 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2771 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2772 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2772 
 Labour Legislation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2773 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2773 
 Revenue from Oil Royalties 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2774 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2774 
 Financial Assistance for Farmers 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2775 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2775 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 100 — The Police Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2777 
 Bill No. 119 — The Election Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2777 
 Bill No. 120 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2777 
 Bill No. 121 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2778 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2778 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2778 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Access to Embargoed News Conferences and Technical Briefings 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2778 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2779 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2782 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2784 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2784 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2787 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2789 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2789 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2791 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ...............................................................................................................................................2795 
 Recorded Division (motion) .......................................................................................................................................................2796 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2796 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




