

















































Hansard: May 05, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 106A  THURSDAY, MAY 5, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2873 
 May 5, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The residents who 
live along Highway 32 are anxious for improvements to their 
rapidly crumbling highway. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these four pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Cabri, Prince Albert, 
Abbey, and Kindersley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents of southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the level 
of residential support for people who have long-term 
disabilities. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with life-long disabilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Wymark, McMahon, Neville, Pambrun, and the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those concerned about 
cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by people from Radville and 
Weyburn. I so present. Thank you. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions, being 
sessional papers nos. 96, 639, 666, 715, 716, 720, 730, 798, and 
808. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 90, The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Bill No. 90 in Committee of the 
Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the Minister of Finance, that Bill 90, The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 



2874 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2005 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 92, The 
International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 92. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act/Loi de mise en 

oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection 
internationale des adultes 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 92, The International Protection of Adults (Hague 
Convention Implementation) Act, be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed once again by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 101, 
The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act also without 
amendment. 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Bill 101 in Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 101 — The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments 
Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements étrangers 

 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill now be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 101, The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, finally, I am instructed once again 
by the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill 
No. 103, The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — . . . waive consideration in Committee 
of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Bill 103 in Committee of the Whole. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time. I recognize the minister. 
 
 



May 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2875 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 103 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 103, The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 111 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what is the 
corporation’s tendering process? Is the lowest tender 
guaranteed the contract? And are successful bidders 
notified of the successful bidder and bid? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker, on the same day I shall ask: 
 

The Minister Responsible for SaskPower: how many 
customers are signed on to the Green program? Please 
provide a breakdown based on total users — residential 
users, commercial users, and government users. 
 

And I have a similar question for the year 2004. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I shall on day no. 111 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: under what 
conditions would a new employee of SaskPower be able to 
join the Power Corporation Superannuation Plan? Since 
January 1, 1999 how many new employees have joined the 
Power Corporation Superannuation Plan? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I shall give notice that I shall on day no. 111 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the same Minister for SaskPower: how much of the 
$301 million budgeted for operating, maintenance, and 
administrative expenses in 2003 was spent on wages and 
benefits? 

 
And I have a similar question for the year 2004, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I give notice that on day no. 111 I 
shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: please 

provide the following productivity measures for 2004 — 
the number of customers per employee, the power 
generated per employee, and the power generated per 
dollar of assets. 
 

And I have similar questions to the same ministers for the year 
2003, 2002, 2001, and 2000. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 11 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: does 
SaskPower currently levy any fees on individuals who 
generate power off the electric grid? 

 
And finally, on day no. 11 I shall ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: does the provincial 
government currently levy any taxes related to the 
generation of electricity by individuals who generate 
power off the electrical grid? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 111 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: what is the 
corporation’s tendering process? Is the lowest tender 
guaranteed the contract? Are unsuccessful bidders notified 
of the successful bidder and bid? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, it is my pleasure 
to introduce 50 students from Melfort and Unit Comprehensive 
Collegiate. They are the senior band and swing choir. They’re 
here with chaperones Adrian Bourgeois, Bruce Schell, Alan 
Debusschere; and their music directors, Mavis Peters and 
Ray-Ann Usselman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here for the day in Regina. And on this 
beautiful day they came to the legislative grounds and the grass 
to relax before they’re going for a dinner engagement. And I 
convinced them to come and see this beautiful place in the 
Chamber that’s their legislature. Would everyone please 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great pleasure 
for me to stand and welcome many visitors in your gallery 
today who are celebrating the International Day of the Midwife. 



2876 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2005 

They held a very informative and fun event on the front lawn of 
the legislature at noon today, at which both myself and a 
member of the opposition attended. 
 
I had the opportunity . . . I would ask that these individuals 
would stand or wave as I introduce them, Mr. Speaker: Heather 
Wood, who is a midwife practising in Hamilton, Ontario, and is 
generously offering her knowledge and experiences for the 
progress of midwifery in Saskatchewan; Joanne Havelock, from 
the Prairie Women’s Health Centre of Excellence. And as well 
there’s other midwives practising in Saskatchewan, and their 
supporters: Sonya Duffee, Eileen McKenzie, Jeni Minion and 
her son Elijah, Sylvie Roy and her children, Debbie Mpofu, 
Rob Wright, Amy Stensrud and baby Mason, Elizabeth Curry, 
Christina Phipps, Ruben and Pamela Artavia, Roberto Apodaca 
and Kristy Obrigewitsch with baby Manuel, Joanna South and 
baby Jack. 
 
And unfortunately I don’t have all the names but I welcome all 
of the guests to the Assembly today and thank them again for a 
wonderful event at noon and the information that they provided 
to the visitors that were at the event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming the midwives and the 
friends of the midwives to their Assembly. Some of these 
women have made the trip to the legislature every year for the 
past six years and they’re hopeful that the government will 
work with them on their Bill for midwifery. And I’d like to 
welcome them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly I’d like to 
introduce 19 grade 11 and 12 students from the Sedley High 
School in Sedley, Saskatchewan, located about 50 kilometres 
east of Regina. 
 
They are here with their teachers, Sandi Robertson — and I 
hope I have the pronunciation right here — Andre 
Boutin-Maloney. I would like to welcome them here and hope 
they enjoy the proceedings. I’m going to have an opportunity to 
visit with them after question period and hopefully answer the 
questions that perhaps the government doesn’t today. So I 
would like all members to join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like 

to introduce two women sitting in your gallery — Barb Cape 
who is the president of Local 299 SEIU [Service Employees’ 
International Union], and also Laurie Probst from CEP 
[Communications, Energy and Paperworks Union of Canada]. 
I’m very pleased to see them here today and I hope all members 
will give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today is 
Holocaust Memorial Day or Yom haShoah. 
 
On this day we honour those who fought and continue to fight 
the tyranny of anti-Semitism. This is a day set aside to 
remember the more than 6 million Jewish women, men, and 
children who were victims of the Holocaust and who died for 
no other reason than they were Jewish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2001 this Assembly passed the Holocaust 
memorial Act. The legislation refers to this day as a time to 
reflect upon and educate people about the enduring lessons of 
the Holocaust and to consider other instances of the systemic 
destruction of peoples and the importance of multiculturalism in 
our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 100 years ago people from a variety of ethnic, 
racial, and religious backgrounds came together to form the 
province of Saskatchewan. And they took for their motto, “from 
many peoples, strength.” Holocaust Memorial Day is a day of 
remembrance. It is a day for each of us to reflect on what our 
motto really means, to reaffirm our commitment to acceptance 
and understanding, to celebrate those things that make us 
unique and different from one another, and to celebrate those 
things that make us very much the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, understanding is key to ending intolerance, 
xenophobia, and racism. We need to learn the lessons of the 
Holocaust, and relearn the lessons of the Holocaust, and we 
need to remember the victims. Remembering will go a long way 
toward fostering the kind of understanding we all so desperately 
need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Saskatchewan Party’s Nomination 
for Swift Current Constituency 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday I and a number of my colleagues were able 
to be in Swift Current to attend the official opposition 
Saskatchewan Party’s first nomination meeting. 



May 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2877 

There was an excellent crowd on hand for the event. And 
despite perhaps the better judgment of caucus and of party 
members in the Swift Current constituency, the current member 
for Swift Current was uncontested for the nomination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night’s event was only the first of several 
Saskatchewan Party nomination meetings this spring. There 
will be nomination meetings in Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan 
Rivers, Carrot River Valley, Saskatoon Eastview, and 
Saskatoon Riversdale in the weeks to come. 
 
And these are hotly contested nominations, Mr. Speaker, where 
people are anxious to nominate a Saskatchewan Party 
candidate. They’re anxious, Mr. Speaker, to nominate someone 
who will represent their constituencies and who will send a 
message to the legislature that the same old rhetoric from this 
out-of-touch NDP [New Democratic Party] government just 
doesn’t cut it any more. They want a government that will talk 
about what Saskatchewan can be — not just what Saskatchewan 
used to be. And they want a government that stands by their 
words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people don’t want to wait until the next election is 
called to get involved. They want to make a difference now, 
which is why the Saskatchewan Party is holding these 
nomination meetings. Mr. Speaker, we would like to 
congratulate the member from Swift Current for being officially 
nominated as the first Saskatchewan Party candidate for the 
next election and we eagerly look forward to our other 
nomination meetings this spring. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 

Grateful Expressions to Canadians 
for the Liberation of the Netherlands 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, over the last number 
of days the people of the Netherlands have been holding 
ceremonies of remembrance to honour the soldiers of the First 
Canadian Army who fought and died to liberate the Netherlands 
from Nazi occupation. At just one of these memorial 
ceremonies held in Groesbeek, Netherlands on Tuesday, more 
than 8,000 people were in attendance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these heartfelt expressions of thanks coming as 
they do, 60 years after the terrible events of World War II, 
speak loudly and directly to the high level of esteem and 
gratitude, indeed affection that the people of the Netherlands 
hold for their Canadian liberators. Mr. Speaker, as someone 
who was born in the Netherlands, I want to add my voice of 
thanks and appreciation to those who gave so much to ensure 
Dutch freedom and liberty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in September 1944, Canadian troops who had 
previously been fighting in France, Italy, and Belgium were 
moved to the Netherlands. Among these troops was the South 
Saskatchewan Regiment. For the next nine months, the 
Canadians fought an increasingly desperate German army in 
conditions and terrain that were some of the most difficult in the 
entire war. Sixty years ago today, May 5, 1945, the liberation of 

the Netherlands was complete — 7,600 Canadians had given 
their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the liberation of the Netherlands by Canadian 
Armed Forces is one of the most significant events in the 
history of that country. As the mayor of Groesbeek said at 
Tuesday’s ceremony, the Canadian cost of Dutch freedom is 
incalculable and the Dutch will never forget it. Thank you 
Canada, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Football Team 
Hosts Dogs’ Breakfast 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what do you call 1,378 hungry football fans? Well if you were 
in Saskatoon this morning you’d call it a dogs’ breakfast of 
Huskie proportions. 
 
I had the pleasure early this morning of joining the members 
from Saskatoon Massey Place and Saskatoon Fairview in 
attending the fifth annual U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 
football team’s dogs’ breakfast in support of scholarships for 
elite football players. The crowd heard an inspiring speech from 
former Saskatchewan Roughrider great, Steve Mazurak. 
 
The breakfast is the kickoff to training camp for the Vanier Cup 
finalists. It gives the team a chance to highlight the new recruits 
that will join the team this year. The recruits are high school 
and junior all-stars from across Western Canada. There’s even 
one from my hometown, Mike Sydoruk from Blaine Lake. Four 
Huskies were drafted in the recent CFL [Canadian Football 
League] college draft — Nathan Hoffart, Curt Hundeby, Ryan 
Gottselig, and Jeff Piercy who’s from Saskatoon Silver Springs 
— a real tribute to the great program and great coaches like 
Brian Towriss and Ed Carlton. 
 
Two retiring assistant coaches, Barry Radcliffe and Rick 
Wakeman, were honoured for 21 years of service. These two 
individuals helped make the Huskies what they are today. They 
helped to mould about 500 players, including myself, into better 
football players and better citizens. 
 
I’d like to congratulate breakfast Chair Daryl Labach and his 
team including MC [master of ceremonies] Hugh Vassos, 
organizers Todd Peterson, Murray Sadownick, Doug Siemens, 
and Mark Regier for organizing one of the largest — if not the 
largest — fundraising event in the province. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the U of S 
Huskie football team as they embark upon their journey to 
return to the Vanier Cup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

 



2878 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2005 

International Day of the Midwife 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
International Day of the Midwife, a time set aside to raise 
awareness about the valuable services that midwives provide to 
expectant mothers, their families, and their newborns, and to 
acknowledge the significant contributions that midwives make 
to the health of their nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the midwifery model of care is based on the belief 
that pregnancy is a natural and healthy process. Through 
continuity of care, midwives provide high-quality, safe, and 
cost-effective services to women with low-risk pregnancies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the quality of care that midwives provide is about 
much more than delivering babies. Midwives counsel, monitor, 
and support the health and emotional well-being of mothers 
from early on in their pregnancies through delivery and through 
postpartum period. 
 
Midwives build a trusting relationship with their clients and 
work with them to make informed choices about their care. As a 
result, the demand for midwifery services often exceeds the 
supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the midwife is the most common birth attendant in 
the world. Today’s model of midwifery services is about 
providing women with a choice for safe and healthy maternity 
care. It’s about educating and empowering women to make 
informed decisions about their pregnancies and their bodies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
acknowledging Saskatchewan doulas and midwives for their 
tireless work and in recognizing the Friends of the Midwives 
for educating the community, creating awareness, and ensuring 
that women with low-risk pregnancies receive the maternity 
care they want and need. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Saskatchewan Groups Join In Motion 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 2 to 
the 8 is recognized as Physical Activity Week. Today the 
Saskatchewan legislature joined with many other community 
groups across Saskatchewan participating in the In Motion 
movement. 
 
In Motion is a province-wide program aimed at increasing 
physical activity for health benefits. The vision of 
Saskatchewan In Motion is to make Saskatchewan people some 
of the healthiest, most physically active individuals in Canada. 
Research has shown the overwhelming benefits of physical 
activity. Individuals that participate in regular physical activity 
experience lower stress levels, better health, and improved 
fitness. 
 
By joining In Motion movement, the Saskatchewan legislature 
has committed to creating a supportive environment that 
challenges employees to becoming more physically active. 

Various communities and groups across Saskatchewan have 
already recognized the value of physical activity. As of this 
morning, In Motion movement has 144 communities as well as 
212 workplaces committed to incorporating physical activity as 
part of their healthier lifestyle. 
 
I would just like to highlight, Mr. Speaker, that the school in my 
hometown of Cupar recently joined this movement. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to have all 
members join with me in recognizing In Motion and encourage 
members to ensure that their home communities and 
community groups join the movement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s no wonder stakeholders in our economy are 
confused about Bill 87, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act. 
The minister can’t seem to give a straight answer. 
 
On Tuesday a reporter asked the minister, and I quote, “and 
with this Bill the board will be able to seize and access 
information.” Note the reporter asked about seizure, Mr. 
Speaker. The minister replied, “yes, if it is relative to the case.” 
Then yesterday another reporter asked for clarification. Again a 
quotation, “but they wouldn’t be able to take any of those 
documents.” The minister said no. 
 
So which is it, Mr. Speaker? One day the minister says, yes 
there is seizure. The next day she says, no there isn’t. Can the 
minister give us a straight answer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member is accurate in his quote from Tuesday, but I would say 
to him it also says “and access” and “access to documents.” 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what I was referring to. Yes there is 
access to documents. There has been concern about some 
referring to the sweeping powers that we are providing to The 
Trade Union Act . . . or in The Trade Union Act to the Labour 
Relations Board. That’s inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are powers that the board currently has. We are better 
defining them. And it will provide access to places of 
employment. These are reasonable requirements and are meant 
to provide opportunity to interview staff and also do inspections 
within the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 



May 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2879 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister’s comments are already causing a stir amongst 
Saskatchewan’s businessmen and women. In fact my office has 
received calls from business owners who don’t know what to 
believe. One day the minister says, yes the Labour Relations 
Board will have the ability to seize information or documents if 
it is relative to the case. Yesterday she said no. 
 
Does the minister realize the uncertainty she is causing amongst 
stakeholders in this province? When will the minister start 
being straight-up with all stakeholders? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well I would ask the member opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, if he realizes the confusion he is causing by 
cherry-picking out of quotes just the ones that suit his argument. 
Mr. Speaker, I clarified the statement yesterday in the paper, 
again this morning on the radio. And I will say again, this is 
interviews and inspection powers in the workplace where they 
are relevant to the case before the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this all 
gets back to the issue of proper consultation. Mr. Speaker, this 
minister did not consult with all stakeholders prior to last 
November when she introduced Bill 87 which isn’t surprising 
given the government’s track record. They said they consulted 
about the smoking ban, and later we find that they did not 
consult with the First Nations. They said they consulted on the 
new municipal Act that was introduced last fall, and then they 
had to scrap it and reintroduce it this spring after they had 
consulted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister today commit to actually 
consulting with all stakeholders and cleaning up the mess and 
confusion she has created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I met with the Saskatchewan Business Council on 
December 10. They were very clear in their comments on Bill 
86 and 87, Mr. Speaker. We have sent letters to the Chamber of 
Commerce of Saskatchewan, also the CFIB [Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business], and we have received 
written comments from both of those organizations and from 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. Mr. Speaker, we have 
also consulted and had discussions on the details of the 
legislation and the proposed amendments with the legal 
community with a cross-section of stakeholders in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I think what that really means is that the 
minister said there has been no consultation prior to last 
November with all stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the minister’s comments in May 
4, 2005, Hansard on page 2869 when the minister this: 
 

. . . also clarifying access to workplaces to gather 
information that may be relevant to the case[s] . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a point, a straightforward question to the 
minister — gathering information, does that mean that a Chair 
or a director or an individual appointed by the Labour Relations 
Board will have the power to take out the material that they 
believe relevant? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, having access to 
information may include taking a copy of that information to 
the board. It may also mean handwritten notes. It may mean 
taking a copy on a computer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is access to the information, and it is 
substantially different than seizure, despite the inaccuracy and 
not sticking to the facts that the opposition insists on doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let’s again quote 
from Hansard the minister’s words. The minister commented 
yesterday when I asked her about the ability to take out relevant 
material, this is what she said, quote: 
 

What I will say is, no, not any material, any . . . I mean 
that is pretty broad scope, broad scale. 

 
Mr. Speaker, she also said in Hansard the day before when 
asked about consultation, she said that the people from the 
business council, she had met with them, and this is her quote: 
 

. . . they were quite clear in their comments on this 
legislation . . . I understood quite clearly what they said. 

 
Mr. Minister, if that . . . Mr. Speaker, if that minister is in fact 
listening to the stakeholders, to the business people in this 
province and they have clearly told her that this Bill is flawed, 
will she agree — like the Minister of Municipal Affairs is — to 
remove this Bill from the order paper, consult with the 
stakeholders, and bring it back in a fashion that is acceptable to 
all stakeholders? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 



2880 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2005 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as a member of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, when we look at bringing 
forward any legislation, we take into consideration the views of 
all stakeholders right across the province. Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t take the views of one stakeholder group over another. We 
look at province-wide and how it will affect the province as a 
whole and what the needs are for the legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s what we’ll continue to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Geothermal Heating 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Environment minister said his government is always interested 
in hearing about good ideas like geothermal heating. However 
in a letter dated January 20, 2004, the same minister said, and I 
quote, “Earth energy systems cannot be supported/promoted in 
an unqualified manner.” So which is it, Mr. Speaker? The 
answer in the letter or the answer provided in the Assembly 
yesterday? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think if the member would check, yesterday I said something to 
the effect about what was unique or special to Saskatchewan’s 
circumstances. And I think that’s very important when we talk 
about geothermal because when you look at the whole energy 
chain, what’s happening in Manitoba, they have a good source 
of hydroelectricity. Our source of electricity here in 
Saskatchewan largely comes from coal. So we have to take 
things like that into account to what good ideas are appropriate 
here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this Assembly 
yesterday, the minister said this about a geothermal heating 
system, “ . . . we’ll be happy to examine this type of thing.” 
However a letter from the fall of 2003 from the office of the 
then-minister of the Environment stated, and I quote: 
 

Basically, Saskatchewan has very dirty electricity. As you 
can see, the case for ground source heat pumps in 
Saskatchewan is not very clear cut. 

 
Mr. Speaker, does this government actually support expansion 
of geothermal heating sources or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, what we 

support here in this province. We support the spirit of 
innovation and what fits for Saskatchewan people in our unique 
circumstances. And that’s very important. And that covers the 
whole range of situations whether it’s geothermal or solar 
energy or wind. Wind is one that we’re doing an awful lot of 
work with. And yesterday when the member spoke about 
energy conservation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I’m just finding it 
difficult . . . Order please. Thank you. Will the minister 
complete. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to 
emphasize how important this area is for us in Saskatchewan. 
The future of energy’s here in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister seems to 
talk a lot about being open to ideas and examining possibilities. 
However the record of action tells a different tale. Can he 
commit to this Assembly that he will instruct his officials to 
actively consider expansion of geothermal heating in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Well I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the tenacity around geothermal. Of course we’re very 
interested in all ideas. But I have to tell you, we’re doing some 
really innovative things here in Saskatchewan: working with 
RMs [rural municipality] through the Office of Energy 
Conservation, different projects like that. So I’d be happy to 
hear more what he has to say, and we can talk later. We want to 
talk about the whole big picture of energy here in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This minister says 
he’s looking into consumer rebates, then writes that these 
systems cannot be supported, promoted in an unqualified 
manner. He tells this Assembly that he’s happy to consider this 
sort of thing, but his department correspondence tells an 
entirely different story. Mr. Speaker, will consumers get a 
rebate or not? No one seems to know. 
 
Manitoba has programs to support geothermal heating. 
Saskatchewan does not. Mr. Speaker, shouldn’t the people of 
Saskatchewan get better standards of performance from a 
government claiming to promote a green and prosperous 
economy? Or is their support for the environment merely talk? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



May 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2881 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this is a subject I love to 
talk about. We have such a green and prosperous economy. It’s 
happening here in this province whether you’re talking about 
carbon capture down in Weyburn, cogeneration in the forest 
areas — we are really on the move — the centennial wind 
turbine projects out at Rush Lake. It goes on and on. This is an 
exciting province and we take a look at each project. Whether 
it’s a small or a megaproject we want to talk about those things. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. This is a place to be, 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Midwifery Legislation 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1999 this 
government introduced The Midwifery Act in the legislature. 
Today nearly six years later, this Act has yet to be proclaimed. 
Since then midwives has left Saskatchewan in droves. Mothers 
who do not want the birthing experience to be clinical and 
institutional continue to be disappointed with this government’s 
failure to proclaim the Act and regulate and fund midwifery. 
This is yet another example of this government talking the talk 
but failing to walk the walk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is this government going to stop seeing 
midwifery as a challenge and get in step with all other 
provinces west of Atlantic Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we support the practice of 
midwifery. And we continue to work with the partners in the 
health care system as to how to provide these services in a 
professional way using our professional legislation, but that also 
takes into account the many other health providers in this 
particular area. We have an opportunity to try and make some 
of these things work in a way that fits with what happens in 
Saskatchewan, and we’re going to be working with the 
midwives to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this government loves to see 
themselves as the birthplace of medicare, yet today midwifery 
is basically still an illegal activity in Saskatchewan. 
 
Yesterday the Alberta government announced that after recent 
studies showing that between 700 and $1,100 per delivery was 
saved, and the fact that outcomes from midwife-delivered 
babies were as good or better, the province will consider 
funding midwifery. In Ontario the savings are between 800 to 

$1,800 per birth. Clients spend less time in labour and in the 
hospital. They also have fewer Caesarean and labour 
inductions. There are fewer hospital readmissions for mothers 
and babies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan doesn’t have to reinvent the wheel. 
When will this government get on with the responsibility of 
providing families with the alternative of midwifery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
government has introduced a midwifery legislation, and we 
have been . . . and passed it. And we haven’t proclaimed it 
because we have a challenge around professional legislation 
because we have four or five midwives in Saskatchewan. And 
so what we are trying to do is see whether we can have the 
professional legislation administered together with Manitoba or 
other provinces so that we can have sufficient numbers to 
provide the professional licensure and monitoring. 
 
As well we’re looking at our primary care teams and how that 
works together with the obstetricians, GPs [general 
practitioner], nurse practitioners, and others to make sure that it 
fits with our overall health system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Provincial Registration of the Liberal Party 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to a story in today’s paper, the provincial Liberal 
party has violated the elections Act. The Liberals failed to file 
their annual financial statements by May 2. This is a 
contravention of the elections Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are strict laws governing financial disclosure 
of political donations, and the penalty for breaking these laws is 
deregistration of the political party. Mr. Speaker, I know that 
the Chief Electoral Officer is responsible for enforcing the 
elections Act, but the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, is 
responsible for the Act. In the minister’s opinion, should the 
Liberals be deregistered as a provincial party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
would know, as we do on this side of the House, that this is the 
responsibility of the Chief Electoral Officer. The members 
opposite should know that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that they 
do. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that he is an independent 
officer of the legislature, and it isn’t for us, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide the direction to the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
So I say to the members opposite that we have a process in 
Saskatchewan today. We know that that often doesn’t prescribe 



2882 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2005 

to the kind of method in which the Saskatchewan Conservative 
party would operate, Mr. Speaker. They would want 
intervention in that kind of an exercise, Mr. Speaker, directly. 
But when we have independent officers, we believe on this side 
of the House that we should allow them to do their work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We believe that 
people should obey the law. And when it comes . . . ultimately 
the minister over there, the Minister of Justice, is quite entitled 
to give his opinion, and that’s what we asked for. Mr. Speaker, 
a few years ago the Liberals, especially Mr. Osika — you 
know, Mr. Speaker, the one the member from Athabasca is just 
wishing to come back and join him as a seat mate — used to 
come into this Assembly and castigate other parties for failing 
to provide full disclosure of political donations. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the government changed the elections Act 
as a result. Now the Liberals are breaking that law that we set 
up at that time by failing to disclose their donations on time. 
Maybe, Mr. Speaker, they’re waiting for Justice Gomery to 
report. Mr. Speaker, when parties ignore these laws, you see the 
mess that we’re in from what’s happening in Ottawa today. 
Why should David Karwacki and the Liberals be allowed to 
violate the elections Act? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I find the question out of order 
in the fact that the question period is for members, private 
members, to ask questions of the executive branch about their 
duties. The question that has been posed is really out of the 
jurisdiction of any minister here. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this question is 
directed directly at the Justice minister. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Osika 
actually went one step further than that. He wanted the money 
seized from the New Democratic party and from the PC 
[Progressive Conservative] Party because he said donations 
weren’t properly being reported. Mr. Speaker, today the 
Liberals are violating that election Act not reporting properly 
their donations. Section 227 of The Election Act says that if a 
party violates financial disclosure laws . . . and it shall be 
deleted from the registry. And if a party is deleted from the 
registry, it must turn all its assets over to the Chief Electoral 
Officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Justice. Given 
the Liberals’ past statements on this issue, should they be 
handing over their assets to the Chief Electoral Officer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I find that question out of order. Is 
there another line of questioning? I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 

Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s official. Saskatchewan teachers ratified a contract 
giving them wage increases that are beyond the government’s 0, 
1, and 1 wage mandate. They deserve this. 
 
This government continues to say one thing, however, and do 
another. This morning the minister responsible for Public Sector 
Compensation said that the teachers’ 2, 2, and 2 contract is 
really 0, 1, and 1. Mr. Speaker, this just simply does not add up. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain her strange and 
convoluted math to this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, I want to congratulate the bargaining committees 
who were able to reach this agreement and the trustees and 
teachers of the province who ratified the agreement. I think it 
was a good and responsible job on behalf of those parties for 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly I would say that in many agreements, unions bring 
forward and employees bring forward situations that require 
one to look harder at the resources in a contract. Certainly in 
this particular contract we were looking at matters regarding 
classroom expenditures by teachers, the increased pressures in 
that workplace today, and certainly recruitment and retention 
issues. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this was a very fair contract. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that this negotiated contract indeed was very fair and 
appropriate to the teachers of this province. But clearly the 
teachers of this province aren’t buying the notion that this is a 0, 
1, and 1 contract and that they’re somehow being compensated 
for out-of-pocket expenses in the classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the teachers of this province negotiated a contract. 
In the information that was provided to them it said, and I 
quote, there would be: 
 

Terms of the agreement are from September 1, 2004 until 
August 31, 2007. [And there would be] A two per cent 
economic adjustment to reflect the relationship with CPI, 
in each of the three years of [this] . . . agreement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is not trying in some way to modify this 
agreement to suit this government’s phony mandate of 0, 1, and 
1. Teachers in this province want a legitimate contract that is 
properly placed on their grid and that they can count on this in 
terms of future negotiations. They didn’t negotiate to be 
compensated for buying a box of chalk, Mr. Speaker. They 
want a contract. Will this government acknowledge that this 
contract is 2, 2, and 2 and not anywhere near the 0, 1, and 1? 
 



May 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2883 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of CRE 
[Community Resources and Employment]. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, in responding to 
the bargaining table, we recognize the recruitment and retention 
issues, principals’ allowances, and in fact the very substantial 
pressures on teachers financially in the classroom today. And I 
would have to say that teachers voted for it, Mr. Speaker, and I 
believe they know what it means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Provincial Registration of the Liberal Party 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 
Justice: some time ago we passed a Bill in this House, presented 
to this House by the Minister of Justice, put the Bill forward. It 
was Bill with a section 227. My question is, is he prepared to 
enforce the Bill that was passed by this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation that comes 
forward is determined, Mr. Speaker, after consultation with all 
of the parties. When all the parties reach an agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a decision about who it is, Mr. Speaker, who 
will serve as the Chief Electoral Officer in this province. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition should know this, that the 
individual today who serves the people of Saskatchewan in the 
areas of determining issues of this nature is decided, Mr. 
Speaker, as an independent officer of this legislature. 
 
And if there is confusion, Mr. Speaker, today at all, the 
confusion is, Mr. Speaker, about which party is it today in 
Saskatchewan today that is the real Conservative Party, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the question that we need to address, Mr. 
Speaker, in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because we have, Mr. 
Speaker, today, we have today the results, Mr. Speaker, of two 
parties, Mr. Speaker. You’ve got one party, Mr. Speaker, that 
has absolutely no members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Highways 
and Transportation. 
 

Digital Cellular Expansion by SaskTel Mobility 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
brings me great pleasure today to announce the latest phase of 
digital cellular expansion by SaskTel Mobility. 
 
SaskTel Mobility will be investing another 3.7 million . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order please, members. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel 
Mobility will be investing another $3.7 million to expand and 
improve cellular coverage at 14 locations throughout 
Saskatchewan; including the previously unserved areas of 
Dorintosh and Orkney. 
 
In addition, improvements are planned at 12 existing locations 
including Allan, Bienfait, Bredenbury, Caronport, Chaplin, 
Dubuc, Duck Lake, Elstow, Maymont, Meath Park, Vanscoy, 
and Yellow Grass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s announcement is phase 2 of the $28 
million investment announced earlier this year. This brings the 
total investment by SaskTel Mobility in digital cellular in 2005 
alone . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask that if members have 
communications they want to make, they could perhaps make 
arrangements to meet behind the bar. But allow the statements to 
be made; allow the responses to come forward. Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And they can 
access new communications at 14 different locations, Mr. 
Speaker. This brings the total investment by SaskTel Mobility in 
digital cellular in 2005 alone to $9 million. SaskTel Mobility’s 
total investment in digital cellular service since 1998 now reaches 
$120 million. This is indeed further proof that SaskTel Mobility 
understands that reliable coverage is critical for many customers. 
 
SaskTel Mobility will continue to announce further locations for 
cellular investment throughout 2006. The focus will be on 
providing cellular service to areas where there currently isn’t any 
cellular service and on improving service where there are coverage 
gaps. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in late 2005, SaskTel will be launching 
push-to-talk functionality over the digital network. This will allow 
customers to use their cellular phone much like a walkie-talkie. 
Future cellular expansion will also support FleetNet 800 
customers as they consider migrating to the new cellular 
push-to-talk service. 
 
I also want to once again assure emergency service providers in 
this province that SaskTel Mobility is committed to doing its best 
to support the existing FleetNet 800 service until a viable 
solution is in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s announcement is another reminder that 
SaskTel Mobility is listening to the needs of people across this 
province and responding with ongoing improvements to what is 
already the largest cellular footprint in this province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to rise 



2884 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2005 

and respond to the Minister for SaskTel’s statement today. And 
just a few brief remarks, Mr. Speaker. I want to again from the 
official opposition send congratulations to the good, 
hard-working folks at SaskTel for their excellent level of 
service that they provide to the residents of Saskatchewan. And 
to also say that we are indeed proud that SaskTel is on the 
cutting edge of technology and has been for some time, and we 
consider that to continue for a long time into the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just a couple of concerns though that I do see out of the 
minister’s statement. And they really come from the statement 
today, but also as a part of the recently released annual report 
for SaskTel. And my concern is that when you look at the $3 
million or the $3.7 million that’s announced today and the $9 
million that SaskTel Mobility is investing in the year 2005, one 
has to obviously draw comparisons to that $9 million and how 
much easier that would have been to come up with that $9 
million had we not wasted $26 million on out-of-province 
investments such as Retx or $60 million on failed projects that 
are failing such as Navigata in British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one wonders where we could be if this 
government wasn’t handcuffing one of our major Crown 
corporations, that being SaskTel. We also talked about . . . You 
know, I look at things like the equity stripping that goes on 
within SaskTel, within the Crown corporations, and it’s a credit 
to the people, a real credit to the good folks at SaskTel for being 
able to continue, being able to expand their business and their 
services to Saskatchewan residents in spite of — in spite of, Mr. 
Speaker — the fact that they’re being handcuffed by this 
government. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one more thing of 
concern about the minister’s statement. In question period the 
last few weeks and also a couple of weeks ago, the opposition 
had a motion that talked about the FleetNet 800 system and 
what it would be replaced by. We were assured by the minister 
and also other members of the government that the FleetNet 
system would not be replaced by a push-to-talk system at least 
and until there was wide consultation with all the stakeholders 
in the province. And from the minister’s just few words today, I 
get the feeling that perhaps the government is moving away 
from that commitment. And I hope that’s not the case, and 
certainly will be . . . It’s our job as the opposition to make sure 
and ensure that those consultations take place. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d offer the opposition’s support in those 
consultations and we look forward to those happening. 
 
Again in finality, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 
congratulations to SaskTel, and we look forward to continued 
expansion of the mobility system within the province. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 125 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
125, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill 125, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf the government and 
table responses to written questions 1,063 through 1,093 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,063 through to 
1,093 have been submitted. 
 
Why is the member from Batoche on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Batoche requests leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was with great 
pleasure that today I would like to introduce in your gallery, 
seated with my wife, it’s not her younger sister, it’s my 
mother-in-law. So please welcome them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work 



May 5, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2885 

of the Crown and Central Agencies Committee and the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure Committee, I 
move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion has been carried. This House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2873 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2873 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2873 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2873 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2873 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2873 
 Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi de mise en oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection internationale des adultes 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2874 
 Bill No. 101 — The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements étrangers 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2874 
 Bill No. 103 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2875 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2875 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2875 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2875 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2875 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2876 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2876 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2876 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2884 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Holocaust Memorial Day 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2876 
 Saskatchewan Party’s Nomination for Swift Current Constituency 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2876 
 Grateful Expressions to Canadians for the Liberation of the Netherlands 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2877 
 University of Saskatchewan Football Team Hosts Dogs’ Breakfast 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2877 
 International Day of the Midwife 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2878 
 Saskatchewan Groups Join In Motion 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2878 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Labour Legislation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2878 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2878 
 Geothermal Heating 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2880 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2880 
 Midwifery Legislation 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2881 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2881 
 Provincial Registration of the Liberal Party 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................2881, 2883 
  Serby ..............................................................................................................................................................................2881, 2883 
 Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2882 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2882 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Digital Cellular Expansion by SaskTel Mobility 
  Sonntag................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2883 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2883 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 125 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2884 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2884 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2884 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




