















































Hansard: March 21, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 77A  MONDAY, MARCH 21, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2139 
 March 21, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to present 
a petition regarding a new hospital in Humboldt. And I read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Humboldt and Quill Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After numerous 
promises, the people of Humboldt are anxious for their hospital. 
The prayer reads as follows on this petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the 
community of Humboldt, as well as Archerwill and Muenster. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 

And these signatures, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities 
of Lanigan, Muenster, and Bruno and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
petitioners from the Humboldt constituency concerned about 
the need for a new hospital in Humboldt. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital. 
 

And the petitioners today are from Humboldt and Englefeld. 
 
I’ll also table a petition with respect to group home spaces in 
Swift Current. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of the people from the Humboldt area who are asking 
that the government look at their hospital: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the necessary 
funding for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Humboldt, 
Englefeld, and Naicam. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from signatures here in the province of Saskatchewan. These 
are from people who are concerned that forced amalgamation 
will not achieve any cost savings and therefore will not result in 
any reduction of property tax. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to rescind its decision to force school 
boards to amalgamate. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
community of Dinsmore, and I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with this government’s 
lack of commitment to the Humboldt hospital. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2005 

the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Humboldt and Muenster. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the hospital in Humboldt and a 
petition by the citizens of Humboldt area. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and to provide funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Watson. 
 
And at the same time I also have a petition I’d like to present 
regarding the brick plant in Claybank. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those people concerned 
about the lack of commitment from this government regarding a 
new hospital in Humboldt. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the necessary 
funding for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Humboldt. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 
rise today with my colleagues in asking the government to keep 
their commitment in regard to the construction of the new 
hospital in Humboldt. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 

The people signing this petition are from the area, certainly in 
my constituency, from the community of Watson. I’m pleased 

to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — And the Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition with people in Humboldt and surrounding 
community who are waiting for the long promised funding for 
the new hospital. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 

And the signatories, Mr. Speaker, are from Lanigan, LeRoy, 
Humboldt, Quill Lake, and Englefeld. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens living in the area of 
Humboldt who are asking the government to honour their 
commitment to a new hospital. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of St. Gregor, Humboldt, 
Bruno, and Englefeld. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people of the fine 
constituency of Humboldt. It’s a petition for a new hospital in 
Humboldt. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
The signatures for the petition are from residents of Pilger, 
Benson, Fulda, and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also am 
pleased to rise on behalf of the citizens of the Humboldt area 
that are petitioning for a new hospital. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 



March 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens of Humboldt, 
Muenster, and Carmel. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of citizens from the Humboldt area who are asking the 
government to live up to a commitment to provide funding for a 
hospital. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by the citizens of Quill Lake, Muenster, 
Naicam, Lanigan, Guernsey, Humboldt, and Annaheim, Mr. 
Speaker. Not the Anaheim in California but the Annaheim in 
the Humboldt area. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise today on behalf of the 
citizens in Humboldt and area, and actually extending as close 
to Saskatoon which is adjacent to my own constituency. I will 
read the prayer. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 
Humboldt, Muenster, and Lanigan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with a 
petition for a new hospital in the Humboldt area. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Humboldt, 
Wakaw, and Watson. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition to present on behalf of citizens who are looking for a 
new hospital in the community of Humboldt. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the necessary 
funding for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Muenster and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to offer a 
petition on behalf of the Humboldt hospital, which the Batoche 
constituency, the southern half, would be using this hospital. So 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And it is signed by the good people of Humboldt, Fulda, and 
Burr. Thank you. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning a new hospital in Humboldt; that’s 
sessional paper no. 718. 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 180, 637, 640, and 715. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 82 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: what is the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment’s policy and procedures for 
following up on a complaint made by a child against a 
parent whom the child is living with? 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2005 

Second question: 
 

Is it common practice for the department to place a child 
with a person who was involved in filing the complaint 
against the child’s parent and, if not, what is the common 
practice for placing a child in foster care? 

 
And: 
 

When a child is placed in foster care and the department 
then learns that the child has become suicidal, what step 
does the department take to ensure the child’s safety? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members, today I have the honour of 
introducing to you some special people who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They’ve gathered here today to participate in a 
tea and to honour Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen upon the 
completion of her appointment as Children’s Advocate for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Seated in the front row of the Speaker’s gallery, first of all, our 
Children’s Advocate for the province of Saskatchewan, Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen. I wonder if you could indicate . . . Thank 
you. Deborah’s husband, Rob Loewen; Deborah’s father from 
British Columbia, Ed Parker; Deborah’s sister, Lin Gallagher; and 
Deborah’s parents-in-law, Jake and Marie Loewen, are here as 
well. 
 
And seated directly behind her are other family, friends, and 
Children’s Advocate staff. In addition to these guests, we also have 
some of the legislative officers of the Assembly, independent 
officers of the Assembly, here to join with us to honour Deborah 
Parker-Loewen — and I would ask them to indicate as well — the 
Chief Commissioner for the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission, Donna Scott; Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Mr. Gary Dickson; the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 
Fred Wendel; Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Jean Ouellet; Provincial 
Ombudsman, Mr. Kevin Fenwick. 
 
Would members please join me in extending a warm Assembly 
welcome to Deborah Parker-Loewen and to all of the guests that 
have gathered in her honour here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government — I 
expect the Leader of the Opposition may want to do the same — I 
would also want to recognize in your gallery the presence of Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen, our Child Advocate. I know that we are 
setting some time aside later this afternoon to formally recognize 
her pioneering work over 10 years. But here in the context of 
the Assembly, I want to welcome her to this Assembly, perhaps 
for the last time in her capacity as our Children’s Advocate, but 
I hope certainly not the last time over the years to come. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure on behalf 
of members of the official opposition to also recognize Dr. 
Parker-Loewen here today and to congratulate her on whatever 
is coming next in her life and to thank her for 10 years of 
service to the people of the province and to the children of 
Saskatchewan. We also want to acknowledge and thank Rob for 
sharing her with the children of the province and with the 
Legislative Assembly and many of us will look forward to the 
opportunity to say hello more informally a little bit later on. 
 
Thank you for your service to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, I’d like to join 
the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming Ms. 
Parker-Loewen. And certainly I’ve had opportunity to work 
with Ms. Loewen over the last number of years. We have 
agreed to disagree on one topic — we won’t mention that — to 
spank or not to spank; I think that’s what it was. 
 
Regardless, Mr. Speaker, a number of guests have joined us in 
the gallery and last summer I had the pleasure of joining 
together with Muriel Parker and a number of her family 
members, and Muriel is here with us today. And it was 
interesting, as I drove into the yard, Ms. Parker-Loewen and her 
family drove in and, you know, for some reason I never drew 
the connection. But we celebrated that special day, the 
centenary farm family award for the Parker family. 
 
And I want to congratulate the Parker family, and welcome 
Muriel. As well we have Garry Parker with us, Wesley Parker, 
Irene Regier, Heather Berlin, and Rosa Parker. Welcome to 
each and every one of you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the House a very talented group of 
13- and 14-year-old baseball players from Moose Jaw. 
 
These young athletes earned the right to represent their city, the 
province, and the country at the Junior Division World Little 
League Championships in Taylor, Michigan last summer. The 
Moose Jaw Little League Junior Division All-Stars won the 
provincial title, then the westerns, to advance to the national 
championships in Coquitlam, BC [British Columbia]. There 
they played a very thrilling final to win the Canadian title and 
the opportunity to compete against some of the best teams in the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce each of the players: Adam 
Baer, Dustin Caplette-Tarrant, Jordan Colquhoun, Julio 



March 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

Colquhoun, Jon Cotter, Justin Gibney, Dillon Hauck, Boyd 
Holland, Mike Holland, Joel Kot, Regan Kuzek, David Slack, 
Bryce Warner, and, Mr. Speaker, the head coach Kevin 
Meacher, and the assistant coaches, Mark Gould and Cody 
Murdock, and the manager, Al Cotter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this team is the only Saskatchewan Little League 
team to ever win a game at the world series at any age level. 
And at 20 years old, the youngest coaches in the tournament 
were there, but also set a record: they were the youngest to ever 
coach a Little League World Series game. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
hear that when they went to the coaches’ briefing before the 
tournament started, these three young men were actually asked 
to leave because they thought they were ballplayers just kind of 
putting on a bit of a prank, that they weren’t actually the 
coaches. But they’re three very fine young men. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these all-stars represented their country and city 
with class and honour, and made us all very proud. It takes hard 
work and dedication and skill to compete at this level, and each 
Moose Jaw player did his part to earn the team a spot at the 
Junior World Series. Mr. Speaker, the Junior All-Stars instilled 
enthusiasm in the people back home as sports fans, parents, and 
friends rallied behind these players. 
 
And I’m sure my colleagues will join me in recognizing the 
Moose Jaw Little League All-Stars’ achievements; the three 
coaches and their manager Al Cotter for their leadership; and all 
the volunteers and parents for their undying support which 
wouldn’t have been possible without that. Congratulations to 
the Canadian Junior Little League national champions, the 
Moose Jaw All-Stars — and best of luck. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow in recognizing 
and congratulating the Moose Jaw Little League All-Stars and 
their families — many of whom are in attendance today — for a 
truly remarkable run that included a provincial championship, 
national championship, and the opportunity to participate in the 
world championship in Michigan last summer. The 
achievement and ability of this team to play together and to 
overcome obstacles is a great Saskatchewan story, Mr. Speaker. 
They are a great example of the determination that makes 
Saskatchewan people special, particularly Saskatchewan 
athletes. 
 
I’d like to recognize all of the players and their coaches, Kevin 
Meacher, Mark Gould, Cody Murdock, and manager Al Cotter, 
for proudly representing Saskatchewan on the national and 
international stage and demonstrating that Saskatchewan’s 
young athletes are world-class. And best of luck to all of you in 
the future. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations, the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, members of the advisory 
committee on Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations, who I met with 
earlier this morning and who are with us today sitting in your 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps you could signal to our guests to wave 
when I mention their names. The Chair of the advisory 
committee on Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations, Christine 
Devrome; Vice-Chair, Gerald Luciuk; committee members, 
Paul Ortynsky, Tony Harras, Nadia Prokopchuk; and secretary 
to the committee, Danylo Puderak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, welcome 
these people to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join with the minister in welcoming the six 
individuals just introduced in the gallery, the advisory 
committee for Saskatchewan-Ukrainian relations. 
 
I want to specially introduce a constituent of mine, Mr. Paul 
Ortynsky. Paul is a former mayor of the town of Canora and is a 
very active individual in my community and in my 
constituency. 
 
I also want to pass, not to mention all of the six names, but I 
also want to extend a welcome to Gerry Luciuk. Gerry and I 
spent a little bit of time together back in university just a short 
while ago. 
 
So I want to join with the minister in welcoming all the 
members to their Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As usual, my light 
didn’t go off quite as quickly as I’d wished it had . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . a nice easy one for the opposite members. 
 
I would just like to also recognize Christine Devrome. She’s a 
constituent of mine. She was a very proud participant in 
supervising the elections in Ukraine and I know that was 
something that was very powerful for her. 
 
She’s also a very talented artist and we’re very proud to see the 
work that she’s displayed. And also, she’s the mother of my 
dentist. So would you please welcome Christine Devrome here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Regina Elphinstone. 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2005 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, two individuals seated in the western gallery. They 
hail from the fine province of Alberta, from Burnstick Lake 
which of course is down the road from Caroline. They are 
Georgina Woodward-Fay and Darrell Fay. If you could just 
stand up there for us; give a little wave. 
 
They’re presently honeymooning in the fine province of 
Saskatchewan. They were out to Moose Jaw, good reports from 
Moose Jaw. They went to the spa, to the tunnels. They’ve been 
to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Museum. And 
now they’re capping things off at the legislature. 
 
But in particular, why they’re coming to Saskatchewan was 
Saturday night out on Okanese First Nation they were in 
attendance for the graduation of the wellness team out there. 
And certainly both individuals are active in the field of 
addictions. But Georgina in particular spent six weeks with the 
people of Okanese, and they think she’s fantastic. And they did 
a lot of great work out there, Mr. Speaker. So please welcome 
them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on March 21, 1960, a group of demonstrators gathered 
in the town of Sharpeville, South Africa to protest the so-called 
pass law that restricted their freedom of movement under the 
apartheid regime of that time. The demonstrators were neither 
violent nor threatening, and yet police opened fire on the crowd. 
Sixty-nine people were killed and 180 wounded. Among the 
victims were many women and children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to remember the Sharpeville massacre and what 
should be learned from it, the United Nations proclaimed March 
21 as International Day for the Elimination of Racism. Canada 
was one of the first nations to support this proclamation. And 
now 45 years later, we continue to dedicate March 21 to all past 
and present victims of racism, prejudice, discrimination, and 
intolerance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, racism in many of its forms is still a tragic reality 
in societies around the world, including our own. But we do 
know that as racism grows out of ignorance and fear, that it can 
be dispelled through education and understanding. 
 
To that end, let us continue to work together here in 
Saskatchewan to eliminate racism, celebrate diversity, and 
make social justice and equality a reality for all people. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Day of Mourning for Missing Aboriginal Women 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and a 
privilege to rise in the Assembly as we join people around the 
world in celebrating today, the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
Six years after the 1960 Sharpeville massacre in South Africa, 
the United Nations declared March 21 as the International Day 
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Today we 
commemorate the 69 demonstrators, including 8 women and 10 
children who were killed when 7,000 anti-apartheid 
demonstrators assembled to march to Sharpeville police station 
in South Africa. That demonstration marked the beginning of 
the end for that country’s apartheid regime. 
 
In Saskatchewan we know there is much work to do to end 
racial discrimination and enhance appreciation for the cultural 
diversity of our province. One of the organizations in this 
province making a difference on this issue is Speaking for Our 
Silent Sisters. This North Battleford’s women’s organization 
has declared March 21 a day of mourning to recognize the more 
than 500 Aboriginal women who have gone missing in Canada 
in the last 20 years. 
 
This year they’re organizing a candlelight walk to promote 
awareness of violence against women, especially First Nations 
and Métis women. We congratulate them, all community-based 
organizations and individuals that are leading the fight against 
racism in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city of 
North Battleford mayor, Julian Sadlowski, has proclaimed 
today a day of mourning in recognition of the more than 500 
Aboriginal women who have gone missing from their 
communities across Canada during the last 20 years. 
 
March 21 was proclaimed day of mourning to coincide with a 
candlelight march planned for the local community 
organization, Speaking for Our Silent Sisters, to honour the 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
The candlelight march will be held in North Battleford, from 
the library to the Chapel Gallery, tonight. 
 
Speaking for Our Silent Sisters is a newly formed committee of 
many proactive, local organizations who have come together to 
heighten the awareness of the safety and well-being of First 
Nations and Métis women to reclaim their rightful place in 
society. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has joined the First Nations 
leaders of this province in proclaiming 2005 the Year of the 
First Nations and Métis Women. I would like to extend my 
sincere respect and appreciation for the Speaking for Our Silent 
Sisters committee for coming together to celebrate Aboriginal 



March 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

women and to educate our community on the barriers of 
discrimination and violence that are regrettably still imposed on 
First Nations and Métis women of Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
I ask all members of this House to join me in honouring these 
women of Saskatchewan, and I thank all members of the 
Speaking for Our Silent Sisters committee and the city of North 
Battleford for having the courage to bring this appalling reality 
of violence against First Nations and Métis women of all our 
communities to the forefront for discussion, reflection, 
education, and action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Regina Bull Sale Celebrates 100 Years 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A congratulations to 
the Regina bull sale on 100 years of service to the cattle 
industry. Yesterday there was an official ceremony including 
dignitaries, past presidents, and many of the families that have 
contributed over the years. 
 
The Regina bull sale has always been an event in my life and 
for that of my family. I recall growing up in the country north 
of Pense several years ago, Mr. Speaker, when the municipal 
roads weren’t as good as they are today and it seemed that the 
winters in those years, there was a lot more snow and the road 
was blocked. But the Regina bull sale was such an important 
event that the municipality would open all the major roads so 
that producers could attend that sale, and that would sometimes 
be the first time we’d get out by motor vehicle for more than 
two months. 
 
The sale has dropped since then from a maximum of 1,000 bulls 
to about 200 this year because of the advent of Internet 
marketing, the tendency for larger producers to hold their own 
sales, as well as the cost to fit and show cattle, sometimes 
hundreds of miles from home, in these difficult times. 
 
Many more years of service to the cattle industry to the Regina 
bull sale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 

Swift Current Student Wins Divisional Spelling Bee 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great pride that 
I rise today to congratulate and honour one of my young 
constituents. Thirteen-year-old Kaleb Adam won the southern 
Saskatchewan division of the CanWest CanSpell competition 
on Saturday. He was competing against 30 other students, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Kaleb is in grade 8 and attends Fairview Middle School in Swift 
Current. It’s a great school; our oldest daughter goes there. And 

he correctly spelled the word orthodox. And when he did that at 
the end of the competition — it was his last word — he took the 
top prize and will now go on to compete in spelling 
competitions in Ottawa and in Washington, DC (District of 
Columbia). The top prize in the Ottawa competition is $10,000 
in an education award, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s inspiring to see a young person like Kaleb understand the 
importance of words and of literacy. I wish him the very best of 
luck and hope that he will be bringing back the grand prize to 
Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, additionally I heard it promoted today on the 
famous morning show in Swift Current, on The Eagle 94, that a 
couple of the personalities on that morning show have 
challenged Kaleb to an on-air spelling bee sometime this week. 
People in Swift Current and others from across the province 
will want to tune in. And Kim Johnston and John Keene of The 
Eagle morning show are bright young men in Swift Current, but 
the smart money’s on Kaleb. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Okanese First Nation Community Healing Project 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday evening 
the Premier and I attended the graduation ceremony for the 
Okanese First Nation community healing project, a health and 
wellness initiative done in conjunction with the Nechi healing 
institute and with various partners. Also in attendance were 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) Grand Chief 
Alphonse Bird and Vice-chief Morley Watson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 12 people received diplomas, star blankets, and a 
sacred eagle feather apiece to mark their graduation as members 
of the first Okanese wellness core team. The celebration marked 
their graduation from a year-long intensive course and their 
certification as counsellors in a variety of areas including 
addictions, family violence, and critical incident stress 
management. Mr. Speaker, this core group of trained 
counsellors will now work with others from within the 
community, take them through a similar program, and they will 
in turn become trained counsellors to work for the healing of 
their community. 
 
During the evening, the Premier also presented Chief 
Marie-Anne Day Walker-Pelletier with the Saskatchewan 
Centennial Medal. Mr. Speaker, Chief Day Walker-Pelletier has 
been a chief of Okanese First Nation since 1981. She has 
demonstrated outstanding leadership and has always 
emphasized the importance of education. It’s not surprising that 
she was instrumental in bringing about the wellness program. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Chief 
Marie-Anne Day Walker-Pelletier, the council for Okanese and 
the people of Okanese First Nation, and of course the graduates 
of the community healing project, and to wish them well on 
working together, healing together. Kamamawih-atoskeyak, 
Kamamawih-miwayayakk. Thank you. 
 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Recognition of Learning Disability Month 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
March is Learning Disability Month across Canada. On behalf 
of the official opposition, I would like to acknowledge the 
thousands of people across Saskatchewan who face the 
challenge of a learning disability and whose daily efforts to 
overcome these challenges are an inspiration to us all. 
 
Learning disabilities can affect anyone from the very young to 
senior citizens and is a serious problem in our society where 
learning is from the cradle to the grave. These disabilities can 
range from minor inconveniences to very serious physical and 
psychological conditions. Our duty as a society is to provide 
recognition, acceptance, and assistance to aid in overcoming 
these life challenges. 
 
As we know from experience in our schools, learning 
disabilities like ADD [attention deficit disorder], dyslexia, or 
FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder], are often the root of 
behavioural problems that underlie the problems children and 
youth face in the classroom. We also know that with 
recognition and treatment, these same kids have an opportunity 
to go from being problems in the classroom to high achievers. 
 
As we recognize Learning Disability Month across Canada, we 
need to commit to providing solutions which aid those 
challenged, and need to recognize the important contribution of 
health care workers, care providers, and educators who assist 
persons with learning disabilities and their families. I would 
encourage the provincial government to make a concerted effort 
to assist those with learning disabilities, especially children and 
youth in the education system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Budget Commitments Regarding the Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, this 
is budget week in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
Saskatchewan families have some tough questions for this 
government in advance of the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year was the budget of broken promises. The 
election before that budget, the NDP [New Democratic Party], 
the Premier of the province, the Leader of the NDP, had 
campaigned on lower taxes for Saskatchewan families, but that 
budget brought in a PST [provincial sales tax] increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question today is to the Premier. Can he 
inform this Assembly and Saskatchewan families if he will now 
keep his commitment to lower taxes? Are they prepared to 
address the increase in the PST from last year’s budget? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I want to thank the member 
for the question, Mr. Speaker. The member will know that 
during the course of the last year the government committed to 
ensuring that Saskatchewan families would have the lowest cost 
utility bundle in all of Canada, and the government delivered on 
that promise. 
 
The government also at mid-year made the commitment that we 
would be setting aside funds for property tax relief for the next 
two years, and we intend to honour that commitment, Mr. 
Speaker. So if the member is looking for relief for families in 
Saskatchewan, I can assure the member that relief will be there. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that Minister of Finance and this 
Premier justified last year’s tax grab by saying the times were 
tough, that the cupboard was bare. Well we know that’s not the 
case any longer, Mr. Speaker. We know that from the third 
quarter report last year. Nothing has changed since then. 
Arguably the position of the government in terms of finances 
has gotten even better as the price of oil has stayed above $50 a 
barrel. 
 
So the Minister of Finance, the Premier asked Saskatchewan 
families to help them deal with what they termed as a 
challenging situation. That situation has been alleviated. Can 
the minister simply tell this Assembly whether or not the NDP 
will be able to keep their promise for lower taxes. Will they 
address the PST increase from last year’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 
the member bringing us up to date as to what’s in our third 
quarter report. And the member is quite correct that we did have 
a very good year last year. But as to what will be in this specific 
budget and what the assumptions are, whether it’s respect to oil 
or heavy oil or the exchange rate, those are the things we’ll 
have to wait for until the budget itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a simple proposition, really, in 
our province. When times are bad, when times are difficult, 
people understand that they need to make sacrifices. That’s the 
kind of spirit we’ve seen in Saskatchewan for the last 100 years. 
 
But there is an expectation then, Mr. Speaker, that when times 
are improved, especially the fiscal state of the province, when 



March 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

it’s improved, and it has improved significantly thanks to the 
high price, thanks to the high price of oil and natural gas . . . 
The government asked those people to sacrifice. Even though 
they promised lower taxes, they increased taxes and said 
everyone needed to sacrifice. Will they now commit to the 
people of the province that they will also share in the gain? Will 
this government address its tax increase, $140 million worth in 
the last budget on the PST? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve noted over the 
years that — to go back to what the member is saying — that 
for members in the opposition, everything is a simple 
proposition because the opposition members, Mr. Speaker, 
never really have to make any choices, never really have to 
make any decisions. For them, everything is possible. 
 
I would just wonder, Mr. Speaker, did the Leader of the 
Opposition have the opportunity this last weekend to go to the 
theatre? I wasn’t; I was prepping for the budget. But maybe he 
was at the theatres. Maybe he saw this movie starring a Mr. Ice 
Cube called Are We There Yet? Well we’re not there yet. We’ve 
got two more sleeps, and then the member will see what is in 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance talks 
about the choices that are important to . . . that the government 
must make, that opposition must make. Here’s a choice, Mr. 
Speaker, that the government could make: this government, this 
NDP government, that Minister of Finance and that Premier 
could choose to keep their promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They campaigned during the last election across this province 
saying apparently absolutely anything that came to mind in 
order to get elected. They promised lower taxes, and in their 
first budget after that election, Mr. Speaker, what does this 
Premier do? He increases the PST. He increased the PST by a 
point and 140-plus million dollars. 
 
The question to the Premier is, is that the kind of choice we 
could expect him to make, that he would break promises he 
made in the campaign? Or will this budget keep the promise 
that he made to keep taxes low? Will they address the PST in 
the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, during the course of 
the last election the government party made a number of 
commitments to the people of Saskatchewan with respect to a 
green and prosperous economy, making sure that we had the 
best quality public health care system in Saskatchewan, to 
create a future here for our young people, and to make sure that 
Saskatchewan families have an affordable climate for their 
homes, Mr. Speaker. 

And I can tell you that with respect to the commitments that we 
have made, we have acted on many of these commitments. 
Have we done all of them? Not yet. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
midway through a four-year term, just about mid-way through. 
Give us time. We will deliver on all of those commitments, Mr. 
Speaker. People will say promises made, promises kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across 
Saskatchewan, today and tomorrow, teachers are conducting a 
sanction vote which could result in strike action. They’re tired 
of being undervalued. They’re tired of the minister of Education 
calling on them to hold the line on salaries. And they’re tired of 
being blamed for high education costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister of Education: when is he, his 
government, going to abandon their 0, 1, 1 wage guideline and 
get back to the bargaining table and start treating teachers with 
the respect that they deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that one of the biggest challenges that we 
have in dealing with public sector negotiations — whether it’s 
with the teachers, with nurses, with others throughout our . . . 
who provide front-line public services — is trying to find a way 
that reflects within the wage grids the value that we obviously 
place on the services they provide, at the same time making 
sure that we can balance off the interest that taxpayers have 
raised. 
 
Today in this House the members have raised, in their first set 
of questions, a number of the pressures that taxpayers have 
brought to us about high property taxes. Now the member’s 
arguing, as I appreciate opposition members want to do, that we 
need to continue to increase the costs and the spending that we 
have in order to provide better public services. 
 
Our challenge, our challenge is to try and balance these 
competing interests. And indeed I am interested in us finding a 
negotiated settlement with the teachers as soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, teachers made it clear right 
from the beginning of negotiations that they were not accepting 
a contract that was dictated to them by the provincial 
government. They made sacrifices in the ’90s when times were 
tough. They were told last year that times were tough and there 
needed to be a mandate. And now this government has run into 
a windfall of riches, and they are saying that the same 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2005 

conditions apply for teachers as did before that. Mr. Speaker, 
teachers understand that when you tell them that they’re going 
to be held to a zero mandate, it means you have zero value for 
the work you do. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Murray Wall has said that 
collective bargaining is just that: it’s bargaining. It’s not a 
mandate. My question to the minister is this: teachers are ready 
to bargain seriously and openly. Is the minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister the 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well very simply, Mr. Speaker, the 
answer is obviously yes. But let me also say this to the member 
in reference to his comments. We need to understand that when 
we talk about where we are at in collective negotiations, 
collective bargaining discussions, that the resources that have 
been available to every other group of public sector workers — 
child protection workers, social workers, and others — those 
same resources, those same values are available at the teachers’ 
table as are the specific resources that we need to achieve an 
agreement to deal with the situation with the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]. That has been our 
approach in each and every table and will continue to be such in 
our discussions with the STF. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I suspect today and tomorrow 
teachers across this province are going to voice their concerns 
with the direction and the mandate that this minister of 
Education has laid on the table. Mr. Speaker, they’re going to 
speak very loudly about the determination . . . resolve they have 
to be treated with respect and dignity and fairness around the 
bargaining table. Mr. Speaker, we are going to lose trained 
professional people in this province if this minister thinks he 
can insist on a 0, 1, and 1 mandate when in neighbouring 
provinces settlements are happening much larger than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this minister admit that in order to respect the 
value of teachers in this province, he has to open up the 
negotiations and open in a fair and open way with the teachers 
of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that we 
will reach a negotiated settlement with the teachers. This next 
couple of days, I too agree with the member that we will see a 
very large number. I suspect more than 95 per cent of teachers 
will vote for some kind of sanction in order to press home their 
point that they want and deserve higher wages. Our challenge is 
to balance out those competing demands in a way that makes 
sure that we can also meet the requests the Leader of the 
Opposition has raised today, to keep taxes down. 
 
This is not a complicated formula, but it is a very challenging 
issue for us to resolve. I can assure members of this House that 
we are interested in a negotiated settlement. I can assure 

members of this House that we will make sure not only the 
same resources that have been available at every other table that 
we’ve negotiated with, but the specific resources that we need 
to resolve the STF situation will be made available, and in due 
course we will have a collective agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Revenue-Sharing Agreement for Municipalities 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
local property taxpayers are getting hosed in this province. 
Regina says it needs 4 per cent increase to maintain current 
services. Saskatoon needs a 7 per cent increase. The mayor of 
Regina says the only way to fix it is to provide more revenue 
sharing to local governments. Idea no. 70 of the Saskatchewan 
Party’s 100 ideas addresses this very issue. 
 
My question is very simple. To the Minister of Government 
Relations: when is he going to stop the downloading and start 
negotiating a realistic revenue-sharing agreement with local 
governments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I appreciate the question that’s being raised here. 
 
I can say to the member opposite and to all municipalities 
across Saskatchewan that the co-operative and collaborative 
approach that we began with them a number of years ago, and 
has continued through my appointment last year to resolve 
municipal issues in the interests of all provincial citizens, will 
continue. That collaborative and consultative approach has 
come to a municipal forum, a table in which urban and rural 
governments and Government Relations sit down. 
 
We agreed, Mr. Speaker, three weeks ago to discuss together a 
new revenue-sharing formula for the municipalities, to put 
options on the table, and to discuss it. This does not mean of 
course that we will reach a consensus on the issue, but we’ve 
agreed to discuss the options, and we will be proceeding with 
that, probably within the next two weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we get this from this 
NDP government all the time. They’re going to discuss it. 
They’re going to review it. They don’t put a deadline. They 
don’t put a time frame on it. 
 
We know, we know for an example that in this province if the 
province is going to grow, it’s the province and Ottawa that are 
major winners, and it’s the local governments that are losing 



March 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

out. To give you an example, about 20 years ago Regina 
received $16 million in revenue, and by the late ’90s they had 
dropped to $6 million. And it hasn’t caught up yet. That’s 
because the province has taken all of the cash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the oil revenues up as they are right now, 
there is an expectation of a fair share of dollars being returned 
to the municipalities. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s when, it’s when will 
this NDP government start giving a fair share to the local 
governments, a time frame of when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member opposite knows, as do most municipal leaders 
across the province . . . that this government is committed to 
building prosperous communities throughout Saskatchewan, 
both rural and urban. Over the course of the last year, last three 
years, Mr. Speaker, this government has increased revenue 
sharing to our municipalities by $10 million per year — 10, 20, 
30. Remember, Mr. Speaker, this goes up and stays in the 
system. We have $60 million of revenue sharing of new dollars 
in the system today than we did three years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a very strong commitment that this government has 
made to improving the ability of municipalities to deliver 
services to their people. 
 
A year ago at our budget table, we indicated that we wanted to 
work with communities to ensure that they’re able to deliver on 
infrastructure commitments to their communities with new 
federal dollars coming forward, Mr. Speaker. And in this 
budget we are going to see committed some . . . Thank you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister talks 
about prosperous communities. It’s the old question is, how’s 
he making out on it? The communities that I visit are not very 
prosperous at all, and it’s because of the downloading from this 
NDP government. 
 
On one hand we have a government that goes to Ottawa, and we 
agree wants an equalization that’s fair — fair for Saskatchewan. 
Then they come back and they sit in their little circle, and 
they’re not fair to the municipalities. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment where the 
Premier in 2003 in Yorkton, he had told voters that the NDP 
election platform, and I quote, “provides the room to receive the 
recommendations of the Boughen Commission.” Mr. Speaker, 
the Boughen Commission, as we know, recommended a 1 per 
cent PST hike to be used for property taxes. Well we saw the 
NDP raise the PST by 1 per cent and renege on the property tax. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask whoever is in charge over there, why 
hasn’t the PST money been used to reduce property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
apologize if my answers are way too long. I’m just trying to get 
the same amount of time in as the member opposite gets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to providing 
municipalities with the ability to respond to their citizens. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that the city of Regina has raised the issue of 
an escalator formula in revenue sharing. Mr. Speaker, he 
compares that to the early 1980s. One of the reasons that we’ve 
decided to sit down and talk with the municipalities about 
revenue sharing and the go-forward is that the positions that are 
being argued now, currently, go back to the early 1980s to a 
revenue-sharing formula that only lasted for two years, Mr. 
Speaker, two years, because it wasn’t sustainable, and it wasn’t 
predictable. Two of the key factors that the municipalities want 
to put in place. 
 
So we believe very strongly in predictable, sustainable funding 
for municipalities. The money that’s in place today is certainly 
sustainable, and we’re willing to work with the municipalities 
to ensure that these pieces are going to fit together in this big 
puzzle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Funding for St. Elizabeth’s Hospital 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, St. 
Elizabeth’s Hospital in Humboldt serves at least 20,000 people. 
Over a decade ago the city of Humboldt and surrounding area 
asked this NDP government to help them with the much needed 
renovation. At that time it was decided that building a new 
hospital would make more sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt has had its share of money for a new 
hospital — $8 million — in place since 2002. Now they’re 
waiting for the ground to be broken. Quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re tired of an annual photo op with the minister, 
and what they want is action. Can the minister tell us today that 
the funding for St. Elizabeth’s Hospital will be announced in 
this week’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s only 48 hours until the 
Minister of Finance will be answering that question specifically. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we continue to work very carefully with the 
Humboldt area and community as they work on their hospital 
project. We’ve set out our goals as to how we’re going to do 
this, and we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you build a facility which is to serve for 50 
years, you want to make sure that it’s planned appropriately and 
that everything that you need over the next 50 years is going to 
be included in what you do. We’ve been doing that, Mr. 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2005 

Speaker. 
 
It’s very curious today to see how one member stands up and 
says spend more, the other one says tax less. That’s very much 
the reason why those people opposite will never be government 
in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, quite frankly that’s the 
problem. They continue and continue and continue to talk about 
it, but they never do anything. On September 18, 2003, the 
Health minister held a news conference at St. Elizabeth’s 
Hospital and told the people of Humboldt that a new hospital 
was coming, and I quote, “in the next couple of years.” Five 
months later, in September 2004, Bob Bundon with the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority advised the community 
that the project was still on schedule and he said, and I quote, 
“The hospital has raised their part of the money. Now we need 
to lobby to keep the hospital on track.” 
 
The schedule that was promised was that by October 2004 the 
project would go for tender, and construction would start in 
2005 and an opening in 2006. Mr. Speaker, we know that 
schedule is way behind. The tendering process has not even 
begun. When can the citizens of Humboldt and area expect 
ground to be broken for the new hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was 
present when I met with the mayor and many of the leaders 
from all the surrounding communities, and we set out our goal 
for how we’re going to complete this project. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re continuing on that plan. And we will continue to 
work with the community to make sure that the projects that we 
have set out in our plans are completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about providing accessible health care to 
Saskatchewan residents right across the province. And we will 
continue to make sure that we provide those funds in a 
responsible way which also balances the concerns around the 
taxpayers and how much money they will be required to pay in 
taxes. Mr. Speaker, we have a good record of doing this over a 
long period of time. And Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
operate on our balanced approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the 
minister is talking about providing acceptable health care. Does 
he think this is acceptable? St. Elizabeth’s Hospital was built in 
1955, which was 50 years ago, and faces a number of safety and 
accessibility issues. The hospital hasn’t always met the fire 
code and has had to ask for an exemption from the fire 
commissioner’s office on more than one occasion. 
 

There is no wheelchair access to the hospital’s front doors, Mr. 
Speaker. The doors to the ambulance entrance are too small for 
today’s ambulances to fit through, so they have to unload the 
patients outside — it doesn’t matter what the weather is. There 
are wild swings in the building’s temperatures. There aren’t 
enough electrical outlets. You can’t fit a stretcher in some of the 
rooms on the surgical ward. And the hospital cannot 
accommodate a major trauma in its own ER [emergency room] 
because it’s too small. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister just spoke about what was acceptable. 
Does the minister think that it’s acceptable that the citizens of 
Humboldt and area are forced to rely on an out-of-date hospital 
year after year because of his government’s inaction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that I have 
been working very carefully with the leadership in her new 
community; it’s a part of her riding that was added in the last 
election. And I’ve been working with these people prior to that 
time on this project. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that we do have a 
project that works for that whole area because we know that 
there’s good, solid citizens working in the community. We 
know that there’s expanding businesses. We know that the 
commercial opportunities are very great, and providing a good 
health facility along with other educational facilities, good 
roads, and other telecommunication opportunities is what 
provides a good solid base for the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these things working together have to be 
done in a balanced fashion. Mr. Speaker, in two days I think 
you’ll see our Minister of Finance bring forward such a 
balanced prospect for our whole province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, you know who’s worked 
together? The community of Humboldt has worked together. 
Humboldt and the surrounding community have worked very 
hard to raise their share of the cost of building a new hospital — 
$8 million to be exact. And as I said this money has been in 
place for three years now. 
 
The people of Humboldt are tired of waiting. They’re tired of 
the schedule being pushed back. They’re tired of their hospital 
being announced again and again and again by the NDP 
government. And in short, they are tired of this NDP 
government’s broken promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the longer we wait for action, the more that the 
building is going to cost. Can the people of Humboldt expect 
the NDP government to keep its promise and announce the 
funding for the hospital in this budget? 



March 21, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s two more sleeps for that 
member and for all of her colleagues so that they can wait and 
see what kind of positive things we’re going to do for the 
province. The people in the Humboldt area know that we have a 
commitment to them to work towards providing this hospital. 
We’re going to make sure that we provide the best facility 
possible based on all of the planning of the local people, 
together with the Saskatoon Health Authority and the provincial 
health officials, because we know that when you do good 
planning and you work at building things in a very careful, 
consistent way, then you can build buildings that will provide 
services for five decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s our intention — to be a good government 
for many years to come. And I ask the members opposite to 
think about voting for our budget this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Support for Education Programs on Treaties 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today in my capacity as Minister of First Nations and Métis 
Relations and say that it’s my honour and pleasure to stand in 
the legislature to inform you of an important initiative 
announced today by the Department of First Nations and Métis 
Relations. 
 
First let me tell you that today, as others have indicated, March 
21 is the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. This day was designated by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations in 1996 when the assembly 
called on world leaders to increase efforts to eliminate all forms 
of racial intolerance and discrimination. Our government 
supports, of course, this proclamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government wants to build bridges between 
different people and between different groups. We are 
committed to raising general public awareness of issues such as 
treaties, First Nations and Métis culture, and the need to 
eliminate racial discrimination. Much is being done but we all 
have much, much more to do. 
 
I’m pleased to tell you that the Department of First Nations and 
Métis Relations is doing more on this particular day. Today we 
are contributing, Mr. Speaker, $100,000 to the Office of the 
Treaty Commissioner to enhance its public education programs 
on the treaties and their meanings and the general cultural 
awareness. It was my pleasure to make the official 
announcement to the public this morning along with 
Saskatchewan’s Treaty Commissioner, the Hon. David Arnot. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have the 
largest per capita Aboriginal population of any Canadian 

province and that population is growing quickly. As a province, 
we simply cannot ensure our future success if Aboriginal people 
continue to face a lack of understanding and awareness about 
their history, their culture, and their Aboriginal and treaty 
rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our department has a long history of working with 
the Office of the Treaty Commissioner. The Office of the 
Treaty Commissioner is mandated to educate the public about 
treaties and the treaty relationship. It is also playing an 
instrumental role in trying to help Aboriginal people and other 
Saskatchewan citizens gain a better understanding of each other 
with a view to creating and promoting good relations. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that through this public education we 
will be helping to create an atmosphere of racial harmony and 
of respect. We will be helping to build a province that respects 
diversity and the rights of all, not just today but into our future. 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Department of First Nations 
and Métis Relations and the Office of the Treaty Commissioner 
are working together in this very important fight. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
minister for his statement on this very important issue. I’d also 
like to applaud the government for taking a step in the right 
direction when it comes to enhancing the understanding of 
Aboriginal people and Aboriginal culture in our province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has a great deal of respect for the 
important work that has been undertaken by the Office of the 
Treaty Commissioner — and I might add, very hard work. We 
are certainly supportive of this government’s efforts to provide 
funding to the office to increase awareness about treaty issues. 
The Saskatchewan Party believes that all people in this province 
deserve to know more about treaties with Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal people, and the best way to enhance 
understanding is through the school system. 
 
That is one of the reasons that the Saskatchewan Party last week 
included as part of our 100 ideas that will get Saskatchewan 
ready for the next 100 years, idea no. 26, which would make 
instruction in the history and content of the treaties signed 
between First Nations and the Government of Canada a part of 
the provincial core curriculum. 
 
It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite chose 
to vote against making instructions in the treaties part of the 
core curriculum in Saskatchewan, just as they voted against 
partnering with First Nations to increase participation rates and 
improve communication outcomes for First Nations students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are exactly the type of steps we need to 
provide to build a strong province. So while we congratulate the 
governments for supporting the excellent work of the Office of 
the Treaty Commissioner, we certainly encourage the 
government to take the next step to ensure that all children and 
youth in our schools have the opportunity to learn about the 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2005 

treaties and gain a better understanding of the foundation that 
joins First Nations and non-First Nations together in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for The Battlefords on his 
feet? 
 

BILLS WITHDRAWN 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Municipalities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to rise in the 
Assembly and ask that Bill No. 81, The Municipalities Act, 
currently item 3 under adjourned debates on the order paper, 
and the order for second reading, be discharged and the Bill 
withdrawn. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Minister of Government 
Relations has requested leave to withdraw Bill No. 81, The 
Municipalities Act, which is under adjourned debates, no. 3. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. This Bill stands 
withdrawn and will be removed from the order paper. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Government Relations. 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes 
Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I also request leave of the 
Assembly to rise and ask that Bill No. 82, The Miscellaneous 
Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004, currently item 4 
under adjourned debates on the order paper, and the order for 
second reading, be discharged and the Bill withdrawn. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The minister has requested leave that 
Bill No. 82, the miscellaneous municipal . . . Order please . . . 
that Bill No. 82, The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes and 
Amendment Act, 2004, which is item no. 4 under adjourned 
debates, be withdrawn. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. This Bill stands 
withdrawn and will be removed from the order paper. 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions 897 to 905 inclusive, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 897 through to 905 
have been submitted. 
 

I recognize the minister of CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan], the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the 
House do now adjourn. 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the government Deputy 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:41.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2139 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2139 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2139 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2139 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2139 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2139 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2139 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2140 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2140 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2140 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2140 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2140 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2140 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2140 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2141 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2141 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2141 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2141 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2141 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2141 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2141 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2142 
  Calvert .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2142 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2142 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2142 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2142 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2143 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2143 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2143 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2143 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2144 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2144 
 Day of Mourning for Missing Aboriginal Women 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2144 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2144 
 Regina Bull Sale Celebrates 100 Years 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2145 
 Swift Current Student Wins Divisional Spelling Bee 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2145 
 Okanese First Nation Community Healing Project 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2145 
 Recognition of Learning Disability Month 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2146 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Budget Commitments Regarding the Provincial Sales Tax 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2146 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2146 
 Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2147 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2147 
 Revenue-Sharing Agreement for Municipalities 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2148 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2148 
 Funding for St. Elizabeth’s Hospital 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2149 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2149 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Support for Education Programs on Treaties 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2151 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2151 
BILLS WITHDRAWN 
 Bill No. 81 — The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2152 
 Bill No. 82 — The Miscellaneous Municipal Statutes Amendment Act, 2004 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2152 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2152 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2152 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


