















































Hansard: April 18, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 93A  MONDAY, APRIL 18, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2527 
 April 18, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I have several pages of petitions 
concerning the condition of Highway 32 that runs from the 
community of Leader down to Swift Current. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the immediate action necessary to repair Highway 32 in 
order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the first several pages of this petition are signed 
by citizens from the communities of Cabri and Lancer. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of constituents and residents of southwest 
Saskatchewan concerned about the residential support offer to 
people with long-term disabilities in Swift Current. The prayer 
of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the community of 
Gull Lake as well as the city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about crystal meth and the 
tragedy it brings to the users and the families of the users. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Wadena, and Elfros. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions because the 
size of proposed school divisions is far too large to retain any 
local input into the education system. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Landis, Saskatchewan, and I’m pleased to 
present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present today on behalf of those concerned about the 
development of cabin lots in the area of Rafferty dam. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the development of 
cabin lots in the area of Rafferty dam proceeds. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Radville, Estevan, 
Oxbow, North Portal, Bienfait, Carnduff, Macoun, and 
Torquay. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the amalgamation of 
school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to rescind its decision to force school 
divisions to amalgamate. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Gladmar, Radville, 
and Weyburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

great pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned parents in my constituency regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement the allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live on Buckwold Cove, Lashyn Cove, 
Guenter Terrace in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here with citizens that are concerned and worried about no 
cellular service in rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions and install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
in Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Lanigan, LeRoy, and 
Wynyard, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents opposed to possible 
reductions of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district, I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional papers nos. 106, 637, 638, 670, 720, and 730. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 98 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what was the 
amount spent on advertising the Future is Wide Open 
campaign in the province of Quebec for the years 2002, 
2003, 2004, and 2005? Also, which advertising agency 
was employed for these purposes? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 98 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: could you provide details as to 
the criteria used in the tendering process for contracts 
concerning the service of SPMC vehicles; and could you 
please provide a paper copy of the forms sent out to 
dealerships for service purposes? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 98 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: is the government planning to 
close the Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw over the next 
three to five years? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
question for the government. I give notice that I shall on day no. 
98 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: do government employees have 
access to any designated smoking rooms in buildings that 
the government . . . that houses government departments, 
Crowns, agencies, boards, commissions, including the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, Casino Regina, and 
government-owned properties leased to third parties? 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 98 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: how many 
trade missions did the government conduct in 1999? 
Where did these missions take place? How much did each 
trade mission cost? How many businesses have relocated 
to Saskatchewan as a result of these missions? And how 
many jobs have been created in Saskatchewan as a result 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

of these trade missions? 
 
And I have the same question for the year 2000, 2001, 2002, 
2003, and 2004. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is 
my honour today to introduce to you a group of teachers who 
are here in the legislature to attend the seventh annual 
Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy. The institute started on Saturday and 
will continue through to Wednesday. 
 
Already this group has met with the Speaker, the Chief 
Electoral Officer, members of the judiciary, and Her Honour, 
the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. They are scheduled 
to meet with House leaders, caucus Chairs, caucus whips, 
private members from both sides of the House, and cabinet 
ministers as well as government caucus and legislative staff. 
 
The teachers will be completing an assignment to develop new 
units of study and lesson plans based on their learning 
experiences here in the legislature. The Department of Learning 
is working with them and will post these lesson plans on their 
website so that these resources are available to all teachers of 
the province. 
 
I would ask that the teachers might give a little wave as I 
mention their names. And they are Jodi Bjornerud from Eston 
Composite School; Ryan Brennan from Western Christian High 
School in Regina; Nita Cameron from Elizabeth School in 
Kindersley; Anna Fish from Southeast Regional College in 
Weyburn; Daniel Giesbrecht, Aberdeen Composite High 
School; Randy Glettler, Winston Knoll Collegiate in Regina; 
Wendy Gottselig, William Derby School in Strasbourg; Terry 
Graham, superintendent of curriculum instruction, 
Saskatchewan Learning region 4; David Hawkins from 
Milestone School; Wendy Johnston, Leask Community School; 
Jennifer Kuchinka, Punnichy School; Michelle LaFayette, 
Saskatoon; Meaghan Lang, University of Regina; Jim Lissinna, 
Kelvington High School; Leanne Merkowsky, St. Vital School 
in Battleford; Helen Sukovieff, Sheldon Williams Collegiate in 
Regina; Caroline Tompson, Lawrence Elementary School in 
North Battleford. 
 
I would also like to introduce two special guests who are here to 
observe the institute. They are Karen Aitken of the British 
Columbia Legislative Assembly and Nancy Buchanan of 
Manitoba Education, Citizenship and Youth. 
 
I would also like to make special mention of our steering 
committee, composed of five officials of the Department of 
Learning and three teachers who attended past institutes. From 
the Department of Learning we have Armand Martin, Gail 
Saunders, Ray Robertson, Brent Toles, and Anna Schmidt. 
 
And also other teachers that are on the steering committee are 
Larry Mikulcik from William Derby School in Strasbourg, Tim 
McFadden from Thom Collegiate in Regina, Erin McLeod of 
W.S. Hawrylak School in Regina. And I believe seated with 
them also is Linda Spence, coordinator of this project. I ask all 
members to welcome this group to the Saskatchewan 

legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister of 
Education, the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join with you and all members of this Assembly in 
welcoming the group of teachers who are joining us here today. 
I had the pleasure of joining them briefly for lunch today and 
I’m just saying that I know that all members, certainly on the 
government side, really welcome the opportunity to have the 
exchange of ideas and the exchange of views and perspectives 
that they bring, that the teachers bring from the classroom, and 
that hopefully we’re able to share in terms of what happens here 
in this legislature and indeed what happens within the 
representative democracy that we participate in. 
 
I am looking forward to meeting with the group tomorrow to 
discuss more specifically some of my role as the Minister of 
Learning, and I know that many members on this side will have 
an opportunity to talk to them. 
 
And so on behalf of the NDP caucus and the NDP government I 
would welcome them all here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the critic for Learning, 
the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would join with 
you and the Minister of Learning in welcoming the teachers 
here. The Social Studies Teachers’ Institute is indeed a 
cornerstone of our parliamentary democracy in Saskatchewan. 
And it’s a pleasure to see as well representatives of other 
provinces that see how valuable this institution is to democracy 
and the purveying of this democracy to the children of our 
schools in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to meet and greet and 
discuss issues with teachers because I think we as a society 
understand very well that teachers are the custodians of the 
hopes and dreams of our children for the future not only insofar 
as participants in a democracy but as citizens of the province, of 
Canada, and of the world. 
 
So thank you very much for participating. We hope that the rest 
of your time is fruitful and interesting. I look forward to, as the 
Opposition House Leader, to meeting with you and being 
grilled by you tomorrow and be in attendance at your banquet 
tomorrow evening. So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that everyone in Saskatchewan knows that we’ve got the 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

highest percentage of volunteer participation in Canada with 42 
per cent of Saskatchewan residents age 15 and older 
volunteering on an annual basis. 
 
To represent some of that volunteer capacity, I am pleased and 
proud to be able to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly some of the hard-working members 
of the Premier’s voluntary sector steering committee who are 
here to help launch National Volunteer Week as well and to 
introduce the framework document that we’ve worked hard on 
to lay the foundation as a basis for the relationship. 
 
I’d ask them to give a wave as I introduce them. They’re seated 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Norman Campbell, Judith Hindle, 
Wayne Thrasher, Katrina McKenzie; and, Mr. Speaker, the 
Vice-Chair but someone who’s been involved in the Canadian 
Volunteerism Initiative for a number of years now, Tracey 
Mann. With them is Bill Werry, who’s the administrative 
support and my valued, valued, support and assist for the 
working of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the investment in our economy that the voluntary 
sector provides and with one of the members there I’d say, slash 
the co-operative sector as well, is about $800 million. We’re all 
working hard — not only this week, but all weeks of the year 
— to make sure that work and investment continues. And I ask 
all members to give a round of applause for our guests in your 
gallery this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you, I’d also like to welcome not only the teachers 
but the volunteers here today. 
 
But I’d also like to introduce three very special people in my 
life. This is the first time in 10 years that my favourite 
son-in-law and my granddaughters have come to the legislature 
to see us all at work. Robert, Brianne, and Jayden have made 
their way from Prince Albert today. 
 
Robert is my only son-in-law. He works in the federal 
penitentiary. Brianne loves soccer and her Game Boy and 
Jayden loves dancing and figure skating. They go to St. John 
Community School in Prince Albert, which I believe is in the 
Speaker’s constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us have people who provide motivation and 
reason for us to get up in the morning and I ask this Assembly 
to welcome the three people who bring joy to my life. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with great pleasure I introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the House, a fairly large group in the west gallery. 
Now this group is here from Westmount School in Moose Jaw, 

which is only about a half block away from where I live. And I 
know the students are accompanied by three teachers: Mark 
Albert, Faithe Sovdi, and Bob Kitts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the grade 8 students of Westmount, 
when I attended, they were remarkably well behaved and I’m 
sure these grade 8s are also and that it’s just like a day off for 
the three teachers that are accompanying them. Mr. Speaker, I 
look forward to meeting with the group later on in the afternoon 
and I’m very pleased that they’re here to view the proceedings 
at the Assembly and to tour the legislature. And I would like all 
my colleagues to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with you and others today in welcoming all the 
teachers here, but specifically my daughter Jodi from Eston. 
Mr. Speaker, my daughter has brought into this world two of 
my highlights in my life, Austin and Lauren, and I take great 
joy in having them come and visit us so we can spoil them 
rotten, give them chocolate bars, pop, and everything, and then 
send them home. I find that away better than really having a 
family of your own at that present time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might add though too in the number of years that 
I’ve been here on many occasions I have explained to my 
daughter how raucous it can become in here in question period, 
and I’ve told her on many occasions that I am probably not one 
of the ones that raise my voice in this fine building. I know the 
Agriculture minister and for that matter the Deputy Premier will 
back me up on that one, Mr. Speaker, and I take great pride if 
the rest of the members would remember that in talking to my 
daughter. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all 
members to join in welcoming my daughter here today and I’m 
very glad she could be here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it would be truly an error 
if I did not take this opportunity to introduce to you and to other 
members of the legislature somebody that I had the pleasure of 
working with for a number of years. Sandra Morgan was a 
paralegal, still is a paralegal with Robertson Stromberg, or the 
successor firm of Robertson Stromberg, and she was everything 
that you could want from a co-worker. Competence is not fair, 
she is far above competent and every day of our association she 
was. And always courteous and always helpful and I’m aware 
of only one serious lapse of judgment on her part, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s when she agreed to marry the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast, a decision I’m sure she regrets at her 
leisure. Please welcome her to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair must recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not really sure what I can 
say by way of honest rebuttal to those remarks, other than that 
my good wife has got a significantly better life now that she 
does not have to work with the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin and that her own husband now spends his time in 
Regina. I think her life is probably improved measurably both 
on the home front and at work. And thanks to all members for 
welcoming my spouse to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Withdrawal of Remarks 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all kudos, 
Mr. Speaker, to the new sound system in the Assembly and to 
whoever designed and installed it. During question period on 
Thursday, Mr. Speaker, I directed comments toward the 
member from Yorkton, and in so doing I used unparliamentary 
language. Mr. Speaker, I wish to apologize to the member and 
to this Hon. Assembly for, and to retract that particular 
language. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Saskatchewan Volunteers Celebrated During 
National Volunteer Week 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 17 to 23 is 
National Volunteer Week. As we look back on the last 100 
years it’s clear that we have all benefited from Saskatchewan’s 
long and proud history of hard-working volunteers who give 
their time and energy to better the lives of others. These 
volunteers are the foundation for more than 5,000 incorporated 
charities and 12,000 cultural and recreational organizations here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the energy, commitment, and generosity of our 
volunteers that enables these thousands of community-based 
organizations to provide services and support to Saskatchewan 
people. As Chair of the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative, I 
am extremely proud of the work that has been done by the 
members of the joint steering committee to strengthen the 
relationship between government and the Saskatchewan 
voluntary sector to assist volunteer organizations in effectively 
fulfilling their mandates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Centennial Leadership Award is 
one way we are celebrating our volunteers in our centennial 
year. This award is open to all Saskatchewan-based, 
non-governmental organizations with a provincial focus. It 
recognizes the contributions of two individuals from each 
group; one who has helped to build the organization, and the 
other who will carry forth with the spirit of leadership and 
vision into our second century. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
our volunteers and the enormous contribution they make to the 
quality of life we enjoy here in Saskatchewan, and encourage 
the work of the voluntary sector to work with us, the public 
sector, to strengthen that relationship for the next 100 years. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Centennial Hockey Challenge 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Thursday night MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
from both sides of the House attended a very memorable event 
in Lloydminster, that being the Centennial Hockey Challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to send out a few congratulations here 
today publicly. And I want to first of all congratulate all the 
team members for Team Saskatchewan who although even 
though we didn’t win the game on the ice . . . I thought our 
young men represented our province very well. In fact I thought 
after the game we should have had an MLA challenge game 
because we had many MLAs from Saskatchewan against only 
one from Alberta. I think we could have won that one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] television for the fine job they did 
on the Centennial Cup Challenge . . . Mr. Ron MacLean who 
had to work under trying circumstances, especially when the 
power went out. I want to congratulate and thank Richelle 
Bourgoin, who’s a manager of promotions and special events at 
the Saskatchewan Centennial Office. Shawna Kelly who did 
just an incredible job, Mr. Speaker, of her tremendous 
hospitality on the bus up to Lloydminster and the return trip to 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, circumstances of that trip also made it a very 
memorable occasion, that being again the ride home with the 
snow and the ice and the tremendous wind, the power outage. 
And I want to congratulate and thank the MVP [most valuable 
player] who I think is the MVP of that night — not the most 
valuable player, but the most valuable person — that being 
Milo Johnson who was the driver of the STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company] bus who took us up to Lloydminster 
and returned us home safely. And I’m amazed, Mr. Speaker, at 
the tremendous job he did, and I’d like to ask all members of 
this Legislative Assembly to thank him and congratulate him 
for a job very well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

World Class Players’ Cup Soccer Tournament 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the great pleasure of 
teams and supporters of nine soccer-loving nations, the very 
finest competitive soccer Regina has to offer was played from 
Tuesday to Sunday as the first World Class Players’ Cup of 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

soccer took place. Teams representing the nations of Chile, El 
Salvador, Germany, Holland, Ireland, Jamaica, Northern 
Ireland, Portugal, and Scotland played and, Mr. Speaker, they 
played well. 
 
Kevin Holness has many claims to fame. Kevin has played with 
the Canadian soccer team, with the Canadian Olympic soccer 
team, and with team Jamaica in this tournament. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Kevin was the brain thrust ; it was Kevin’s idea to 
hold the World Class Players’ Cup right here in Regina. 
 
Bob Maltman played the role of chief tournament organizer, 
and Bob and his team did a super job. The Saskatchewan 
Soccer Association was represented by their executive director, 
Bjorn Osieck, and Regina Soccer president, Leslie Blyth, was 
also there. Mr. Speaker, we were treated to fantastic competitive 
soccer, good sportsmanship, and goodwill throughout. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Premier presented the medals to the bronze 
winning team, Portugal. He then had to present Jamaica with 
the silver medals when Jamaica ran out of time in the final 
game against El Salvador, when the score was still El Salvador 
5, Jamaica 4. That of course means El Salvador won the gold, 
and it was the Premier’s pleasure to present the cup to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to next year’s Players’ Cup 
in Regina in the new soccer facility. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Estevan’s Legion Celebrates Awards Night 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
presentation of life memberships and service pins highlighted 
the annual banquet and awards night at the Estevan branch of 
the Royal Canadian Legion on April 9. 
 
The recipients of the 60-year pins were Harry Burke, Cecil 
Hitchcock, Don Knight, William Kurmey, Jack Leniczek, 
Charles Preddy, Anthony Samenook, and George Symons. Phil 
Attrill was presented with a 50-year service pin and 50-year 
golden anniversary pin. 
 
Clifford Hawkes was the recipient of a 45-year pin while 
40-year pins went to Bert Hahn and Ed Walton. Presented with 
35-year pins were Howard Donaghy, Les Mann, Ken Raine, 
and Robert Rooks. Receiving 20-year pins were Louis 
Bourgeois and Leo Saccary. Joan Fallis was the only associate 
member to receive a pin, and that was for 20 years. 
 
This evening also marked the anniversary of the Battle of Vimy 
Ridge. Canadians were extremely successful at Vimy Ridge, 
and this proved to be a turning point in the First World War. 
Canadian valour and bravery brought about a victory, not only 
for Canadians but for the entire Allied force. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the no. 60 branch 
of the Royal Canadian Legion on a successful evening. Thank 
you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Public Safety Telecommunications Week 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Public Safety Telecommunications Week has just wound up 
here in Saskatchewan. Sponsored by the Association of 
Public-Safety Officials International, the week is set aside to 
honour the many telecommunications professionals who help to 
provide assistance to people when it is needed most. This 
includes all our emergency service dispatchers from police and 
fire to emergency medical services and Sask 911 operators who 
handle the calls for help in their area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this special week has been proclaimed in 
Saskatchewan to help promote public awareness and to 
demonstrate our appreciation of the vital services provided 
every day by these dedicated emergency communications 
professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year Saskatchewan’s emergency 
telecommunications professionals select one of their own as 
Telecommunicator of the Year. I’m pleased to say that this 
year’s recipient is Shauna Bruce, a Sask 911 call taker and fire 
dispatcher with the Prince Albert communications centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the Assembly to join in 
congratulating Ms. Bruce and in saluting all of Saskatchewan’s 
emergency telecommunications professionals for their 
contributions and commitment to public safety. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Dinner 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to congratulate the fine people of the constituencies of 
Batoche, Carlton, Northcote, and Sask Rivers on the fine job 
they did Saturday night of hosting the Sask Party dinner in the 
beautiful city of Prince Albert. 
 
The supper was held at the Prince Albert exhibition grounds. 
Over 300 people were in attendance, including members of P.A. 
City Council, many mayors from surrounding communities, and 
we enjoyed a wonderful meal of roast hip of beef which was 
done to perfection. Then the crowd was treated to a truly 
inspiring speech by the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. 
Comments after the presentation were that the member from 
Swift Current sounded like the best prospect for premier of this 
province, and his vision for Saskatchewan was like a breath of 
fresh air for a so-called have-not province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, congratulations to the people of 
Batoche, Carlton, Northcote, and Sask Rivers on a job well 
done. 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Commitments Made by Government 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I understand that the Government House Leader spent 
the weekend considering his options to get the opposition to 
stop saying that this government doesn’t tell the truth. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, here’s an option I hope the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] will consider: start telling the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The House is suffering 
from language that is getting rather personal, and I would ask 
that members desist from using language that is personal and 
directed at other members of the House. And I would ask that 
the Leader of the Opposition withdraw the remark before we 
continue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I withdraw the remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. The Chair recognizes the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the last election the Premier said 
he would lower taxes in the subsequent budget. He increased 
taxes. The Premier promised to cut surgical waiting lists, Mr. 
Speaker, and since then surgical waiting lists have grown longer 
in the province of Saskatchewan. The Premier said he would 
hire 200 new police officers. He has not done that, Mr. Speaker. 
If the NDP want the people of the province to trust them, will 
they simply commit to this? Will they simply commit to do 
what they say they will do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again today the Leader of 
the Opposition has been put in his place and forced to withdraw 
comments in this House — again. Mr. Speaker, over the course 
of the weekend I observed what the Leader of the Opposition 
was commenting publicly about the totally inappropriate 
comments made by the member of Thunder Creek in this 
House. He observed that the government’s concern about these 
comments were, quote, “Just silly and maybe even a little 
pathetic.” 
 
Is it the view of the Leader of the Opposition that this great 
Chamber, this institution of the legislature, should be treated in 
this fashion by himself? By his members? If he does not 
condone this, I ask the Leader of the Opposition what is he 
doing to discipline his members, particularly the member from 
Thunder Creek? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what the opposition is 
doing. I’ll tell you what I am doing. This party is sending out a 
clear message to the people of this province that when 
politicians make commitments, they ought to keep those 
commitments, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re sending a 
message to that Premier over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government and this Premier told the 
people of the province for six years that SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] was a 
partnership. And it was never a partnership. The NDP had a big 
press conference at Belle Plaine to say they had a deal to build 
an ethanol plant. They had no such deal, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
government told us that BC [British Columbia] communications 
company Navigata would turn a profit in 2004. That turned out 
not to be true either. The NDP government said their $3 million 
investment in Pangaea systems would create 35 new jobs in 
Regina. That proved not to be the case, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Health told us he had done his homework on the 
smoking ban. He had not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand in his place and explain to 
the people of the province why he says one thing and does 
another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the issue so well illustrated 
again today. The issue is this: we have a Leader of the 
Opposition who said he was coming to this legislature, coming 
to lead that opposition, to make change in that opposition. Mr. 
Speaker, this opposition is worse that it ever was under the 
leadership of the member from Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again today the Leader of the Opposition has to be 
put in his place for inappropriate language in this legislature. 
Mr. Speaker, does he condone this? He does by his actions. 
Does he officially, as Leader of the Opposition? And if he 
doesn’t, what is he going to do to have his members regain 
respect . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I have been unable to 
hear the last few remarks. I’ve heard that, it indicated it had 
been prompted, but I will check the record on a point of order 
on this. But I recognize the Premier. I want to be able to hear 
what is being said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, because 
it’s obvious when you cannot debate policy, what you do is roar 
from your seats. What you do is engage . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The members 
ought not to comment on a ruling of the Chair. I recognize the 
Premier. 



2534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you after 
talking to many people over the course of this weekend, the 
question on the minds of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, is 
what is going on with this leader and this opposition, and does 
he condone this kind of activity in the public’s legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say this. Changes are 
coming to the official opposition, and they won’t be made by 
this member or any other individual member in this House. 
They will be made by the voters of this province when they 
boot that government out because they don’t do what they say, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s when changes will come. 
 
The Premier does not like the fact that what’s being spotlighted 
over the weekend is the record of the government saying one 
thing and doing quite the opposite. It’s our job to point out 
when that happens, and it’s happened on a number of occasions. 
 
It happened with respect to his commitment to reduce taxes. He 
increased taxes. It happened with his commitment to add 200 
new police officers. He’s failed to do that. It happened with his 
commitment to reduce waiting lists. They’ve gotten longer. It 
happened with his commitment that he had done his homework 
ahead of the smoking ban. That didn’t happen. It happened in 
SPUDCO for six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again to the Premier of this province: why won’t 
he tell people, why won’t he explain to the people of this 
province why he says one thing and does another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt about it. 
What we’re hearing today, we heard a year ago. We heard 
before the last election. And we went to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they returned this government with a larger 
percentage of the popular vote than in the election before, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I predict that’s going to happen again because you see, Mr. 
Speaker, people value those who will enter public life and 
respect the institutions that give them the opportunity to debate 
freely. Mr. Speaker, that opportunity is being demised by the 
activities of the Leader of the Opposition and his caucus. 
 
Will he do something about it? Will he stop his members from 
the inappropriate language being used in this Chamber? Will he 
stop himself from using it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Negotiations with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate 

the bargaining team of teachers and school trustees. Through 
hard work and patience, they were able to avert a strike that 
would have been a hardship to parents and students. This 
agreement is a testament to their resolve, their ability to 
co-operate, and their commitment to the educational system. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there are some serious unanswered 
questions from this NDP government that say one thing and 
ends up doing another — a question like, when was the 
Learning minister going to tell the NDP government 0, 1, and 1 
wage freeze was not going to apply to teachers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too want to congratulate the government trustee bargaining 
team and the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] for 
being able to reach an agreement just before 2 o’clock on 
Friday. I think that this really is a testament to the goodwill that 
all brought to the table and the fact that we were able to find a 
way to reach an agreement without putting at risk the school 
year, and those congratulations are heartfelt on the part of this 
cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member opposite surely must 
understand that we have a responsibility to make sure that the 
agreement now goes through a ratification and certainly must 
respect those requirements that need to be adhered to. The STF 
is currently preparing to advise their members of the contents of 
that agreement and, once the agreement is ratified, we’ll be 
happy to make further comment on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
minister needlessly took us all to the brink of a strike. He forced 
the STF bargaining team to hold a strike vote. Then magically 
this Learning minister found the Easter Bunny and bought some 
new resources to the table, all the while saying 0, 1, and 1 was 
going to apply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did this minister wait so long to bring new 
resources to the table? Why did he put everyone through 
uncertainty and anxiety while he played with the bargaining 
process? Mr. Speaker, why is it that this government will say 
one thing, that there’s no money, and then do another thing by 
adding resources to the table? Why is there no consistency in 
this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well it sounds to me like the 
opposition member from Melfort is actually unhappy that we 
reached an agreement to save the school year. I can’t imagine 
how anyone could be critical of the fact that we were able to 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

find an agreement without any disruption to the school year, 
without any disruption of work, in a way that I assured this 
House we would do by negotiating. And that is what this 
government did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this minister sat in the 
legislature and said that he was going to defend the mandate 
being imposed on teachers. The official opposition said there 
needs to be a fair and open bargaining process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the consistency? This minister would say 
one thing . . . in fact he even went worse than that, he blamed 
teachers for the high cost of property tax. Mr. Speaker, instead 
of bargaining in good faith, why did he play games and 
interfere with the system, because obviously when you allow 
the school trustees and teachers to make an agreement, they 
found a way to make an agreement in spite of that minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this House when he decided 
to change the position of the government from the 0 and 1, 1 
mandate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let’s be very clear about this, Mr. 
Speaker. I said all along in this Assembly, as I have with each 
of the agreements that we have been involved with, that we 
would do this through negotiations — through negotiation. And 
when an agreement goes through negotiation, the parties that 
are at the table — the government, trustees, and the teachers — 
were able to reach an agreement. And that is one of the things 
that I think we all need to be very thankful for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Public Sector Wage Guidelines 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this government imposed a 0, 1, and 1 wage mandate 
in its 2004-05 budget; what some might consider a unfair labour 
practice. Now the jury’s in. This government says one thing, 0, 
1, and 1 and does another — 2, 2, and 2. Reports out today 
indicate the NDP have reached a tentative agreement with 
teachers for 2, 2, and 2. 
 
My question is to the government. Since when does 0, 1, and 1 
equal 2, 2, and 2? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I cannot believe that members in this 
House would begrudge the fact that we have a reached a 
collectively bargained agreement with the STF in a way that is 
able to make sure that the school year goes ahead, the 
graduations go ahead, to make sure that there is no disruption of 
the school year. 
 
The members opposite suggested that we should be slavish in 
the approach to dealing with a collective agreement. We have 
said all along that we would negotiate the agreement in good 
faith, in a fair and free collectively bargained process. That is 
what we did, and as such we have reached an agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister has just 
indicated is a myth. Okay, the position that this government has 
taken has nothing to do with reality. I want to quote from one 
week ago. The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, president, 
Larry Hubich said this: 
 

“I don’t understand the strategy of sticking to this phony, 
ill-advised, non-supported mandate of zero, one, and one” 
. . . 

 
[14:15] 
 
That’s what was said one week ago. Also last week, the SAHO 
[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] . . . sorry, 
the president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Rosalie 
Longmoore, said, and I quote: 
 

SAHO has advised us that the current mandate for the 
SUN bargaining table is 0, 1, and 1. 

 
Zero, 1, and 1, Mr. Speaker. Now the minister stands and tells 
us that 2, 2, and 2 was on; resources were available. Yet we 
have a group that is at the bargaining table saying 0, 1, and 1 is 
the bargaining position of this government. Could the minister 
tell us what the real answer is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — For a party that seems so concerned 
about veracity, I would ask them to be a little more cautious in 
terms of what they attribute to members on this side. The 
member opposite knows full well that I have been saying in this 
House that we would negotiate a fair, free collectively 
bargained agreement. We have done that. It has reached an 
agreement. It is something we are proud of, something we are 
pleased of, and something that we trust the teachers will ratify. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 



2536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the NDP has been 
disingenuous with the public about its 0, 1, and 1 public sector 
wage mandate. Eleven contracts have been negotiated to date 
under this supposed mandate. We now know that the mandate 
was out the window for the teachers of this province, just like 
the NDP caucus Chair said it was. Was it ever really on for the 
other unions who have negotiated to date, or do these contracts 
represent other examples of the NDP telling us one thing and 
doing another? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well this is truly among the most 
bizarre questions that we’ve had to date in terms of collective 
bargaining. When we have the former head of the Sask Party 
opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When we have the member opposite 
standing up and quoting Larry Hubich at the same time that 
he’ll stand up in this House and suggest The Trade Union Act 
should be ripped up and seriously amended — when we’ve got 
that member coming and saying, don’t impose 0, 1, and 1; why 
didn’t you impose 0, 1, and 1; you should have imposed 0, 1, 
and 1 — I cannot imagine a more inconsistent position. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, our position on this side 
has been clear, and it was clear going back to the SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
agreements that we negotiated and discussed a year ago when 
the members accused us at that point of deviating from the 
mandate. We have provided at each individual table the 
resources that were necessary to reach a fair and freely 
bargained agreement. That was our commitment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, how can anyone trust this 
government? What we see is that the government says one 
thing, and it does exactly the opposite, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier says the NDP would never interfere in negotiations. 
The Health minister says interfering in negotiations is common 
NDP practice. The minister responsible for public sector 
compensation says the NDP will negotiate a zero wage change 
with flexibility. And the NDP caucus Chair says the mandate is 
out the window and it has been since the get-go. Now we hear 
that the mandate is indeed out the window with the tentative 
agreement for 2, 2, and 2 with teachers. Who are we to believe? 
Simple question to the minister: who is to be believed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, I 
cannot believe that the members opposite are taking this 
approach today. I cannot wait for them to bring in a motion into 
this House to roll back any kind of agreements to whatever they 
perceive, whatever they believe should be the mandate. 
 
We have said all the way through, with each of the agreements 
that we have negotiated, that we would bring to the table the 
specific resources needed to resolve those agreements and we 
have done that, Mr. Speaker. I said that we would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. When the 
Speaker is on his feet, the members ought to cease kibitzing 
across the floor. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this government makes 
no apologies for reaching collective agreements, for bargaining 
in good faith, and for providing the resources that we believe 
are necessary to make sure that this province’s public services 
continue to move forward. That is something we have done 
consistently in our approach to the collective bargaining 
process, something we believe in, and something we’ll continue 
to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Funding for Police Services 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government 
zap-you’re-frozen budget has municipal property tax increases 
popping up faster than flowers in spring — Saskatoon, Regina, 
Yorkton, all raising taxes because this government froze 
municipal revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now policing is being hurt in Saskatoon. 
Saskatoon’s police chief is now cutting seven proposed police 
officer positions and three civilian jobs all because of this 
zap-you’re-frozen budget. Mr. Speaker, this Justice minister is 
losing ground. He can’t live up to his government’s election 
promise on new officers. Mr. Speaker, why does this Justice 
minister say one thing and do another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the last, most recent 
budget brought into this House increased the number of police 
officers funded by the provincial government by 18. In the next 
two budgets there will be another 31 added, Mr. Speaker. That 
will bring us to 200 funded by the province, Mr. Speaker. The 
Department of Justice does not control the decisions — the 
budget decisions — of city council of Saskatoon. What the city 
decides to spend its money on is the city’s business. 
 
I can advise that within these 18 officers are two more officers 
funded by the province for the city of Saskatoon in the city of 
Saskatoon. I’ve received a commitment from the chief of police 
that they will be Aboriginal police officers, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon’s police chief says he 
has to cut jobs because of pressure to lower property taxes — 
pressure created by this NDP government’s zap-you’re-frozen 
budget which means no increase in funding for municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means Russell Sabo and the Saskatoon Police 
Service can’t move on the recommendations in the Stonechild 
report. The chief said any of these cuts will hurt our ability to 
respond to some of the things in the Stonechild report, the very 
report that that minister spoke in favour of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can this minister sleep at night knowing that 
these recommendations are going to be ignored and the police 
service in Saskatoon is suffering? Why does he say one thing 
and then promptly do another, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment of this 
government to respond in a positive way to the 
recommendations in the inquiry into the death of Neil 
Stonechild is set out in this budget, among other places. Not 
only are we adding Aboriginal police officers to the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and to the municipal police 
forces of Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert, one of the 
officers that we are adding to the RCMP is specifically there for 
the purposes of recruitment and retention of Aboriginal police 
officers, Mr. Speaker. And there is in this budget a 30 per cent 
increase to the coroner system in the province of Saskatchewan 
in response to the review requested by Commissioner Wright in 
his report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, people have very basic 
expectations of their government. They want a police force that 
is effective and efficient. Seniors, children, women all have the 
right to know that they are safe in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is not meeting that 
expectation. Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is forcing 
Saskatoon’s police force to make harmful cuts all because of 
the zap-you’re-frozen budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this minister live up to his commitment 
to provide for the safety and security of Saskatchewan residents 
and Saskatoon citizens, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, not only have we added 
provincially funded police officers, not only have we added 
provincially funded police officers to the city of Saskatoon, we 

have, we have expanded in this budget the number of 
investigators attached to The Safer Communities and 
Neighbourhoods Act, Mr. Speaker, to that initiative. That 
initiative is shutting down drug houses and brothels and drug 
manufacturing houses in Saskatoon and Regina and throughout 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when this minister was 
challenged on breaking his government’s election promise on 
new officers, his spin doctors told reporters to go and do the 
math. Well, Mr. Speaker, they did the math and they found that 
the minister had come up short and had come up significantly 
short. Two hundred new officers means just that — 200; 200 
more than what you had when you started. 
 
And now I’ve got some new math for the minister and his staff. 
I’ll make it simple, since the question of . . . I question the 
competency of his staff, when they say 200, let’s mean 200. 
Let’s not add 18. Let’s not shovel back and forth. 
Zap-you’re-frozen equal property tax increase minus the 
$350,000 for the Saskatoon Police Service. When will this 
minister fix the disaster he has created, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — The decisions of the Saskatoon City 
Council about the budget for Saskatoon city are the decisions of 
that council. They are not within my control. They’re not within 
the control of the Justice department, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am looking forward to a positive set of recommendations, a 
positive agenda, a positive plan coming from the local police 
commission as I requested last November. 
 
I am trusting that the city, as well as the province, can respond 
in a positive way to the recommendations made by Justice 
Wright in his report on the inquiry into the death of Neil 
Stonechild. In respect to that report, Mr. Speaker, we are adding 
Aboriginal police officers. We are providing funding for the 
retention and recruitment, Mr. Speaker. We are, Mr. Speaker, 
not only have we reviewed the coroner system as requested by 
commissioner Wright, but we are reforming the coroner system 
and adding and improving to the coroner system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are doing what we can . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 
that Bill No. 106, The Municipalities Act be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It has been 
moved by the Minister of Government Relations that Bill No. 
106, The Municipalities Act be now introduced and read for the 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 sur les modifications 

corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Municipalities 
Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 107, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 107, The Municipalities 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 108 — The Business Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 108, 
The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 108, The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 
be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 111 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005/Loi 

de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 111, 
The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 111, The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 112 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 112, 
The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 112, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Bill No. 113 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les 

sociétés sans but lucratif 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 113, 
The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 113, The Non-profit Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the Government House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, to raise a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member please state his point of 
order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, when we last met on 
Thursday, although this is not recorded in Hansard, the member 
for Thunder Creek was heard to yell at the member for Yorkton, 
the Deputy Premier, the words, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, from 
the newspaper in this respect . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The quote is not necessary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The quote is not necessary, Mr. 
Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, if you say that I can’t use the 
quote that is attributed to the member and it was heard by the 
people of Saskatchewan, then so be it. But I think most 
members and certainly the people of Saskatchewan will be 
aware of what it is that the member for Thunder Creek had to 
say. 
 

My point of order is twofold, Mr. Speaker. First of all I would 
like you to rule as to whether or not the members’ statements is 
the appropriate place to deal with the point of order, because the 
member for Thunder Creek stood up to apologize for remarks in 
members’ statements. So first I would ask you to rule whether 
that’s the appropriate place for such a point of order. And an 
apology of that nature, Mr. Speaker, must be part of a point of 
order. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it is not clear, it is not clear, it is not 
clear . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. I 
recognize the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is not clear what it 
is that the member for Thunder Creek is apologizing for. Based 
on his leader’s remarks both in the media and again today in 
question period, it would appear that the member for Thunder 
Creek was apologizing for calling the member of Yorkton a 
name, but was not apologizing for the adjective. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I invite you to ask the member for Thunder Creek to 
withdraw unequivocally his remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — On the point of order, I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
the incident on Thursday the member left the House, and 
realizing that his inappropriate words were caught on the 
microphone system, he realized that it was important to take the 
first opportunity available to him in order to apologize to the 
minister that he directed those remarks at, and apologize. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it is entirely appropriate that the member took 
the first opportunity available to him, which was members’ 
statements, in order to deliver that retraction and that apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader says that he should 
be given the opportunity to read into the record such that was 
not in the record in the first case. Mr. Speaker, in Beauchesne 
486 subsection (4) it says, and I quote: 
 

Remarks which do not appear on the public record and are 
therefore private conversations not heard by the Chair do 
not invite the intervention of the Speaker, although 
Members have apologized for hurtful remarks uttered in 
such circumstances. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the member did just that. He did the honourable 
thing by withdrawing and apologizing, and I think that this 
matter is consequently closed. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for their intervention. I 
will check the records and bring back a ruling in due time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for this Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. I call to order the Committee of Finance. 
The first item before the committee is the consideration of 
estimates for the Department of Agriculture and Food, vote 1, 
starting on page 27 of the Estimates book. And I would 
recognize the Minister of Finance to introduce his officials and 
make a brief statement if he wishes. 
 
Pardon me, I guess I said Minister of Finance. I must have it on 
the brain because I introduced the Minister of Health as the 
Minister of Finance. So we will do Finance . . . Agriculture and 
Food estimates found on page 27, and I will now introduce the 
Minister of Agriculture and Food. Would the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. It’s 
a pleasure to have the officials here from the Department of 
Agriculture and Food, folks who do a tremendous job on behalf 
of the farmers of this province. 
 
To my right is Hal Cushon, the assistant deputy minister for the 
department; and seated right behind Hal is Jack Zepp, who is 
the acting assistant deputy minister. Karen Aulie is seated in the 
back corner, and Karen is corporate services, director of 
corporate services branch. Laurier Donais is sitting next to 
Karen. And right behind me is Paul Johnson, who is manager of 
the economy and commodity analysis policy branch. And 
Maury Harvey, who is sitting to my left and just behind me. 
Maury is senior policy analyst with the strategic planning unit 
in the policy branch. 
 
And I’m very happy to have these folks here, and I hope we’ll 
be able to answer to the members’ opposite satisfaction any 
questions they might have. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — Clause 1, or I mean (AG01). I recognize the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to your officials this afternoon. I’m glad to have the 
opportunity to trade information back and forth here today. 
 
I think one of the top issues and the calls we’re getting, and I’m 
sure the minister’s office is getting many of the same calls, is 
going back to the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program. And I guess a couple of overall 
questions, Mr. Minister, is that to start off I’d like to know . . . 
And I’m going by the Estimates book here, and for 2005-2006 I 
see the budget for Agriculture is at $264,000,353. Estimated 
last year was 263 but then, as we all know, you fully funded 
CAIS coming on in December, which is a whole another story 
and we’ll talk about that in a bit too. 
 
But last year actual cost, and correct me if I’m wrong, was 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $404 million. And I guess 
what I’m asking you in my first question is: are my numbers 

very close to being right here, that this year we’re projecting 
we’ll spend 264 and last year we were around in excess of $400 
million for Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, the total amount for CAIS was in 
the neighbourhood of the 400 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. So I guess 
the obvious question then is, how on earth do you feel and your 
government feel that if we needed the $404 million last year to 
fund the CAIS program, this year that $264 million will be 
suffice to adequately deal with the problems we’ve had? 
 
Considering, Mr. Minister, as you’re well aware of, and I’m 
sure your officials are well aware of, last year was probably one 
of the worst years we’ve had in this province when you add up 
all the problems that farmers have had. We’ve gone through the 
BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] problem that’s been 
ongoing for a couple of years now — no sign in sight of that 
letting up. But we’re talking about 2004. Our farmers had a 
complete year there of up-and-down low cattle prices. Cull cow 
prices, slaughter bull price just hit the bottom and have stayed 
there. And that has taken a lot of dollars out of many of the 
farmers’ pockets. 
 
And I guess to my amazement, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering 
how on earth we can justify that this last year, the 2003 year, we 
would need $404 million — even though it took you until 
December to finally put that money in which caused problems 
out in the Ag sector as it was, but you felt that was necessary 
last year — how can you justify that we won’t need somewhere 
in that area again for the year 2004? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. I think it’s 
very important for us to take a look at the larger picture, and by 
larger picture I don’t mean in the province, I don’t even mean in 
the nation. 
 
I think we’re looking at worldwide issues here and when we 
look around the world, most of the industrialized countries, 
their federal governments fully fund their agriculture programs, 
the subsidy programs, and the support programs. This 
government chose, a number of years ago, to take a tack — the 
federal government — to demand that the provincial 
governments supply a significant portion of any of the funding. 
And they have over a significant number of years, broken that 
down at 60/40. This government since ’99 — and probably 
significantly earlier — was pressing the federal government for 
a more equitable formula. 
 
[14:45] 
 
It has been my commitment since I was appointed minister last 
year to try and do everything I could to get that formula 
changed. And as the member opposite — critic from last year 
— indicated, once we had fully funded CAIS for last year, that 
the members opposite would come on board in that attempt to 
get this formula changed because it is so patently unfair. 
 
Well the thing I’m happy to report about is that members of 
governments across this country — the ministers of Agriculture 
across this country — recognize how completely unjust this 
system is, and they have been standing with me. We have been 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

standing together as we have been pressing the federal 
government for changes, because CAIS as it is structured today, 
first of all, does not meet all the needs. And second of all — 
and I guess in this case primarily — it is not affordable on a 
60/40 basis. To that extent we have not only complained to the 
federal government about it, but we have brought forward 
programs that we know will make a difference for this province. 
 
In the meantime what we have done is we have committed to 
fund on the basis of what the federal government told us the 
average payments over the five years would be. We’ve followed 
through on that commitment; we have committed $100 million. 
And we are continuing to press the federal government with the 
help of the other Agriculture ministers across this country, to 
get some changes so that this program will be affordable, and so 
that we as a nation will be competing on more equal footing 
with the other industrialized countries where their federal 
governments do provide the support payments for agriculture. 
 
So how do we budget this way? We budget based on the 
numbers that we were given. We recognize that there is a huge 
challenge in front of us in terms of changing the formula. And 
we are hoping that we will see those changes at least indicated 
at the July meeting. And following that July meeting, if we have 
to reconsider, if we have to look at alternative ways of funding, 
that’s the time when we will do it. But we are committed to try 
and make changes. And hopefully we’ll see those changes in a 
timely manner and the support will be provided. 
 
In the meantime there is an initial payment when producers get 
their forms in. When they have been processed they will receive 
an initial payment which is equivalent to about 70 per cent of 
what they will be entitled to. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, that sounds very simple 
and fine when we’re talking in here. But the calls that we’re 
getting — the member for Thunder Creek, every MLA on this 
side of the House — and I’m sure your own office is getting 
calls from where farmers are asking, what happened to our 2003 
payment? 
 
Now this program has a number of flaws and I’m sure you are 
well aware of many of those flaws. But this is slow, slow 
reacting. And then to add to the problem that we have out there 
. . . and maybe I’ll just touch on one point that you talked about. 
 
In fact the Deputy Premier talked about it the other day and 
said, when it comes to negotiating with the federal government 
for the changing the formula, that the opposition has not been 
onside. Well that’s far, far from being exact. We have always 
said that we agree with you that the federal formula needs to be 
rejigged, whether it’s 80/20, wherever we can go to make a 
better deal for Saskatchewan because of the large and vast 
agriculture industry we have in this province. 
 
That’s not even for negotiations. We agree that this is not fair 
from the federal government. What we are saying it is — 
because even though it is not fair, the federal government is 
making us pick up 40 per cent of the cost of this program in 
Saskatchewan and that the program itself certainly needs some 
overhauls and some changes — is it’s the only program that our 
farmers have right now. 
 

So we can sit here and argue back and forth, well it’s all 
somebody else’s fault. But in the meantime you know as well as 
I do who is paying the price out there. And it’s the farmers in 
Saskatchewan, the farm families. The stress it causes on those 
farm families, what it does to kids out there on farms. And I 
think you’re well aware from your background, the stress and 
the hurt that that can cause on farmers all over this province — 
ranchers for that matter — all over this province. How many 
breakups are happening out there that we don’t talk about? It’s 
not advertised out there. 
 
I even know, Mr. Minister, of suicides that have happened that I 
could not prove that directly went back to what is happening in 
agriculture, but there’s nowhere else to look. The problem is 
because farmers are up against it, have nowhere to turn. So for 
us to sit here and argue, well 60/40’s too expensive, the federal 
government should pick up more — certainly they should pick 
up more but we’re the only game in town, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I mean we can sit here and argue. You say now we could 
argue till about July; we may look at coming in. You were the 
guy in the government last year, Mr. Minister, that waited till 
December to get in the game. And that added stress to farm 
families out there. You’re well aware of that, I’m sure. But if 
you’re not, I am. And every member on this side of the House is 
well aware that farmers over here didn’t have a commitment 
from you that you would fully fund it. 
 
In fact many of the calls we got last fall that said, this isn’t fair 
— in Manitoba, in Alberta, in the other provinces that rely on 
the CAIS program, we’re not being treated equal as the other 
provinces. The farmers aren’t worried about whose fault it is, 
they’re worried about whether they can make their 
commitments of paying their bills. In fact many of them have 
not even been able to fulfill that obligation yet and are still 
owing money from last year. 
 
So we can sit here and play politics all we want. We’re playing 
with lives out there. We’re playing with businesses out there. 
And farming is a big, big business in this province, and one that 
this province actually relies very heavily on for jobs and the 
dollars that come in through taxation because farmers also pay a 
heavy amount of taxation. We could go in and we will go in the 
education tax end of it later, of the cost to farmers out there. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I guess my question for you right now is, 
will you not reconsider? Get our money in and then let’s 
negotiate the change in the formula. Let’s not wait again — I 
don’t know if we think we’re holding the federal government 
for ransom or what it is — and let’s hope they change. I hope 
they change because let’s face it, the government in this 
province is going to change and we will be there. And we will 
be if they do not change what is happening now. 
 
And the members opposite laugh. But we’re talking about 
farmers out there. And I would say just about every farmer in 
this province is represented by people on this side of the House. 
We see first-hand in our constituencies every day farmers that 
are just about going under. Others that are trying to plan for this 
year have no idea how they’re going to put this crop in. 
 
And some of that responsibility, Mr. Minister, has to rely with 
you and your government. And I’m asking you again, will you 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

reconsider holding this off? Put your CAIS money up and let’s 
get on . . . We’ll support you with trying to change the formula 
for federal funding. You have our support on that, unlimited 
support. But will you consider changing what you have just 
stated to us, that we’re going to wait until July, August, 
whenever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Our budget is built on the numbers 
that we got from the federal government. We are not playing 
with people’s lives here because the people of this province 
have to fund whatever that we are able within our fiscal 
capacity. 
 
There are steep challenges in the agriculture field, far beyond 
the programs of support that we find in CAIS. And we are 
trying to address those challenges which will lead us forward 
into a prosperous agriculture sector. Some of those are related 
to weather, which we have no control over. Some of those are 
related to world trade, which we are working on trying to 
change. Some of those are related to where we can invest 
money to move us into the future, and we know that there is a 
return when we can invest money into research and 
development in this province. 
 
We are seeking to help move agriculture forward. But you’re 
right — there’s a lot of pain out there and there’s a lot of 
suffering out there. And we have done better in this province in 
terms of putting money together and getting that money out 
than most have done. Ten times the provincial per capita 
average is what we paid out last year. And I committed when I 
first stood up and started talking about this last year, I 
committed that we would do everything possible to fully fund 
CAIS. 
 
But in the meantime, what we were going to do was everything 
possible, everything possible to try and get that formula 
changed. And we have been continuing to work at that, 
providing alternatives that may work for the whole nation 
because if they work for Saskatchewan, they will work for the 
nation. 
 
And I can tell you that when we put forward the money for 
CAIS last year, there were a lot of thankful people that we were 
able to reach those numbers. And I can tell you that there are a 
lot of farmers out in this province who are supportive of this 
government and the directions that we have been moving, who 
are supportive in terms of the need to change that formula. And 
I know that when those farmers get their application forms in 
and when those forms are processed and when they get the 
initial payment of 70 per cent of what will be coming, it does 
have a positive impact. 
 
And I can also tell you, Mr. member opposite and the people of 
this province, that as soon as we know what those final numbers 
will be, then we will be looking forward to doing everything we 
can to provide full funding, first of all, through a change in the 
formula. Second of all, if we can scramble together and pull 
together some money and I tell you when you look at this 
province and what we have done, it far exceeds what any other 
province has done in terms of their support for their farmers. 
 
So yes, we understand there’s suffering out there. And because 
of that suffering, we have been paying far beyond what any 

other province does and we will continue to support agriculture 
to that great extent and we’ll continue to try and make the 
system in this province and this country much more responsive. 
 
Now the member opposite also asked another question which I 
think is important and that’s around the timeliness of the 
payments. This has been a very, very frustrating piece for most 
producers who are . . . there’s a delay of a year. And we have 
been pressing again for the federal minister to make some 
adjustments. And I know we met with him last week and he is 
trying to find some way of facilitating those payments getting 
out earlier. 
 
So on each of these fronts, we are working. We’re working with 
the federal government and we’re working with the other 
provinces to try and make sure that we’ve got a system in this 
province that will . . . in this nation and this province that will 
work for Saskatchewan, that will be affordable, and will 
provide the necessary kind of payments in a timely manner. 
That’s our commitment, to work to make that happen. 
 
And I appreciate that the member opposite has said that they 
will give us their unconditional support in our attempts to try 
and change the formula. We need that support. The more we 
stand with a solid voice when we’re speaking to Ottawa, the 
better off we all are. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. 
Well we’ve got that straight. We’ve got that part out of the 
road. 
 
But I guess the problem, maybe I’m not making myself clear 
enough, is that if I remember right last year, we had a billion, 
over a $1 billion windfall in this province. A lot of that 
attributed to oil and gas, another part of that attributed to 
equalization money from the federal government. So there was 
a lot more money coming into provincial coffers last year, last 
fall, than was expected. 
 
And I guess my question, Mr. Minister, is: how much of a 
bonus would we have to have from the federal government, or 
for what other area if oil and gas goes to $100 a barrel like 
some are talking about it may in the next couple of years? At 
what point will you get on board and say, well because our 
farmers in Saskatchewan here should be on a level playing field 
with the rest of the country, we will honour this commitment? 
 
Just once I think it would be so good for the members on this 
side of the House and farmers that we represent would be to 
have your government come out when a program of any kind 
comes out and have you agree to say, it’s a good program; 
we’re going to be there for our farmers. And I’ve heard you say 
that a number of times, except I take exception to that because I 
haven’t found many instances when you’ve actually been there 
for our farmers. You got over putting . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh come on. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The minister says, come on. Now think 
about this for a minute. What program can you list off in the 
last while that you’ve actually helped farmers in Saskatchewan 
by being to the table right away with dollars when a program 
comes out federally, many jointly agreed to by both — or not 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

agreed to maybe because you guys always hang out — but 
where our farmers are actually treated the same as every other 
province in this country? 
 
Our farmers always seem to have to take the back seat to every 
other province — Manitoba for an example, who has by the 
way an NDP government. They hold off it for a while and try 
and get a better deal as you’re doing. And they agree with many 
things that we’re doing here in Saskatchewan. But they always 
get to the table far sooner than you guys do. You know, and we 
can go into crop insurance. We can go into all these different 
programs where it seems that we’re so hesitant to get to the 
table right away that our farmers are the ones that are up against 
the wall. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you explain to a farmer out there that’s 
applying for an operating loan and hits a, just like he hits a 
brick wall when he’s talking to his banker? Because you know 
what? That banker is saying, this program, the CAIS program is 
not bankable. And why is he saying that? It’s because there’s no 
commitment at this point from the provincial government to 
honour their share. 
 
So he’s going to the bank and trying to borrow money on a 70 
. . . 60, 70 per cent commitment that the farmer across the 
border in Manitoba can turn around and have a 100 per cent 
commitment. How on earth can you explain to those farmers 
out there or tell them? What do they tell the banker? I guess that 
would be the best question. What are you going to tell a banker 
that he will come forward and honour an operating loan that 
they may have had last year or the year before, an operating 
loan that they so desperately need to put this crop in? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you know as well as I do, fuel costs for 
diesel last spring was probably what, 43, 44 cents. This spring 
we’re talking in the neighbourhood of 69, 70 cents and maybe 
higher. And we don’t know. It’s such a fluctuation. But when a 
farmer goes to the bank for an operating loan, he’s got to list all 
these things, all these projections of what his costs are going to 
be, what his income may be, and what he’s guaranteed for 
income through programs, whether it’s crop insurance, CAIS 
program, set-aside program — whatever the programs out there 
are right now. He has to take that to that banker, and he has to 
convince that banker that I will be here a year from now. 
Because of programs like this, I can honour my loan from the 
bank. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And the bankers are saying right now, I’m sorry. We would like 
to stand behind you but we can’t because in Saskatchewan these 
programs are not fully funded. And, you know, maybe, Mr. 
Minister, I should go on with something else, but I think this 
issue is so important that you get the message from farmers out 
there. 
 
And I know you’ve had calls because we’ve had calls from 
farmers saying, I called the minister’s office. I’m calling you 
now because I really didn’t get the response I’d hoped we got. 
Nobody is explaining to me how I put this crop in, especially 
the ones that are saying I couldn’t pay off last year’s bills. 
 
Tell them, Mr. Minister, how they’re supposed to deal with that 

banker and what they’re supposed to use for an operating loan 
this year to put the crop in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well there are a number of issues that 
the member raised and questions within those issues. I did say, 
oh, come on, because the records will show that the member 
said that we did not fully fund programs. He did change it in his 
secondary comments, which is important to note. 
 
But the point is, we did come to the table quickly on BSE and 
we had funding in place. We did come to the table, and we have 
continued to come to the table in terms of fully funding crop 
insurance, our environmental farm programs. And we have . . . 
by the end of the year last year, we had fully funded CAIS. And 
I can tell you that in our record we have been there. In the last 
couple of years, $85 million for BSE. The programs have come 
forward. 
 
The second question that the member raises is around 
bankability of programs. And this is a real dilemma, I think, for 
people dealing with CAIS because a number of the factors that 
are involved there is, you send in . . . you fill out your forms, 
you send them in, but then there’s the whole approval process, 
the checks to see if they fit or they don’t fit and how much 
they’re going to get. Well no one knows. The accountants were 
often off when they estimated for farmers what they would be 
able to get out of that program, or what they might get. 
 
And bankability is if . . . it’s like a loan guarantee or something 
where you know the amount. Well in CAIS that just simply 
isn’t the way it operates. I mean, you could say that if your 
estimate is accurate, if your accountant’s numbers are accurate, 
that bankability is 70 per cent. But still at the beginning of the 
year when you’ve filled out your forms, when you’ve sent them 
in, there’s still no guarantee that what is your estimated 
payment is going to be your payment, nor that 70 per cent of 
that is going to be your payment. And I think the banks back off 
on that. 
 
However if we look at the issue of . . . I mean, their input costs 
are a huge factor along with prices. And I think that’s causing 
many, many problems for many, many farmers out there. Few 
of those are factors which the provincial government controls. 
 
Now, your point about, well then, the provincial government 
should be backfilling. Well the problem is, and we’ve seen this 
over many, many years is, when the provincial government or 
the federal government or a program backfills, those who are 
charging the prices, who are price-setters, seem to somehow 
have a need to gobble up however much is put into the program. 
And farmers are price-takers. Whatever the price is, they can’t 
make a difference there. They have to take that price. That’s 
something which our programs have tried, I think over decades, 
to meet that. 
 
But we’ve got farmers out there who are looking at all of the 
crops that they might grow. They’re doing their numbers on the 
input costs that they have to get. And there’s not a lot of crops 
that are showing a huge possibility of great returns. But that 
said, the reports out this afternoon say that we will see the same 
number of seeded acres approximately as what there were last 
year. 
 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

So farmers are finding the resources. They are moving ahead. 
They are making the commitments to move ahead. And we are 
making the commitment that we will be funding CAIS to a per 
cent. And then when we can . . . and they will get the initial 
payments as their forms are processed. And then if we can get a 
change in the formula, we’ll make sure that they get whatever 
else is coming through that program. 
 
We will be there, as I have said many times. We have been 
there, and we will be there for the producers of this province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I know 
there’s a number of programs that you haven’t been there. And 
we talk about the farm family opportunities program, the 
conservation cover agrologists last year. Do I remember right? 
Are my facts right, that we let a bunch of agrologists go that 
assist farmers in doing the business that they do? 
 
The property tax rebate — you’ve put in 8 per cent now, after in 
the last ten years probably jacking the taxes . . . The education 
tax on farm land has probably gone up 100, 150 per cent, and 
we’re returning 8 per cent and saying what great guys we are. 
And nobody’s begrudging the 8 per cent for sure, but there’s 
sure the need out there to deal with problems like that are far 
greater. 
 
We talk about the CFIP [Canadian farm income program] 
program, if you’re talking about programs that you’ve funded. 
Well that was one, if I remember right, wasn’t fully funded. 
 
Another one, Mr. Minister, maybe you want to talk to me and 
tell me about the set-aside program now, the $200. If I 
understand it right, the federal government’s share has gone out. 
Part of the provincial share went out at the end of the month — 
and correct me if I’m wrong. I might not be quite right on this 
— and then the other part of the provincial share isn’t going out 
till the end of June. Would you care to comment on that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well in terms of the set-aside 
program, we did make a commitment to the full amount of our 
funding for the set-aside program. We also made a commitment 
in terms of good stewardship to do so in a stage program. The 
second payment is not coming in June as the member says, but 
is scheduled for October. It is when the costs are incurred and 
the payments will be made. Farmers know that. They can plan 
around it. We are fully funding the program as well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, through the Chair, 
maybe explain that a little clearer to me. If a farmer took part in 
the set-aside program, has he received a cheque of the federal 
money to this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes. The producers who have joined 
the set-aside program have received the full amount of the 
federal money and they have received the first stage payment 
from the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, again I guess what I’m 
going back to is where Manitoba and Alberta and some of the 
other provinces are. From our understanding is that farmers in 
that area that took part in the set-aside program received the full 
$200 when the first federal money come out, which was not that 

long ago, but they got the full $200. 
 
How on earth do we think it’s cheaper to pay in increments? 
And we’re not paying till October the other part of the money. 
Wouldn’t it be cheaper administratively and all the other issues 
involved . . . is to give them just once this $200 up front in one 
shot? Because, I mean, the costs are there now. They’re keeping 
these cattle over. Why do we have to always in this province 
make it more complicated, more administration? I mean it 
would be so much simpler to have given the full $200 shot and 
got that part out of the way and they’d have the cash in their 
pocket. What is the reasoning that here in Saskatchewan we 
have to drag this out? 
 
I had one farmer ask me if we thought . . . if the government 
thought maybe they weren’t old enough or smart enough to 
handle the full 200 in one shot. So maybe, Mr. Minister, you 
can explain to him why we have to hand it out like an allowance 
instead of handing it out as the other provinces do, in a one-shot 
time and save administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s very important to know that 
some of the other provinces, in looking at the program . . . And 
we are not the other provinces. We do things differently. 
Sometimes we do them better and faster. Sometimes we do 
them just differently, and sometimes they don’t roll out the 
same way. 
 
And I’ll give you an example . . . is the CAIS payments. Alberta 
is at about — the last numbers we got — about 62 per cent of 
their payments out. We’re at about 92 per cent of our payments 
out because we do it differently. We do it better. And there are 
numerous examples where the kind of work that we do 
facilitates payments faster. 
 
But we also try and do good public policy. And I think the 
member opposite will agree with me that good public policy is 
important. And in this program, this set-aside program, one of 
the possibilities was that we would see a March 7 border 
opening. The question I would ask is, should we have put the 
taxpayers of this province on the hook for a full payment and 
then try and take back that payment which was to cover feeding 
of animals for a whole year period? It was not about wealth 
transfer; it was about providing the support for a set-aside that 
would normalize the market crisis, which it was a factor in 
doing that. 
 
So in terms of good public policy, we think that what we did 
was right. We have heard feedback from other provinces 
saying, yes indeed we think that is the way it should’ve been set 
up, and complimenting us on the good public policy. It was not, 
I repeat, about a wealth transfer. It was about payment for a 
program which could end at any time with a border opening. 
And it’s about paying producers for the cost during those times 
to enable that set-aside to happen. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may be getting 
compliments from the other provinces, but I haven’t heard too 
many of those compliments being passed your way from the 
farming community in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, on the set-aside program, if I understand it right, 
you had allotted $40 million, is that right for that program? 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, we did fund that program in our 
planning. We’re looking at, excuse me, the potential number of 
animals that would be enrolled in Saskatchewan, and we were 
also looking at the time that they would be set aside and what 
the cost factors would be there. And to that extent, we had 
budgeted in the neighbourhood of . . . well we had budgeted 
$40 million for that program. 
 
And if that money is not ultimately used, then there will have to 
be some redesignation. And we hope if that comes to pass it’ll 
mean the border is open, the trade is better, and our 
redesignation will have a positive impact for farmers in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
guess my question then would be, would you not know at this 
point exactly what it will cost the provincial treasury for this 
program? 
 
I believe the application deadline has passed, has it not, to 
apply? Or is that still an open-ended book? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The three elements of the program, the 
fed cattle set-aside program is still in progress as people register 
to take part in that program. It’s paid out somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of $46,000. We see in the other ruminants side 
of the program, payments have been going out. It’s expected 
that they’ll be about 1.8 million by the end of that. And the 
payments under the feeder cattle, we’re estimating will be 
somewhere in the $25 million range. 
 
And again that’s very, very dependent for the feeder calf 
set-aside, very dependent on when a border might open. If it’s 
the extended year program, then we’ll have the funding in 
place. We’ll fully pay that out. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess another 
question to do with the set-aside, I noticed Alberta has a 
deadline of October that the people have to set aside their 
animals for before they can move them in Saskatchewan. Can 
you correct me if I’m wrong, but I believe we’re January. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well one of the things that happens 
when we’re engaged in developing programs with the federal 
government and the other 10 provinces, occasionally we get a 
national agreement on a program which we did on this program, 
and the January date was the date that had been agreed upon. 
And Alberta, which does have the advantage of a significant 
surplus and large treasury, decided that they would go for an 
October date. We knew that that would impact producers in 
Saskatchewan as well, being as we’re the close neighbours here 
and working in the same market. 
 
And so in our discussions we determined that we could set — 
and we talked this over with the federal government and other 
provinces as well — that we could set an alternative October 
date that farmers could choose, and payments would be 
proportional to when those dates were. So the payments for an 
October date would have been a little bit less than the January 
date, but that was all dependent on the kind of support that was 
there for the farmers to feed their animals on the set-aside. 
 
[15:15] 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I guess the only reason I kept going 
on that, Mr. Minister, was that if farmers in Alberta can let their 
cattle go in October — I’m not sure if it’s the beginning or end 
— and yet here in Saskatchewan we have to hold them until 
January, I think the cost to our farmers is an additional three 
months to hold those same cattle over. And I guess if there was 
a benefit to our farmers, why wouldn’t we have gone in October 
with Alberta . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — They had the choice about that . . . 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, I missed that, Mr. Minister. We’ll go 
with that for now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I got a call and it was kind of an interesting call. 
But a farmer had got some information that within the CAIS 
program . . . and I’m not sure if this is federal, and I hope you 
can correct me if I’m wrong. But within the CAIS program 
itself, there’s been up to 200 layoffs from office staff that have 
worked with the CAIS program. Can you explain any of that to 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That is of course the federal program. 
And it’s our understanding that those are national numbers 
which you were quoting, and it’s a regular seasonal layoff as 
the numbers of forms are completed and paid out, and we are at 
92, 93 per cent now here in Saskatchewan. Other provinces that 
are under the federally administered CAIS program are also far 
ahead, and so they are able to lay staff off for a period of time. 
And once the forms start coming in en masse then there will 
probably be a corresponding increase in the numbers of staff to 
handle the increase in the number of processing forms. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is this federal 
bureaucrats that have been let go on seasonal basis or is that 
provincial? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Those are all federal. We opted into 
the federally administered program. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay thank you. And I guess with the 
number of calls we get on the program being so backed up . . . 
let’s face it we’re still talking some cases, in fact quite a number 
of 2003 claims that haven’t been processed yet. I believe you 
said 91 per cent we’re up to at that point, somewhere in there. 
But then we’ve got to go through, all the way through 2004, and 
the program itself is so slow reacting that a farmer can be long 
gone before his cheque ever hits the mail if he’s one of the 
unfortunate ones that has it sit on this desk to that desk. And 
I’m sure you’ve got calls that we’ve also got, that it can be a 
nightmare trying to track where their claim is and whose desk 
it’s sitting on and for what reason it’s not being processed. 
 
We have people that have switched over to the accrual 
accounting process, and we’ve even had people say that well 
it’s on this desk, and it’s being held up because we’re dealing 
with all the other accounting methods. And, you know, it’s 
frustrating for farmers when they try and track what’s going on 
when they finally think they do qualify for a payout out of these 
programs. 
 
And again as we’ve said, these programs aren’t as bankable 
here as they could be in other jurisdictions or as bankable as we 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

need them. And when we have this slow reaction time to these 
programs, it’s really hard for farmers to have a poor crop or a 
downturn one year and see the next year that that cheque’s out 
very early in the new year to help them get through that new 
year. It may be as much as two years away, and that certainly 
isn’t saving anybody from bankruptcy or anything else that they 
might have to go through . . . or selling their farms or whatever. 
If may be this payment was large enough that it could have kept 
them going for another year or two until the crops improve, 
until the border opens, whatever it is. 
 
So I guess we’re talking about the program not being receptive 
enough or quick enough, reactionary enough, to really help 
farmers in a timely mode out there. And I guess when I hear of 
people that administer the program being laid off it makes us 
really scratch our heads; what on earth is going on here, 
seasonal or otherwise? Why don’t we catch up on the ones 
we’re behind with and then maybe get up to date? It reminds 
me of the waiting lists in health care in the province that just 
seem to get longer and longer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d just like to go back . . . and correct me if I’m 
wrong; I believe you said 91 per cent we have, were up to date 
on the 2003 program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Closer to 93 per cent, I’m told, that 
have been processed for the ’03 program. The reality of this as 
we understand it . . . and certainly there are people who are 
concerned about the timing of this, and I’ve raised that with the 
federal minister and we’ve been . . . I know he has been trying 
to figure out ways that we can deal with this. Now we can do an 
advance, always there is the risk that somebody might take 
significant advance and then have to pay back over time. 
 
But we’re trying to find mechanisms, and I am assured by the 
federal government that their officials are working as quickly as 
they can, and they’re working with our officials to try and find 
some way of making sure that these payments flow in a more 
timely manner because we’re all very well aware of some of the 
issues of cash flow that farmers are facing. 
 
My understanding is that the forms, the CAIS payments left to 
be processed are, generally at this time, they are the larger 
payments. And they should be — I hope that they will be — 
flowed out just as quickly as they possibly can. The fact that 
they’re larger probably means that you’ve got one or two 
people dealing with each file, and retaining a whole lot of other 
people who are dealing with preliminary aspects of the CAIS 
forms and CAIS filings wouldn’t really affect finishing up these 
larger files. That is the understanding that we have at this point. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, another thing that’s came to 
our attention is that Alberta, I understand, administers their own 
program in Alberta. And from the information that we’ve got is 
they’re far ahead of us in dealing with these applications. Can 
you comment on that? Does Alberta not administer their own 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, Alberta does administer their 
own program. In the last numbers we got was that they were 
determined to try and get a fast track because while we were at 
somewhere in the 90, 91 range, they were in the neighbourhood 
of 62 per cent complete. So they have decided that they need to 

fast track and move that ahead. 
 
Let me just give you an idea of the kind of processing that has 
already happened for the 2004 claims in Saskatchewan. There 
were not quite 4,200 applications received, and there have been 
almost, well, 2,700, just over 2,700 applications processed 
already. And there are another 1,400 in progress. Payments out 
— this is 2004 — 1,467. So we are moving ahead with the ’04 
year as well. And I hope that we will find a mechanism for 
making this cash flow a little earlier because we recognize the 
problem there. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister just 
getting back to the Alberta doing their own administration here 
makes me wonder if it might be something we would want to 
look at in the future maybe too. Does Alberta receive any 
federal money to support them for the administration costs 
because they’re doing it themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is our understanding that being in 
the federal system allows them to use the tax information that 
the federal government carries, which does move things along 
more quickly. There’s another aspect as well, and that is just in 
terms of running the computer programs to move these forms 
through. And I think it’s because we’re tied into the federal 
program that we have been able to move through them as 
quickly as we have. 
 
Alberta with their own system . . . I mean there are some 
benefits to going that way, no denial. But in terms of trying to 
flow the cash as quickly as we can, which for us we see as a real 
concern, tapping into the federal system and having them do the 
administration has given us more speed in terms of our ability 
to process the forms. Frustrating as it is that they’re not all 
through, it has given us more speed than what Alberta has had. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, can you give us any timeline 
today when they hope that the 2003 applications will be fully 
processed and we’ll be on with 2004 only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With the exception of the problem 
files and those files in which farmers choose to appeal, it is our 
understanding that they should have the rest of them finished by 
the end of April. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Interesting you 
talked about appeal. That brought something else to mind. 
Supposedly a farmer would have the right to appeal if he wasn’t 
satisfied with what the payout was in the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is our understanding that out of the 
thousands of farmers that were supported with CAIS, that there 
are about 98 appeals. The system is in place for those appeals to 
be moved forward, but there is always the hope that if an appeal 
is filed, that they’ll be able to work it through administratively. 
If there is some problems there, that they’ll be able to correct it 
before it actually has to go to the appeal panel. And they should 
be . . . I’m hoping that they’ll be able to move through those in 
a fairly timely manner as well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I guess my 
question is then, is there actually an appeals committee in place 
at this point? 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — They have their system set up. We’re 
not clear as to whether they have made their full slate of 
appointments on the appeal panel, but that has to happen. It’s 
our understanding that they will be prepared to move by May, 
that they will be prepared to move on those by May. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because the 
reason I ask these questions is when you mentioned appeals, it 
brought back to mind a note that I’d been given by a farmer, 
that he was told his appeal should be heard on January 5, and 
then to his amazement finds out that on March 29 there’s still 
actually no appeals committee in place. And I guess again the 
grief that this causes this farmer out there is that whether he’s 
getting this amount of money, or this amount of money after the 
appeals process has gone through, he was shocked to find out 
the appeals process is not even in place and his chance of 
receiving money in the near future are probably slim to none. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’d made the comment in one of your answers 
here before — we were talking about the 2004 program — and 
would you just go back into that. Did I hear you right, say you’d 
had only 4,200 applications to this point for the 2004 year and 
we’ve processed about 2,700? Is that all the applications we 
have received to this point for 2004? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, that is accurate. That’s the 
numbers that we have as of April 10. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Minister, is that number not a 
way lower than you would have projected due to the year we 
had last year, or are you expecting a flood of claims to still 
come in, in the future? 
 
[15:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is our understanding that this is a 
fairly normal pattern because farmers will be doing their 
income tax as well as filing the forms. And so some time after 
the tax filing, the forms will probably start to flow in fairly 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the other 
consistent complaint we get, and I’m sure you get the same 
complaint, is the administrative costs and the hurdles that 
farmers have to go through to put in a claim. And it’s just like a 
nightmare. And I know why some of the farmers haven’t put 
their claims in yet because it’s driving them nuts, the rigmarole 
they have to go through to claim for CAIS. I go back to AIDA 
[agricultural income disaster assistance] and CFIP and all these 
programs. 
 
Is there no way or is there any . . . Maybe the question I should 
be asking, is there anything in the works where your department 
maybe is working with the federal government? Is there no way 
we can simplify these now that we’ve got the CAIS program? 
And I’m not saying it’s a perfect program, needs many changes 
made to it, but again it’s the only program in town. Is there no 
way that we can simplify these programs? 
 
You’ve talked about farmers have done their income tax or are 
doing their income tax — deadline’s coming very quickly. By 
using their income tax . . . And they’ve got their amount of 
grain on hand, their cattle on hand, and all this is recorded now 

from years past. That was a real hassle to start with. Is there no 
way that we can simplify the program right now so that farmers 
aren’t spending the kind of dollars they are on administration, 
and actually in some cases almost making it prohibitive to even 
bother applying for CAIS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There are three points that I’d like to 
make in regard to revising the program to make it, make it more 
effective, more simple. First of all, the federal government has 
been working to try and tie the program closer to the tax system 
so that a supplemental form could be filled out. I think that will 
be effective. 
 
I think one of the other things that we’ve seen has been for 
many farmers last year, and part of the complexity of it, was 
shifting to an accrual accounting system, which I think now that 
they’ve gone through that process, it’ll probably make it a little 
bit less costly and smoother for them as well. 
 
Secondly is with regard to the CAIS deposit. And I know the 
member opposite knows that I’ve pressed on that very hard and 
we’re seeing some change in that. I still don’t know what the 
final result of that will be, but it has been our position that the 
deposit should be removed and that the commitment of the 
farmers on their portion of the program should simply be what 
they’re covering in terms of the losses. 
 
And so we’ll see how that moves forward. I mean some of the 
other provinces have a different point of view on how the CAIS 
deposit should be worked out, whether there is administrative 
fee. And I think from my understanding, that fee would 
probably tie in to what actual costs of taking out a loan to pay 
the deposit would be. So that might not be too onerous. And 
others are talking about a deductible. 
 
But all of that has to be dealt with at our meeting in July. The 
officials have been working very diligently on that to try and 
provide us with the best advice and the best way through this, 
and we’ll be deliberating that in July. 
 
And the other thing that we have asked for at the 
federal-provincial meetings is really to see if there is any way to 
develop more administrative simplicity. And again, the officials 
are working on that front to see if there is any possibility of 
getting more simplicity for the future. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, has 
your department, in conjunction with the federal government, 
any projection for 2004 of what kind of dollars we may be 
looking at when the smoke clears from 2004 applications? Are 
we far enough into the year that you can give us some kind of a 
number in that respect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Without adding up the federal 
government’s 60 per cent, I can give you the range of 
projections that they’re giving us today. For 2004, the range 
today is 179 million to 206 million. And when they’re ranging 
out even a little bit further for the 2005 CAIS program costs, 
again if we’re into a 60/40 split, the provincial portion is 
estimated for ’05 CAIS year to be somewhere between 228 and 
$245 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Forgive me, Mr. Minister. Maybe I’m 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

misunderstanding what you’re saying. You’re saying for 2004 it 
could range somewhere from 179 million, our share of 206 
million, and that’s fine. And you talked about 2005. How would 
they have any idea of what 2005 would cost us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think as all of us in this House 
experienced last year when we were told signing on to the 
program that the program would cost us $100 million a year 
over a 5-year average, that there’s a lot of iffiness in the 
computer modelling program that the federal government has. 
 
There will be learning in terms of now having one year behind 
us, moving into the second year. But their projections for 2005 
are based on a computer model. They try and take in all of the 
relevant factors to that model to give us a number. But I’ll tell 
you, it’s not a number I’d want to budget on today. And as I 
say, I’m also hopeful that we will see some significant address 
to the issue of affordability before that time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I find for the 
year 2004, especially both sides, we know that the frost hit, 
well, this half or the east half of the province; in fact, maybe 
even a larger area than that. And just took what was a bumper 
crop, we all know which we all needed, not just the farming 
community, but businesses involved and everyone for that 
matter, needed that crop to come off like it was, and that wasn’t 
to be — the frost hit. 
 
But I’m somewhat surprised when you add into the BSE 
problems that we’ve got in our cattle industry, and I know 
feeders aren’t all — were for a while — weren’t all that bad of a 
price. They’re kind of moving around now a little bit, but where 
our cull cows are just about valueless out there. Butcher bulls 
are just about valueless. You hear stories of farmers just about 
having to give them away because there’s no money coming in. 
 
I would have thought for the 2004 year might be one of our 
worst years that we ever have, either, you know, from past or 
into the future. And I find it awfully low to have 179 million to 
$206 million as the dollars that we would have to put in that 
program for this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think the member raises a number of 
good points and those points are exactly the reason why we’re 
quite skeptical about the numbers that keep coming through. 
 
I mean, again, when we signed on to this program, they assured 
us $100 million a year is going to cover it. And there’s so many 
variables and we get these range of numbers. I can tell members 
opposite that when we were coming into the fall, the numbers 
that we were getting were significantly — and this is late fall — 
were significantly lower than what the final payout actually 
was. 
 
So I mean, you point to . . . the member points to a factor that 
we have to live with and that is, that the ranges vary quite 
significantly and they are projections at this point. There will be 
a number of factors that do affect us. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’ll get to the right mike 

here. Minister, I was listening to your . . . comments of my 
colleague and your answers on the estimates of payouts for 
2004 and 2005, and your comments about the uncertainty of 
those level of payouts for 2003. And I guess the question that 
came to mind is, do you and your department not have any 
capacity whatsoever to do any type of calculations as to the cost 
to this province of this CAIS program? Have you no . . . You 
have a whole department behind you. Have you no one within 
your department that at least has some ability to do some 
forecasting as far as the Saskatchewan portion of this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, I think it’s very important to note 
that we do have staff who have the ability, who are very 
definitely capable of doing analysis. And yet in our initial 
analysis, it was our understanding that it would be better for the 
province, better in terms of timing and consistency, to work 
with the federal government, to use their system. Now that 
system, as we have already discovered, has a lot of difficulties 
in terms of projection. And it’s because there are so many 
variables involved. 
 
But we believe that the projections that they’re doing with the 
information that they have are the projections that get us closest 
now to what those potential numbers are. So it’s not a matter of 
whether our department officials have the expertise. I have 
every confidence in the department of Agriculture and Food 
officials that they can do tremendous work. But it is the federal 
government that is running this program for us. We’re happy to 
have them doing that. It’s kept us ahead of Alberta in terms of 
moving the process through. And not that we’re in competition 
with Alberta to move it through, but that’s the only comparable 
provincial model that we have to compare with. They are 
administering themselves. 
 
But co-operating with the federal government on this front, we 
do provide them with statistical information to help in their 
analysis as well. So though those numbers are off, it just tells 
you how difficult it is to project to any level of exactness what 
we’re going to be dealing with in overall payments. But as to 
the ability of our officials, I have no question. I have every 
confidence in them. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, it seems a little surprising that your 
government would sign on to a program that commits this 
province to spend in 2003, 210 million; 2005, possibly $250 
million, and you wouldn’t have . . . You say you have staff that 
can . . . I’m not talking about administering the program. I’m 
talking about estimating the cost to the province. You say you 
have staff that’s very capable. I have no reason to doubt you. 
 
I guess the question I would have is, why don’t you have your 
staff work on those cost estimates so that we’re not waiting on 
the federal government to give us the estimates? You said that, 
you know, there’s a lot of uncertainty coming from the federal 
government. We have StatsCanada. We have our own . . . In our 
own province we keep track of things like seeded acres and 
crop prices and all those variables that affect these calculations. 
 
Yet no one in your department seems to have said, well gee, 
maybe this is an important thing that we should at least have a 
ballpark figure of what this program is going to cost us on a 
year-to-year basis. And therefore we end up budgeting $99 
million. I mean, this is inexcusable, Minister. 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well once again, I think it is very 
important for the member opposite to recognize the complexity 
of this system. The federal government working with 
governments across the country came up with the program, did 
their budgeting, set out the parameters, told us to the best of 
their understanding that this program would cost $100 million a 
year average over five years. 
 
The department staff provides statistics to the federal 
government as the federal government needs those statistics but 
the members opposite must also understand that the federal 
government has access to most of that information which the 
provincial government does not — the taxation side of it, some 
of the other items that are there within the federal knowledge 
bank. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And also to let you know that they have one whole segment of a 
department that is set up to look at this issue, try and do the 
projections for CAIS. This is a very, very complex issue. There 
are so many factors involved. And in any way for the member 
to posit that the provincial government could be — because of 
the expertise we have, and we do have the expertise — but that 
we could do it faster or better, not having access to all the 
federal information, is simply wrong. 
 
The second factor is that we have agreed to work together with 
the federal government and the other provinces to try and make 
sure that all of the information flows together to give us the 
broadest, best analysis of the whole program. And so it is very 
complex. 
 
And I don’t doubt that the federal government, in trying to 
come to their numbers, the numbers that they’re giving us for 
’04 — between 179 million and 206 million — are the best 
estimates that they can give us, given all that information that 
they have access to plus the information that our officials 
provide for them to do that analysis. And the member is right 
that our officials do have good data on this province and do 
provide that very good data to the federal government with 
which to do their work. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I can remember when we were back in 
this House last fall and we were talking about the total cost of 
the 2003 program. And one of your arguments is that you were 
told by the federal government — and you’ve mentioned it here 
several times today — that the estimated cost of this program to 
the province of Saskatchewan would be around $100 million 
per year and so that’s what you have budgeted. 
 
Going back again to my previous point, I’m not suggesting that 
we should be administering this program in Saskatchewan. 
Perhaps we should, I don’t know. That’s an entirely different 
argument. 
 
What I’m suggesting, asking, is what is the ability of you and 
your department to estimate the annual cost of the program to 
the province? 
 
And I don’t think . . . I realize that the program’s a complicated 
program. I am also a grain, an oilseed, and beef producer, and I 
participate in the program. But the global numbers . . . When 

we talk about gross farm income for the province from various 
sectors, there’s estimates of cash cost, there’s trend lines. I 
cannot accept that . . . And I’m not asking that the estimates be 
within $10 million, but I cannot accept the excuse that we have 
to depend on the federal government to provide us with our cost 
estimate. It seems to me that’s a very poor way of doing 
business — that you sign onto something and you have 
absolutely no idea what it’s going to cost you. And you say, 
well, the federal people will tell us. And now what are you 
telling us? That the federal people won’t even share the 
information? That’s what you were inferring. I would suggest 
that’s not correct, that they probably would. 
 
I’m just asking . . . I wonder if you and your department ever 
asked them for their information so that you can incorporate 
these figures and come up with a ballpark figure as to the cost 
of this program to the province. Minister, I think you need to do 
better in this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well the provinces that do administer 
the program on their own acknowledge that it is probably better 
to have the projections done by the federal government who has 
the funding. That doesn’t mean that we can’t take the 
information that they provide for us, because we are dependant 
on their information for some of the ability to do the analysis. 
Sure we can do that. And we could spend the money for staff to 
try and do this analysis, and we could spend the money to try 
and get a parallel computer model to what the federal 
government is using to do this analysis. And, you know, our 
projections might come out closer than what the federal 
government projections come out. 
 
But, you know, we are a lean department that is working very, 
very hard to try and put as much resource into the industry as 
possible. And we are assured by the federal government that 
they believe that as we move forward in this program, that their 
projections will become more accurate as they gain experience 
in the program. Currently the numbers that they are giving us 
they are estimating, given the background that they have, 
they’re giving the numbers that I have given to you, they are 
estimating will be closer than what they were in last year’s 
estimates. 
 
That said, I will remind you that when we came into the late 
fall, November for example, we were still getting numbers that 
were far below the 210 million which was our final payout. So 
can we do the analysis? Well we still are dependent on the same 
kind of information. We do accurate analysis on our provincial 
information. We provide it for the federal government. They 
bring in the information that they have. They have the computer 
program that does the modelling. 
 
And even with all that there are still challenges to getting an 
immediate, accurate analysis. They assure us that as time goes 
on they will be able to give us more accurate assessments. But 
to go off on our own would be highly expensive and in our view 
would not allow us to return as much to the producers of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Minister, I guess on this issue we’ll have to 
agree to disagree and we may have an opportunity in the future 
to get back to it. There is one other . . . The clock is moving and 
there is an issue that I would like to discuss with you before our 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

time is up. 
 
On April 6, there was news release here in Regina by the 
Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association. And they 
unveiled their plan and talked about the agreement that they had 
reached with Environment Canada on a project which involves 
200 farmers in the first carbon trade in Canada. 
 
My question to you, Minister, is: what type of support and what 
involvement did your department have in assisting the Soil 
Conservation Association in developing this, reaching this 
agreement with Environment Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Our involvement in the process is as a 
supporter of a client customer, or pardon me, the Soil 
Conservation groups are a client customer of the department, 
and so we provide for them a certain level of expertise. But they 
applied to the federal government for the program, were 
accepted, and it is a federal government program that they are 
enrolled in. Our involvement in that program was — directly — 
was minimal. 
 
Mr. Hart: — This program, or this pilot project that the Soil 
Conservation Association along with associations from other 
provinces, as I’d said, is a pilot project which is the first 
carbon-treating project in Canada, which is all part of the 
federal government’s Kyoto implementation program. Minister, 
this is an area where Saskatchewan farmers potentially could 
receive some fairly significant benefits under the federal 
implementation program which would help offset some of the 
future increased costs of energy. 
 
I wonder, Minister, could you outline what efforts and what 
type, what numbers of personnel you have assigned to this file? 
And just where is your department on this file, the whole area 
of sequestering carbon in our agricultural soils? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is our hope and our belief that this 
pilot project will give us insights. We do have staff who have 
been working on the whole issue of carbon sequestration. 
Again, we’ve worked with the soil conservation groups urging 
zero tillage and forage cover over a number of years. It’s still a 
little early to figure out exactly how this system is going to 
work, and how points will be accrued, and who will be able to 
accrue those points. Rumour has it that there are some groups 
that have independently aggregated and are seeking to sell their 
credits on the open market. I have no more than rumour on that 
front. 
 
But it is, from our perspective, a little too early to say exactly 
how this program is going to roll out. The pilot project should, I 
think, give all of us in this province, provincial government, 
farmers . . . and I think will also help the federal government in 
determining the dimensions of this process. I think what our 
hope is — and I don’t want to go too far because I think there is 
a lot of work yet to be done — but our hope would be that the 
net gain would be to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I couldn’t disagree with you more when 
you say it’s too early. In fact it’s too late. The federal 
government signed the Kyoto Protocol two years ago. 
Agricultural soils and their use as carbon sinks were part of that 
agreement. It was known; this is nothing new. And there are 

other provinces that have been working on this and trying to 
establish protocols and promote this idea, with the idea of 
getting maximum benefit for their producers. 
 
Saskatchewan, the province with the largest number of arable 
acres in the country, has been sitting on its hands, has been 
doing absolutely nothing on this file. Absolutely nothing. And 
now you stand up in this House and you say that it’s too early. 
You have done nothing and you should be ashamed of yourself. 
And the losers in this whole file are going to be the farmers of 
this province, Mr. Minister. Yes, make your gestures, Mr. 
Minister. Stand up in the House and make those gestures, and 
then we’ll see what kind of an Ag minister you are. You should 
be ashamed of yourself for dropping the ball on this file. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think it’s very important that 
when a member asks a question, that the member should listen 
to the answer. I indicated to the member the kind of things that 
the province has been doing and that the province has been 
working on. And the member opposite can join his members in 
all the name calling that he wants and all the challenging he 
wants, but I can tell you very clearly, I can tell you . . . 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I ask the members to please . . . ask the 
members to restrain comments while the member is speaking. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s very important to note the 
work that has gone on in co-operation with the soil 
conservations group. I did indicate that earlier. I did indicate 
that the department is working to try and get the best possible 
understanding of how to make sure that we do get the best gain 
for the people of this province through that process. That work 
is ongoing. So the member can deny hearing it all he wants, but 
that’s what was said. 
 
The work is ongoing. The department is engaged and I expect 
that we’ll see some good results of that in the future. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that we report progress and 
move on to another department. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Deputy House Leader has moved 
progress and moved on. Is that agreed? 
 
I recognize the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I just want to — thank you, Mr. Chair — 
just thank the minister and his officials for answering our 
questions today and I’m sure we’ll do this a number of times 
again. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would also like to thank the member 
opposite, the critic for his questions, and my department for the 
good work that they do and the analysis that they do and for 
their being here and support through this portion of estimates. 
Thank you very much. 
 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

The Deputy Chair: — The minister has moved that the 
committee report progress. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The next item of business before the 
committee is estimates for Government Relations, subvote 
(GR01). We’ll pause while the minister gets ready. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Will the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. I appreciate the 
opportunity here. As you know, we are here with the team from 
Government Relations. I have to my immediate right, the 
deputy minister. I’m sorry . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister of 
Intergovernmental Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — All right. Once again, thank you very 
much. I will start again. We are here in Committee of Finance 
to discuss estimates for Government Relations. 
 
I have to my immediate right the deputy minister of 
Government Relations, Mr. Harvey Brooks. And to his 
immediate right, Maryellen Carlson, the assistant deputy 
minister of municipal relations. Behind Maryellen we have John 
Edwards, executive director of policy development. 
Immediately to John’s left, Doug Morcom, the director of 
grants administration. And next to Doug, immediately behind 
me, Wanda Lamberti, the executive director of finance and 
management services. To her left and immediately to my left 
and behind one seat is Mr. Paul Osborne, who is the assistant 
deputy minister, trade and international relations. And to my 
immediate left here is Al Hilton who is the associate deputy 
minister, federal-provincial relations. Seated at the back of the 
House, we have our director of the Office of French Language 
Co-ordination, Mr. Florent Bilodeau and the acting executive 
director of community planning, Mr. Ralph Leibel. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. The question before the 
committee is subvote (GR01). Is the committee ready for the 
question? 
 
I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And 
welcome to the minister and officials. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
just start off with a little bit on how we arrived at the zero grant 
increases for municipalities. And I know that you’ve been 
receiving . . . I would assume you’ve been receiving phone calls 
like I have about the zero increase in money to the 
municipalities. 
 
And I’d just for the record like to put some figures into the 
record about the revenue-sharing pool and how people are 
contacting us and asking us about why there was no increases to 

the revenue-sharing pool. 
 
And originally there was escalator clauses based on selective 
provincial tax bases. For an example, taxable income is not 
actual income taxes, the value of sales, not sales tax revenues. 
And it’s been pointed out that it’s easier to track the actual tax 
revenues raised on some of these bases and this idea to use 
revenue sharing based on the principals. 
 
And I think you are probably very much aware of the 
magnitude of the gap. For an example, urban revenue-sharing 
pool was initially about 34 million in 1978. It rose to 67 million 
before declining to 27 million by 1997, and rising again to 44 
million, 2002-2004 time frame. 
 
But here’s some interesting statistics that are presented to me, 
that if the original 34 million had kept pace with the growth of 
the provincial revenues, it would today sit at close to $150 
million. That’s just keeping pace. And using that analysis, it 
would take another 100 million per year to get back on the 
original track. And even allowing for some conservative 
estimates from the original tax base formula, it’s still probably 
fair to say that the current annual pool of 44 million would have 
to more than triple to meet the original goal of revenue sharing. 
 
And I know in recent years we’ve had organizations, SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], that have 
been wishing to have the pool increased, the revenue-sharing 
formula increased or at least brought back into line with what it 
used to be, and they were asking in previous years for 10 to $20 
million while they’ve been funded to about $5 million. 
 
So all of that to be said, Mr. Minister, can you explain what the 
revenue-sharing formula is and how the sharing formula is 
determined by your department for municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
There’s an awful lot to the premise that the member opposite 
has raised here, the whole question of revenue sharing. And I 
hope that the member opposite will forgive me if perhaps I 
speak a little long in putting my answer together because there 
isn’t a simple answer to his question because all of the pieces 
that he used to lead up to asking the question about what the 
formula is begs other questions. 
 
So not knowing if the member opposite has a series of questions 
with regards to revenue sharing to ask, I’m going to answer to a 
number of the comments that the member made as well as try to 
answer the exact question that was posed. 
 
First and foremost, when he rose to his feet, the member 
opposite was asking about when decisions were made with 
regards to zero increases on revenue sharing and how did we 
get to the point today where actually the budget contains no 
increase on revenue sharing. 
 
It is incorrect to say that municipalities have not received new 
money in this budget. We are dealing with the estimates of the 
department, and I think it’s very clear that the total money 
transferred from this provincial government to the 
municipalities has increased by a little over 8 per cent in this 
budget. So it is incorrect to say that there is no new money 



2552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

flowing to the municipalities. 
 
And in fact I think that it was signalled in the last budget that, 
after we had just finished three consecutive years of providing 
municipalities with a $10 million increase in revenue sharing, 
that they themselves were asking this government to ensure that 
when the new infrastructure deals being brought forward by the 
federal level of government was brought in, that we needed to 
find a way to ensure that municipalities could take full 
advantage of that new infrastructure program. 
 
So this government, myself included, signalled to municipalities 
in the last budget when we provided our third $10 million 
increase to municipalities, that in the coming year we were 
negotiating with the federal government a new infrastructure 
program in which the federal government was going to put 
more money on the table which meant that the provincial 
government had to put more money on the table. And as a result 
of the discussions between municipalities and the development 
of this budget, this government chose to put what will be 
approximately $10 million per year into infrastructure funding. 
 
We signed a deal in mid-winter, late January or early February, 
with the federal government under the Municipal Rural 
Infrastructure Fund in which the federal government, over four 
years, was going to bring forward $38 million. The province of 
Saskatchewan would match that $38 million. And we will now 
be able to, over the next four years, provide on average $10 
million a year of new money for municipal infrastructure. 
 
So the municipalities have got an increase, not only in this 
budget, but in the next three budgets, because of the 
commitment that this government has made towards 
infrastructure funding. Every federal dollar coming into this 
province will be matched by the province of Saskatchewan and 
will provide municipalities with the opportunity to utilize those 
federal dollars to the greatest extent possible. 
 
The city of Regina, the city of Saskatoon have received some 
extra benefit under the urban development agreements that are 
yet to be completed. Negotiations have not yet completed. But 
those urban development agreements will see additional money 
committed in this budget to the city of Saskatoon and the city of 
Regina for projects that they’ve indicated are of high priority to 
them. So we have an 8 per cent overall increase in our budget 
for transfer of dollars to municipalities. And as a result of that, 
it’s impossible to say that there’s no new money flowing to 
municipalities. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms . . . through the Chair, the 
revenue-sharing pool, the numbers that the member opposite 
brought forward are very interesting. And before I go into 
discussing how we’ve arrived at the various numbers in revenue 
sharing, let me say first and foremost that this government has a 
very good working relationship with the municipalities — 
urban and rural. We have worked with the representative 
associations, SUMA and SARM, for a number of years now in 
developing a number of issues that they consider to be 
important. One was infrastructure. Two was the new deal, the 
federal gas tax money. And of course now most recently, we are 
talking about a revenue-sharing agreement. 

We have committed ourselves, that is this provincial 
government has committed ourselves to sit down with the 
municipalities, urban and rural, and examine the 
revenue-sharing circumstances, both the historical 
circumstances, the needs of the communities, and the options 
available to ourselves at the local level and in government for 
proceeding with either a change in the revenue-sharing formula, 
enhancement to the existing one, or whatever other options are 
available. We have agreed to sit down in a working group that 
will include representatives from the urban municipalities, 
representatives from the rural municipalities, and 
representatives from Government Relations to discuss this 
issue. 
 
I think the main reason for changes in the revenue sharing are 
coming forward because of course the municipalities see the 
strong economy of the province of Saskatchewan. The 
municipalities have over the number of years have shared in 
some of the pain that this province has endured. And now that 
there’s potential — and there’s huge potential in the province 
for growth — the municipalities want to also share in that 
growth. And who can blame them? It’s a circumstance where 
we all want to be players in new dollars available. 
 
The municipalities have indicated they want a predictable and a 
sustainable revenue-sharing formula. So does this government. 
We will, when we sit down with the municipalities, show that 
the formula that has been suggested by the member opposite, 
which was in place for two years only, is unsustainable and has 
led to unpredictable results. Therefore if we’re moving forward, 
the formula suggested by the member opposite is unlikely one 
that we would see as a go-forward formula. That having been 
said, I want to indicate that while we’re pulling our numbers 
together, we know that the urban municipalities and the rural 
municipalities are also putting their numbers together. And we 
will sit down and we will go through these at the same time. 
 
But in terms of the numbers that the member opposite put 
forward, I think it is very important to note that the years in 
question where the formula . . . the escalating formula that was 
previously used was cancelled at the end of 1982, essentially by 
the Conservative government, at the time because it was no 
longer sustainable given the circumstances that were taking 
place in the province. 
 
We then saw quite a number of years where there was virtually 
no growth in the revenue-sharing formula through the mid-’80s 
until the early 1990s, when there was a change of government. 
And the province incurred such a huge debt that the 
municipalities by and large agreed to share in the costs of that 
debt. And the revenue-sharing formula in the early 1990s was 
reduced to negative numbers. And in fact we saw overall 10-11 
per cent changes. 
 
It is interesting to note that the next major change for 
municipalities came about in 1997-98, just the year after the 
federal budget of then Finance minister Paul Martin clawed 
back virtually all the health and education transfers to the 
provinces — not just Saskatchewan but across the board. 
Saskatchewan had to backfill all of that federal money that was 
lost to us by that federal budget of 1996. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Chair, here again the province of Saskatchewan 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2553 

in backfilling, worked with the municipalities, and we did see 
another decrease in their revenue sharing . . . again 
unpredictable circumstances because the province had no way 
of knowing what was possible, but at the end of the day could 
not tax the people of Saskatchewan further in order to provide 
additional revenue sharing. 
 
But then as the economy of the province strengthened and this 
government managed to improve the revenue line items in the 
province through — I can only assume — good, strong 
management practices, we’ve been able to share the growth in 
the economy at percentages that far exceeded the growth in the 
provincial economy. In 2002-2003 we did see an 18 per cent 
increase in revenue sharing, in ’03-04 a 15 per cent increase in 
revenue sharing, and in ’04-05 a 13 per cent increase in revenue 
sharing for urban, rural, and northern municipalities. 
 
If we’d been on the formula, I agree, throughout that whole 
period of time there would have been more money for the 
municipalities. But if we’d started the formula again back in 
2002, we would have seen increases of 2 to 3 per cent for the 
municipalities instead of 18, 15, and 13 per cent. 
 
So to make a long story short, we’ve spent three years trying to 
get back into the ball game of revenue sharing with 
municipalities. And we are utilizing the dollars that would 
otherwise be available for revenue sharing to match the federal 
dollars that are available and ensure that municipalities can 
meet their infrastructure needs with 100 per cent, 
across-the-board funding for the federal and provincial shares. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I guess I should 
thank the minister for his oratory there, but there’s a few things 
within what he said that I take a little bit of exception to. 
 
One was I didn’t recommend a formula to the minister. I asked 
the minister what his formula was. And out of that 15 minute 
dissertation, he never got to my fundamental question: what is 
the formula that’s used? That was what I considered a pretty 
simple question for a 15-minute answer that come back and said 
that I was the one recommending the formula, and that was not 
true. 
 
And also, Mr. Deputy Chair, we heard today that 0, 1, and 1 is 
not 0, 1, and 1. There’s something to do with higher math that I 
don’t understand; 0, 1 and 1 could mean 2. It could mean 1. It 
could mean anything. 
 
And the minister said, and we could check the Hansard, that 
funding to the revenue sharing was up. Well I would just like to 
read to the minister from their document, not my document, 
their document: 
 

Urban revenue sharing 2004-2005, 44,109; 2005-2006, 
44,109. 

 
I can’t find an 8 per cent increase in that. And that’s the 
minister’s document. Rural revenue sharing, 33,961 in 
2004-2005. What is it for 2005-2006 — 33,961. That is not 8 
per cent. And that says right in your book, rural revenue 
sharing. Northern revenue sharing, 6,980 — 2004-2005. 
2005-2006, what is it? 6,980 — that is not 8 per cent. 
 

So I think that should be out there to the people when we talk 
about another infrastructure fund, and I’ll get to those questions 
in due course. But how can the minister stand up and say that 
it’s increased, when in his own document it is exactly the same 
as last year? It’s froze. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think when we 
review the blues or the Hansard from the committee tomorrow 
or the next day or whenever the member opposite wishes, he 
will notice that I never said the revenue-sharing pool was up 8 
per cent. I said funding to municipalities was up by 8 per cent. 
The member’s question opposite implies that I was saying 
something that wasn’t accurate. The funding to municipalities is 
up. The revenue-sharing pool is the same as it was last year. 
 
And I indicated in my, as he indicated, 15-minute speech I don’t 
know how long it was, but last year at budget time the 
municipalities indicated to us that the priority for them was 
infrastructure. We were negotiating a new deal with the federal 
government on renewing the infrastructure program which is 
very popular across this province. Virtually every municipality 
in the province had an application come forward for 
infrastructure money over the last five years — a very popular 
program. In fact we could probably use twice as much money in 
that program as had been in place for the last five years. 
 
So renewal of that program was very important. The 
municipalities wanted not just federal money; they wanted 
matched provincial dollars. And for the last five years, the 
province has been able to do that. The municipalities indicated 
it was their priority that in fact we fund the infrastructure 
program. 
 
And when you make choices in government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think the member opposite doesn’t understand that 
when you’re on this side of the House you do have choices that 
have to be made. You can’t do everything for everybody all of 
the time. You have a certain amount of money to work with. At 
the end of the day, you’ve got to make choices as to how you 
distribute it. And when it was brought to our attention from the 
municipalities that first priority was infrastructure, we met that 
priority, Mr. Deputy Chair. We not only met that priority, we 
made choices to ensure that we would get there. 
 
At the end of the day, we recognize that municipalities are 
growing. They’re growing with the province and that as a result 
of that growth, they have additional needs. And therefore 
revenue sharing is an important matter that we have to address. 
That’s why we have agreed to sit down with the municipal 
sector, look at how they’re interpreting their needs and the 
future relationship with the province of Saskatchewan, and 
determine how we can best fit in to those needs. 
 
I also add that in terms of making choices we have now 
identified, as I say, approximately $10 million or $38 million 
over the next four years for infrastructure. Should we have 
additional dollars available to us in future budgets, I think that 
as far as the municipal priorities go, municipalities are 
indicating revenue sharing is what they would like us to look at. 
And I think we are indicating to them that if that’s their priority, 
that’s what we’ll be looking at if there are any future dollars 
available to us, providing predictable and sustainable funding 
for municipal needs. 



2554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I wonder if the 
minister can . . . He’s touting the infrastructure funding, and it’s 
going up by a number of millions of dollars. And I totally agree 
with the minister. The municipalities have a huge need for 
infrastructure dollars, but could he tell the percentage base of 
how this is to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Okay. I don’t completely follow the 
member’s questioning. I think in terms of dollar . . . Is the 
member asking the percentage of the increase, how much is 
going to municipal rural infrastructure fund, how much is going 
to the urban development agreements, and how much is going 
to other municipal programs? Okay. I’ll have that for you in a 
moment. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do have increases of $9.2 million 
under the Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund. That’s a 100 per 
cent increase because the Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund 
did not exist previously. Under the old Canada-Saskatchewan 
strategic infrastructure fund, we’re seeing $1.3 million. In 
actual fact that’s 28.26 per cent increase. But I think I’m going 
to have to check on something here first because this is the sixth 
year of the five-year program — fifth year of the five-year 
program and these are additional extra dollars. 
 
Under the urban development agreements of course we’ve got 
500,000 of a $2.5 million program. This is actually 100 per cent 
new money on the urban development agreements because that 
program didn’t exist. But if the member will give me just a 
moment, I’m going to clarify this percentage on the strategic 
infrastructure fund. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and members opposite. I’ve just 
had the strategic infrastructure fund program clarified for me. 
 
The funding available in ’04-05 for the strategic infrastructure 
fund — which is separate and apart from the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program which is actually 
ended — we had 4.6 million in the program in ’04-05. We’ve 
got 5.9 million available in ’05-06, which is a $1.3 million 
increase for 28.26 per cent. 
 
It’s also been clarified for me that under this CSIF fund, 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure . . . Strategic, pardon me, 
Canada Strategic Infrastructure Fund there’s no requirement to 
match the federal dollars but we’ve chosen to do so anyway. 
And that, in this case, amounts to 5.9 million in this year. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
also what I was looking for is on the infrastructure funds — 
there’s the rural, there’s the strategic, the urban — is it correct 
that they would be matched 25 per cent by the federal 
government, 25 per cent by the province, and 50 per cent by the 
municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, that comes back to the 
problem about revenue sharing. Here we have municipalities 
that are strapped. We both agree that infrastructure is a huge, 
huge issue in a lot of the municipalities and what we’re saying 

is to the municipalities, we’re not going to give you any more 
money. However, we’re going to put a bunch of money in this 
pot and you have to come up with 50 per cent in order to 
improve your infrastructure. 
 
So I would like to ask the minister how he can justify — it’s 
another way of downloading actually — justify by giving them 
no money increase, which we’ve already identified that in the 
sharing, but now for them to access infrastructure dollars 
they’re going to have to find another way of coming up with 
money. And we know that the only way that they can come up 
with money is increasing taxes. So it’s another method of 
downloading. 
 
And I wonder if the minister in his deliberations for this budget 
took any of that into consideration because, as I explained, if 
they have to come up with 50 per cent of dollars for 
infrastructure money at a time when there’s no increase in 
revenue sharing — and we’ll get into some of the tax issues 
later on — how can the minister sit at the table and say we’re 
not giving you any more money in the revenue-sharing pool? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for that question. 
And I think again the simple answer doesn’t tell the whole 
story, and I’d like a couple of minutes to discuss the whole 
story to ensure that we can keep all the pieces together. 
 
The simple answer is that for the most part municipalities 
themselves at our round table discussions indicated that 25, 25, 
50 is acceptable. They asked us to go from one-third, one-third, 
one-third financing to 25, 25, 50 — and I’ll elaborate on this in 
just a moment — because it meant that more communities 
would be able to receive funding. 
 
We’ll go back just for a second. When we take a look at the old 
infrastructure program, the Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure 
program, the 5-year arrangement in which the federal 
government put up money, the province matched it, the 
municipalities made applications with funding of their own; the 
one-third, one-third, one-third. 
 
There were 1,685 applications for funding brought forward. We 
had a project management team made up of SUMA and SARM 
representatives, government representatives from the province, 
government representatives from the federal government, that 
set criteria, examined the applications, and recommended 
dollars to flow out of this program. 
 
Out of those 1,685 applications received, 1,281 did not receive 
funding. That indicated that with a popular program, 
communities that desperately needed this money — despite the 
fact that there were tens of millions of dollars in the program — 
we were unable to provide any funding at all to a number of 
communities across the province, across the province. 
 
So when it came time to negotiate the new program, the 
municipalities realized that there’s unlikely to be a greater 
amount of money coming from the federal government or the 
province. The least they could hope for was a similar amount of 
money coming forward. They still had all of their projects that 
needed funding. Therefore, to ensure that more communities 
received a piece of that, they wanted to see a change in the 
formula. 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2555 

So at the end of the day, when the government negotiated with 
the federal government on how this money was going to be 
delivered on behalf of the municipalities of Saskatchewan, we 
negotiated the 25, 25, 50 to ensure that more communities at the 
end of the day are going to receive some federal and provincial 
money towards their projects. 
 
Now that having been said, I am very much aware that there 
will still be a number of communities in this province that don’t 
have the financial capacity to fund their projects on their own. 
There are others that, even with the amount of money coming, 
there will still be challenges at the municipal level, even with 
federal and provincial money to deliver a infrastructure 
initiative without additional costs to the taxpayers in those 
communities. 
 
But at the end of the day, what the government of 
Saskatchewan has done, has anted up another $38 million over 
the next four years to support these communities. We’ve got a 
very effective committee in place. Again, that committee is 
made up of SUMA and SARM representatives, federal and 
provincial government representatives, that will examine 
applications and will try and meet the needs as best we can of 
the municipalities across this province. 
 
So I guess the long and the short of it is, we listened to 
municipalities. We heard what they had to say, and we 
negotiated a program that will provide this funding to those 
communities. Now we also negotiated another piece in this, and 
that is for municipalities that can show hardship. We will return 
to one-third, one-third, one-third, and it’ll be all part of the 
application and review process. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. To me it’s 
very understandable that municipalities can sit around a table 
and agree with the . . . if they’re getting any money out of the 
provincial government or the federal government, that it would 
be acceptable. 
 
But I think if they’re sitting around the table, they also think it 
would be acceptable if their revenue-sharing formula was 
changed. Because it’s nice to say we’re going to give you 25 
per cent, but if we can’t put the 50 per cent up, and even maybe 
the one-third if that’s the case, so when you say it seemed like a 
lot of people — I don’t know your exact words — but a lot of 
people around the SUMA/SARM table were very pleased with 
the 25, 25, and 50 per cent, have you sat around the table with 
these same number of people and said, you didn’t get any 
money in the revenue-sharing pool? How many of those people 
were pleased and happy that they got nothing? I wonder if 
you’d answer that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again I do believe that I, as minister, and 
this department has a very good working relationship with 
municipalities across the province. During the last two years — 
and I say two years because I’ve now attended, as minister, two 
provincial-wide conventions of both the Urban Municipalities 
Association and the Rural Municipalities Association; I’ve also 
attended their regional meetings and in the case of SARM I’ve 
attended their mid-year convention — in each of those 
gatherings of municipal leaders, I’ve made myself available to 
answer questions from the municipal leaders in attendance at 
those meetings. 

And in both cases of SUMA and SARM, without question, 
there have been individual communities, representatives of 
individual communities who have stood at the microphone and 
asked me why their community didn’t receive any funding 
under this program. And in each case they outlined why their 
community was in need of additional funding. 
 
I am very much aware that the programs themselves are 
inadequate to meet all of the needs of the province, just as at the 
national level, the federal government and other provincial 
governments have been unable to meet the infrastructure needs 
of communities. In fact the whole new deal for cities and 
communities brought forward by the federal government is a 
direct response to the Federation of Canadian Municipalities’ 
call for a filling of the infrastructure deficit, which I think has 
been now identified as about $60 billion nationwide. 
 
Municipalities are trying very hard to fill the municipal deficit 
at the local level. We at the provincial level are making choices 
to try to assist them to meet the choices that they’re making. 
Obviously the federal government is doing much the same 
thing, but it’s going to take a number of years to meet all of the 
infrastructure needs. There is no magic formula that identifies 
exactly the kind of money that should go to every single 
community across Canada. Every province has different 
priorities and needs; every municipality has different priorities 
and needs. Under the current infrastructure program, the new 
MRIF[Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund], we’ve identified a 
process to evaluate and recommend dollars for distribution. We 
have been told by the federal negotiators that the Saskatchewan 
process is a strong one and a model for the other provinces to 
examine and even take up. 
 
We rely heavily on the representatives from SUMA and SARM 
at the distribution table to tell us what their priorities are. And 
the recommendations coming forward to me for funding are 
always taking into account the local needs at the local level. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I realize you’ve 
attended SUMA and SARM, but my question is basically more 
to this budget and referring back to when you say so many of 
SUMA and SARM representatives found that the infrastructure 
program was acceptable. My question was simple: how many 
SUMA and SARM individuals think that your budget of zero 
per cent revenue increase, found it acceptable? Have you any 
people from SARM and SUMA that have spoke to you and 
praised the fact that they got no new money? And that was what 
my question was. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think it’s safe to say that the majority of 
opinions that have been expressed to me have been, we are 
disappointed that there is no new revenue sharing in this budget. 
We are disappointed that we don’t have additional provincial 
dollars to move forward in a challenging climate. That climate 
is fuelled by growth in this province — growth at the municipal 
level, growth in population, growth in business, growth in 
retailing, growth in all sectors, with the exception of 
agriculture, in this province. This is an indication of the 
municipalities recognizing the value of the management skills 
of this government and being able to build a province in which 
there is considerable growth projected. 



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2005 

So now we are, as a government, sitting down with our 
municipal leaders and identifying the tools that we will need to 
be able to go forward and share in this growth, understanding 
exactly when the municipalities bring forward their 
information, how that growth in those communities can best be 
supported by the province. We are aware that growth in the 
community also increases the assessment base in a community. 
Those mean new dollars for municipalities without additional 
mill rate increases. 
 
We have to discuss all of these potential issues as we go 
forward at our working group table to ensure that when we 
make a decision, when we make choices for next year’s budget 
and out-year budgets, that in fact we are addressing the needs of 
the municipalities. 
 
Coming into this budget process — which really began in, 
probably in October and moving into November — we were 
still at the municipal tables talking about the new deal for 
municipalities from the federal government. The municipalities 
were telling us that we had to be at that table with the feds, and 
negotiating on their behalf the new gas tax money, which we’re 
very close to resolving at this moment. And they were telling 
us, resolve and complete this issue with infrastructure. 
 
Before we had signed the deal, we identified the provincial 
dollars necessary to sign on. And so we were meeting at our 
budget process time, October and November, the stated needs 
of the collective municipalities across this country — federal 
government negotiations on gas tax, federal government 
negotiations on infrastructure. 
 
And as members will know, it was the mid-year report in late 
November that indicated that there were new dollars available 
to the province, showed the continued strength of the 
Saskatchewan economy, and the growth potential of this 
province. And it was that point that the municipalities started to 
talk about a change in the revenue formula. 
 
That process, had we begun discussions on that very day, would 
likely not have concluded prior to our choices on budget for this 
particular year. We’ve engaged in that process and we are 
committed to ensuring that all the options are discussed, that 
there’s some consensus reached prior to the budget setting 
process for the coming year. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I would agree. I would have chose 
different words when you say that municipal leaders were 
mostly disappointed with the budget. I would have had a much 
stronger word to use, that I might not be able to use in the 
House, because I’ve had municipalities and leaders of 
municipalities that have told me that when times were tough, 
we understand. We as municipal leaders understand that we can 
share part of the pain. We were down in the ’90s to really share 
a lot of the pain and people on your side of the House always 
blamed the ’80s. Well we can blame the ’70s. We can blame 
whatever we want. The fact is, today let’s move forward. 
 
Now you talk about, you talked about, Mr. Minister, about how 
good this province is — growth and population. Well excuse 
me, but in the last figures that I’ve seen, we’re back under 1 
million people again in this province. I don’t call that growth. 
And I don’t know the exact numbers — we might be up three or 

four, or down four or five more — but it’s not growth. 
 
And you alluded how to, when municipalities grow, you’ve got 
more taxpayers but you need more, you need more 
infrastructure possibly. Well how about the communities that 
are losing people? You didn’t touch on that. And all you have to 
do is walk outside of a couple of cities and you’ll find out that 
people are leaving the province. 
 
And you talk about how the economic boom . . . Your 
government had nothing to do with $50 oil . . . for oil, a barrel 
of oil. It had absolutely nothing to do with that. In fact if you 
wanted to praise the oil prices, you’d have to go back to the 
Iraqi war which all of you were totally against — you didn’t 
want to see any Canadian participation in that —and that was 
actually what caused the oil prices to climb. And now they’re at 
$50 a barrel and you’re taking full credit for economic growth 
within this province. And really it has nothing to do with it so 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. SPUDCO is starting to 
answer questions over there. I’d like you to move into the 
minister’s chair so I can ask you some questions. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. It’s a tradition in this House that 
there will be no personal attacks on individuals and I’d ask the 
member to caution or temper his language. And the issue before 
the committee is the Department of Government Relations. So 
if we could stay even near that topic, the Chair would appreciate 
that. I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, and I will 
stay near the topic. I noticed the minister was drifting quite 
substantially off it, and that prompted me to probably drift off 
to answer his specific or to retort to his specific comments. 
 
So anyway my question to the minister is, the municipalities 
took it on the chin when times were tough, and we understand 
that. Now we just heard how good this place is booming and 
$1.2 billion of new money last year, 400 million forecast for 
this year, which is based on $40-a-barrel oil. So how can the 
minister say that we can’t give you any more money? We just 
got 1.2 billion. When times are tough, we’re going to give it to 
you on the chin. Now we’re in good times, and we’re still 
giving it to you on the chin. 
 
And that’s my question. How the minister can sit around a 
budget table and now go out and look at municipal leaders 
saying, we’ve got $1.2 billion last year in new money, we’ve 
got 400 million this year, but by the way you’re not getting any. 
 
And this is leading to . . . And I know the minister might talk 
about the infrastructure dollars again. It’s not that it’s zero, but 
all you’ve got to do is look at the revenue sharing that I quoted 
from his own Finance document, or the Finance minister’s, 
which I’m sure he had a part in. 
 
So my question is, how can you justify to municipal leaders that 
when times are now good — as the minister just touted on 
about, how the good times were here — and yet we’re not 
giving municipalities any more revenue-sharing money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, I’m very sympathetic to the 
communities that the member opposite indicates. Rural 
communities that indeed may be losing populations, having to 



April 18, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

maintain infrastructure at the local level, are struggling to 
sustain growth. I believe very strongly in working with the local 
regional economic development authorities, working with the 
ACRE [Action Committee on the Rural Economy] committee, 
working with others who are very active on the rural economic 
development front to try and find a way to address some of the 
issues that those communities are facing. 
 
And it is interesting to note that a considerable amount, almost 
50 per cent, actually, of the sewer and water dollars under the 
infrastructure fund go to the rural communities, the smaller 
communities that essentially have the most difficult time in 
funding their infrastructure projects. 
 
But the member talked about $50 oil. The Minister of Finance, 
when he put his budget together, and with the help of all 
members on this side, recognized that oil prices are very 
volatile. Oil prices were in 1998 at $15 a barrel. Oil prices a 
couple of days ago were over $50 a barrel. Today they’re under 
$50 a barrel. Yes indeed, as oil prices fluctuate, there are more 
or less dollars available for the Government of Saskatchewan to 
distribute to health care, to education, to property tax payers, to 
municipalities. 
 
The one thing the municipal leaders have said is, we want 
predictable funding. What happened in the early ’80s cannot 
happen again. We want predictable funding. We cannot base a 
future revenue-sharing formula on the price of oil solely 
because the price of oil, as volatile as it is, could mean that 
municipal leaders are asking for a decrease in revenue sharing 
on a fairly regular basis because the price of oil and gas 
fluctuates. 
 
Now there’s a considerable amount of other measures that one 
can look at, which is why . . . discussing with the municipal 
leaders what our choices are on basing a new revenue-sharing 
formula. We did not have the time to do that prior to this 
budget, but we are committed to doing that prior to the next 
budget. 
 
We believe that the budget brought down by the Minister of 
Finance is a sustainable budget. The money available to 
municipalities in this budget is sustainable. We won’t be seeing 
any further cutbacks or clawbacks because the money that’s 
there should be sustainable into the future. And if we can 
identify revenue steams that are predictable and sustainable, we 
will ensure that revenue sharing is included in the distribution 
mix. 
 
Now when the member opposite talked about municipalities 
sharing in the pain, now they want to share in the gain, let’s 
remember exactly what prompted some of that pain. And I 
indicated it earlier, there were significant deficits in the 
province and there were significant federal clawbacks. And the 
municipalities shared in that. 
 
But when we look at what happened to revenue sharing, we had 
5, 6 per cent or zero per cent responses by governments in those 
years. The last three years, this provincial government has 
increased revenue sharing to the municipalities by 54 per cent. 
And there isn’t a formula in the world, there isn’t a formula in 
the world that would have made that predictable or sustainable. 
This government was committed to putting money on the table 

to assist municipalities, 54 per cent in just 3 years. There’s an 
additional $30 million in the revenue-sharing pool today than 
there was just four budgets ago, and that commitment to 
sustainable, predictable funding remains our credo. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is this agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 
to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2527 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2527 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2527 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2527 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2527 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2527 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2527 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2528 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2529 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2529 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2529 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2529 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2530 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2530 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2530 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2530 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2531 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Withdrawal of Remarks 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2531 
 Saskatchewan Volunteers Celebrated During National Volunteer Week 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2531 
 Centennial Hockey Challenge 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2531 
 World Class Players’ Cup Soccer Tournament 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2531 
 Estevan’s Legion Celebrates Awards Night 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2532 
 Public Safety Telecommunications Week 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2532 
 Saskatchewan Party Dinner 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2532 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Commitments Made by Government 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2533 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2533 
 Negotiations with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2534 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2534 
 Public Sector Wage Guidelines 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2535 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2535 
 Funding for Police Services 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2536 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2536 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2538 
 Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2538 



 

 Bill No. 108 — The Business Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2538 
 Bill No. 111 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2538 
 Bill No. 112 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2538 
 Bill No. 113 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les sociétés sans but lucratif 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2539 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2539 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2539 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2540 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2540 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2548 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations — Vote 30 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2551 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2551 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


