

















































Hansard: April 25, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 98A  MONDAY, APRIL 25, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2649 
 April 25, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people who use Highway 32 really would appreciate something 
being done to their highway. The prayer of this petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
constituents from the community of Lancer. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of this province who are concerned about the scourge 
of crystal meth. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today that I rise proudly on behalf 
of are from the communities of Wadena and Quill Lake. I so 
present. 
 
I’ll also lay on the Table petitions with respect to group home 
spaces in Swift Current. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about crystal 
methamphetamine and the effect it has on their families. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary actions to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
stand to present a petition on behalf of producers who are very 
concerned about the increasing crop insurance premiums and 
the reduction in their coverage. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increases in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Radville, 
Gladmar, and Bengough. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Saskatchewan 
who are very concerned about the spread of crystal meth. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Colgate, Minton, 
Radville, and Weyburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to improve SaskTel cellular service in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Jansen, Guernsey, and Lanigan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 



2650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Grandora and Asquith. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional papers nos. 76, 107, 639, 715, 716, and 720. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I give notice I shall on day no. 100 move the 
first reading of the Bill No. 207, An Act providing for the 
Protection and Assessment of Children who are Abusing Drugs. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 103 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: what was the 
cost of settlement between SaskWater and IPSCO relating 
to work done in the early ’90s, what were the legal fees 
incurred by SaskWater for each year of the litigation, and 
what legal firms were hired by SaskWater? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
today to welcome to this Legislative Assembly an independent 
officer of the legislature. He is a familiar face, Mr. Gerald 
Gerrand, who is our Conflict of Interest Commissioner. He has 
interviewed each and every MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and has reported publicly on this, assuring the public 
that all members are adhering to the conflict of interest 
guidelines. And I would like members to welcome him, and 
with him today in accompaniment is Mrs. Ella Gerrand. 
Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice, 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — It is my pleasure as well to introduce 

through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members of this Assembly, Mr. 
Gerald Gerrand, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel] and his wife, Ella, 
seated in your gallery. As all members will know, Mr. Gerrand 
has served this Assembly as Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
for the past five years and today will be reappointed to serve an 
additional term. 
 
Mr. Gerrand graduated from the College of Law at the 
University of Saskatchewan in 1954 and was appointed 
Queen’s Counsel in 1970. Throughout his career, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Gerrand has practised law with great distinction in this 
province and has served the people of Saskatchewan well. As 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner he plays a valuable role in 
ensuring to the public that the business of the legislature is 
conducted in a scrupulously honest manner. I know that all 
members rely on him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members will join in welcoming Mr. 
Gerrand and his wife, Ella. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the opposition critic for 
Justice, the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
members opposite in welcoming Mr. Gerrand to the legislature 
today. Mr. Gerrand has done, I think, yeoman service in the past 
dealing with all the variety of MLAs and the situations that 
have arisen. 
 
I first came to know Mr. Gerrand, I had briefly his 
granddaughter, Alison, in my employ as a summer student who 
looked after my trust account, and I’m hoping that the two of 
them don’t get together and compare notes too vigorously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner has a very 
difficult task to perform. It preserves not just the appearance of 
propriety on the part of all members but there’s the actual 
underneath work that’s done to verify and analyze and question 
things that are there. And this particular Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner I think has done an admirable job in striking a 
balance between not being overly invasive or intrusive but yet 
examining things to the point where adequate and appropriate 
disclosure is made. 
 
I would like to thank him for his past service, and I know he’s 
had some difficulty with some of the MLAs in getting them to 
file on time and to make their appointments. And I think there 
was a reference by the member from Melfort who said that he 
was one of the last — referring to himself — one of the last old 
dogs still sleeping under the porch because he hadn’t gone yet. 
So I would like to urge all of the old dogs that are sleeping 
under the porch to get out and go and visit Mr. Gerrand and 
fulfill their duties as MLAs. And I thank him for his work. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
This afternoon in your gallery is a group of 24 public servants 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2651 

that are spending the day at the legislature. They come from a 
variety of departments within the public service. So I would like 
to welcome employees from Agriculture and Food, Community 
Resources and Employment, Environment, Finance, Health, 
Highways and Transportation, and the Public Service 
Commission to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I know that myself and the member from Melfort will be 
meeting with this group of public servants immediately after 
question period, and I hope that they do enjoy question period 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming the group of public servants 
here this afternoon. The minister mentioned all the departments 
that they represent. I look forward to meeting with you later on 
this afternoon and being put through a question period of a 
different sort. And in the meantime I hope you enjoy question 
period in this Assembly. And welcome to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great pleasure, 
indeed honour, today to introduce to you yet again a friend of 
mine and a friend of working people throughout Saskatchewan 
— indeed, I’d venture a friend of all of Saskatchewan — Mr. 
Gunnar Passmore, seated in the west gallery. 
 
Gunnar is a representative with the sheet metal workers union, 
and in all of my dealings with Gunnar over a fair number of 
years now, Gunnar, I’ve found him to be very diligent, 
hard-working, and always represented the workers that pay his 
salary. And he’s represented them very well. So please join me 
in welcoming my friend, Gunnar Passmore. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to introduce 
to the House a friend from Wollaston Lake — it’s a long ways 
from here — sitting in the west gallery. His name is Ed 
Benoanie and Ed is a dog musher. I think he’s a jack of all 
trades. He does everything in the community. He’s been a chief, 
economic development worker, but his first priority is always 
for the community of Wollaston and the people there. 
 
So Ed has travelled a long way to be with us today, and I think 
it’s one of the first times he’s going to be listening in the House. 
So on behalf of myself and everybody, I would like to urge 
everybody to welcome him here to the House. And it’s nice to 
see you here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly today two 
officials who of course are well known to this Assembly. Seated 
in your gallery is Glenda Cooney, who’s the deputy children’s 
advocate and is currently the acting children’s advocate for the 
province, and accompanying her is Sharon Chapman, who’s the 
director of communications for the office. They’re here today to 
further support the work that they have tirelessly undertaken in 
the past few years to protect the rights of children from physical 
abuse and otherwise. And I’m sure they’ll be pleased by the 
activity in the House later this day. So I would ask all members 
to join me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatoon Contacts Win TELUS Cup 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday afternoon I, along 
with a couple of young hockey players in my household, had 
the great pleasure of watching the Saskatoon Contact win the 
TELUS Cup midget AAA hockey tournament in Gatineau, 
Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the TELUS Cup is a symbol of national midget 
AAA hockey supremacy. This is the first national championship 
in the Contacts’ 28-year history and they won it in fine style, 
going undefeated throughout the entire tournament. 
 
The Contact defeated the host team, the Gatineau, Quebec 
Intrepide, 4-1 in the final game. Nick Kalmicki had a goal and 
two assists and was named the game’s most valuable player. 
Matstar Lacoursiere from North Battleford scored a 
short-handed goal and David Richard and Russell Goodman got 
one goal each. Contact goalie Travis Yonkman made 22 saves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Contact players were also well represented at the 
tournament awards banquet. David Richard was named the 
tournament’s most valuable player. Kyle Bortis was the 
tournament’s top scorer and top forward. Eric Gryba was 
named the best defenceman. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the TELUS Cup will be coming home to 
Saskatoon, but I think it’s worth noting that almost half the 
players are from the smaller centres around the province. I ask 
all members to join me in congratulating the players and 
coaches of Saskatoon Contact, and everyone involved in the 
Contact organization. I particularly want to acknowledge the 
commitment and dedication of coach Jim McIntyre, who has 
been a coach of the Contact for all but three years of their 
history. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatchewan Children’s Health Foundation 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
had the pleasure Saturday evening of joining 600 Saskatchewan 
residents, including the hon. members from Batoche, Carrot 
River Valley, and Saskatoon Southeast at the 13th annual 
Children’s Health Foundation Celebrity Dinner in Saskatoon. 
Other community leaders in attendance included the Leader of 
the Liberal Party, several city councillors, members of 
parliament, and members of the Saskatoon business community. 
 
The Children’s Health Foundation of Saskatchewan was 
founded on the belief that children in the province deserve the 
best possible health care. The Children’s Health Foundation of 
Saskatchewan is committed to optimizing the safety, health, and 
welfare of our children by supporting programs in areas of 
pediatric patient care and research. Their goal is to see a 
children’s hospital designation within an existing hospital in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I love this province and I am proud of it in many 
ways. One fact however I’m not proud of is that Saskatchewan 
is the only province in Canada, besides PEI [Prince Edward 
Island], that doesn’t have a children’s hospital. Dr. Bill 
Bingham, the head of pediatrics at Royal University Hospital, 
said it best Saturday night, and I quote: “The only thing 
stopping Saskatchewan from having a children’s hospital is 
politics.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you and all members of our 
Assembly that our job as MLAs will not be complete until we 
do see a children’s hospital built in the province. 
Congratulations to executive director, Brynn Boback-Lane and 
her entire Children’s Health Foundation team. You are 
providing hope for every child and family in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association 
Banquet and Awards 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Regional Parks Association recently held their banquet and 
awards night in Saskatoon. I’m told it was a wonderful event, 
Mr. Speaker, with about 130 people in attendance representing 
50 regional parks. The Minister of the Environment was also on 
hand to offer congratulations to the various award winners. 
 
The evening was a celebration of the vital role our regional park 
system plays in the provision of outdoor recreation 
opportunities here in the province, and in particular, Mr. 
Speaker, to acknowledge the outstanding work of the citizens 
and volunteers involved in our regional parks. 
 
The recipients of the volunteer awards were Lee Pollon of 
Whitesand Regional Park, Bob Stringer of Lac Pelletier 
Regional Park, and Lee Chamberlain of Sturgeon Lake 

provincial park. 
 
The Park of the Year award went to Outlook and District 
Regional Park, and Sturgeon Lake won the Park on the Move 
award. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to applaud the hard work of 
John Froese and the directors of the Saskatchewan Regional 
Parks Association as well as executive director Darlene Friesen 
and all the staff of the SRPA [Saskatchewan Regional Parks 
Association]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating 
the award recipients and in recognizing the SRPA for all their 
wonderful work in providing recreational opportunities for 
people all across our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 

Saskatchewan Centenarian Appolonia Jansen 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure today to applaud the achievements of 
Mrs. Appolonia, or Loni, Jansen, one of our centenarians in the 
Kindersley constituency. 
 
Mrs. Jansen was born in Morgan, Minnesota on February 4, 
1904. There were seven children in the family, with Loni being 
the oldest and only surviving member. 
 
Her family moved to Saskatchewan in 1905. She married John 
Jansen and farmed in the St. John area, which is 20 miles west 
of Unity. Together Loni and John had 14 children, seven boys 
and seven girls with a set of twins in the middle, which was a 
great surprise to Loni. 
 
Loni had only completed the fourth grade in school but was 
very wise to the ways of the world. She was a devout Christian, 
giving in every way. She feels blessed and grateful for family, 
friends, and her caregivers. 
 
Loni is still a great communicator and loves to pull a prank 
once in a while. Her daughter said she used to play pranks on 
her teenagers such as putting a string in front of the veranda 
with a bell attached, so she would know when they came home 
from a date. 
 
Loni has 52 grandchildren, 60-plus great-grandchildren, and 
one great-great-grandchild. Loni presently lives at St. Joseph’s 
Health Centre in Macklin, Saskatchewan and is enjoying good 
health. 
 
And I presented Loni with her 100-year medal and centennial 
plaque on March 5 with family, friends, coffee, and cake. And 
for a lady over 100 years old, she was very, very quick. 
 
I’d ask all members of the legislature to please join me in 
congratulating Loni in her 100 years in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Batoche Theatre Company Presents Ernestine’s LaValise 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend the Batoche 
Theatre Company completed the tour of its latest production, 
Ernestine’s LaValise, with a performances at E.D. Feehan and 
at the Awasis conference in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the play an elderly woman, Ernestine, arrives at 
a centennial awards ceremony honouring First Nations and 
Métis women. A member of the provincial government begins 
the ceremony, begins the play, and Ernestine finds that she 
herself is going to be honoured. 
 
But when Ernestine takes the stage, she takes over the stage and 
begins to tell the story of her life, her family, and her people 
beginning in 1885 and moving forward in time from Batoche to 
the present. The play is a celebration of Métis history and 
culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ernestine is played by Maureen Belanger, who 
also directs the play. Ernestine’s husband, Alphonse, is played 
by Duane Favel. Maureen and Duane began their acting careers 
28 years ago in Ile-a-la-Crosse’s Upisasik Theatre which, Mr. 
Speaker, incidentally is where the MLA for Athabasca began 
his theatre career. 
 
Also in the play is Krystal Pederson; Ray Villebrun, from Red 
Blaze; his son, Chris Villebrun, Angus Vincent, and the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Dance Troupe. 
 
Ernestine’s LaValise was toured to Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Meadow Lake, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon, 
and every performance evoked tears, laughter, and pride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this centennial year, congratulations to Maureen 
Belanger and Duane Favel for their many successful years of 
Aboriginal theatre work in Saskatchewan and to the whole cast 
of Ernestine’s LaValise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Govan-Strasbourg Youth Curl in International Event 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to talk to 
you today about a remarkable girls’ curling team whose 
members come from both my constituency and that of my 
colleague, the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The team of Genna Mortenson and Megan Fritzler are from 
Govan, along with Elsa McKenzie and Laura Sorenson and 
coach, Ray Craswell, are from Strasbourg. They represented 
Saskatchewan in the annual under-18 International Curling 
Championship. 
 
This year’s Optimist International event was held in Calgary 
from March 31 to April 3. There are 12 girls’ teams and 12 
boys’ teams competing from across Canada, the northwest US 
[United States], and Japan. The foursome and their coach were 

honoured to be invited and given the opportunity to compete 
against other top-ranked teams. 
 
These girls have curled together now for the past three years at 
the competitive level. This past season they competed in the 
qualifying bonspiels of the provincial junior women’s 
playdowns. In Calgary, they played against teams from BC 
[British Columbia], Manitoba, Yukon, Wisconsin, and Quebec. 
The girls placed third in their pool and sixth overall. A skills 
competition was held in which Team Saskatchewan scored the 
highest and was rewarded with new curling brooms. 
 
Our team curled very well overall, with Alberta winning the 
women’s side. On April 11 the team was invited to the Duval 
Optimist Club supper meeting, where the girls gave a short 
presentation on their curling event in Calgary. 
 
This is definitely one Saskatchewan youth team that will be up 
and coming in the curling world very soon. 
 
I would ask all the members to join me in congratulating these 
youth curlers and their coach from Govan and Strasbourg. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the 16th annual 
Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence gala was held a 
few days ago here in Regina. I hear it was a wonderful event, 
with members from all across the province gathering to 
recognize and celebrate the achievements of Saskatchewan’s 
tourism industry. 
 
Thirteen award recipients were chosen from 126 nominations 
and 39 finalists. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to say that 
the winner of the Saskatchewan Tourism Business of the Year 
award was Churchill River Canoe Outfitters, located in 
Missinipe in my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the folks of Churchill River Canoe Outfitters are 
more than deserving of this prestigious award. They are known 
locally and internationally for their knowledge of the area as 
well as the exceptionally high quality of their programs, guides, 
instructors, and equipment. They are committed to staff training 
and often hire residents from the nearby Grandmother’s Bay 
First Nation. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the local guides work to educate river 
users on environmentally sound practices to help minimize their 
impact and maximize their enjoyment of this incredible 
resource. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 
Ric Driediger, the owner of Churchill River Canoe Outfitters; 
senior guide, Kevin Schultz; and all their staff on being named 
Tourism Saskatchewan’s Business of the Year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, over the last month, the Alberta 
Legislature has worked in an unprecedented, tripartisan manner. 
In fact they abandoned discussion on the budget to respond to 
the calls from desperate parents, parents who were struggling to 
rescue their children from the depths of drug addiction. 
 
Members from every party joined together to fast-track the 
Protection of Children Abusing Drugs Act. It gives parents and 
the government the authority to involuntarily apprehend a child 
suspected of abusing drugs. 
 
Meanwhile in Saskatchewan many desperate parents have no 
legal recourse to rescue their own children from the scourge of 
drug addiction. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he follow 
Alberta’s lead and help Saskatchewan parents who want to save 
their drug addicted children? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have been 
watching very carefully the progress of the Bill in the Alberta 
legislature. We’ve done our own legal review around this 
particular legislation. I know that our Legislative Secretary, 
who is looking at the addictions issue, has met with many 
groups who are in favour of what’s being suggested in Alberta. 
 
But there are also many questions that are being raised. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we intend to watch very carefully how they 
proceed in Alberta, and then if it works well, we will be quite 
willing to look at it. But we are concerned that there are a 
number of issues that need to be addressed before we proceed in 
the same fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, at the legislature today we have a 
family who is desperate for help. Their 17-year-old daughter, 
Mary, was a loving child. She was a role model to her younger 
brother and sisters. She was active in soccer, her church, and 
youth functions, and now they haven’t seen her in months. 
 
She is living with a known drug trafficker, a man in his 40s who 
has introduced her to drugs. A cab driver told Mary’s mother 
that he drove her from one known drug house to another and 
that Mary was stoned and very, very thin, and very, very dirty. 
And her family has no legal recourse to get her back. 
 
This family wants to know: when will this government give 
them the power to rescue their child? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that I and every 

person in this legislature and the community has a great deal of 
concern for people like this. One of the challenges, and that’s 
why Alberta has taken the lead in Canada to move forward and 
see how this kind of legislation could work, is that there are 
many personal rights that are guaranteed under our constitution 
that go up against how we work with this particular legislation. 
A good example in Saskatchewan is that we have pioneered 
over many years legislation in the mental health area which 
gives the ability of a court, after appropriate hearing, to make 
orders around having people require mental health treatment. 
 
So that’s one side of the case. We also, under our 
children-in-need-of-protection legislation, have legislation that 
deals with children. There’s a challenge around these older 
adolescents and people in their young twenties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we have right now is not 
working. This family’s appeal to the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] and the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment, they asked that their daughter be apprehended 
under section 18 of The Child and Family Services Act. This 
Act clearly stated that Social Services has the authority to 
apprehend 16- and 17-year-olds in the need of protection. But in 
a letter from the Minister of DCRE [Department of Community 
Resources and Employment] she stated the Act, The Child and 
Family Services Act further defines a child as under the age of 
16. Access to residential treatment for a young person in care 
over the age of 16 years would occur on a voluntary basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s nothing they can do to rescue their 
daughter under the current legislation in Saskatchewan, when 
will this government enact legislation that will enable this 
family to get their child back? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained earlier, the 
province of Alberta, through this particular Bill that is moving 
forward as a private member’s Bill, is leading the way in 
Canada. It’s something that has been discussed at our Health 
ministers’ meetings, and I’m sure that the Social Services 
ministers across the country have been looking at this as well. 
 
[14:00] 
 
And it goes to a very difficult place where, as the Legislative 
Secretary looking into addictions has discovered, there are 
many strong voices on one side, and strong voices on the other. 
We need to watch carefully what’s happening in Alberta, and 
we’re willing to learn from what they’re going to do. And if this 
works and if there’s a way we can do this, then we will do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we just have to stop watching 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

and start doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in early April the officials from the Department of 
Community Resources went to the home where Mary was 
staying and reported to the family that she was abusing drugs. 
They said they would visit her again in a couple of weeks, but 
the next time they went, Mary was gone, and now they can’t 
find her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice wrote to the family and he 
said, and I quote: 
 

I urge you to continue to engage the local police, social, 
health, and crisis services . . . To offer her whatever 
assistance is available the time she is willing or able to 
take advantage of that assistance. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is missing the point. Mary is a drug 
addict. She is neither willing nor able to take advantage of 
assistance. She needs help. She is too young to legally buy 
tobacco or liquor, but she’s not too young to refuse treatment 
for her drug addiction. When will this government enact 
legislation to allow parents to rescue their children from drugs? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite sets 
out, this is a huge challenge, and it’s one that all jurisdictions in 
Canada, and I think also in the United States, have been trying 
to figure out how to do this. And Alberta has gone ahead with 
legislation which all of the rest of us in Canada will be 
watching as it tries to make that appropriate balance between 
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the privacy of the 
person and the need for parents and family to have some way to 
deal with people who are very, very ill. 
 
And this is not an easy question, and therefore it’s imperative 
that we work together with all the people involved and that we 
work with what’s happening in Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the legislation isn’t 
perfect, but we have an imperfect world, and sometimes we 
have to offer some imperfect solutions. But we have to try 
something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation isn’t working, and it’s failing 
children like Mary and it’s failing the people who love her. 
 
According to the government’s crystal meth strategy, in 
exceedingly limited circumstances The Mental Health Services 
Act can be applied, forcing a person to enter treatment for 
addiction. But obviously that didn’t help Mary. The strategy 
goes on to say: 
 

The province is open to exploring new and innovative 
approaches . . . That may be of benefit in particularly 
difficult cases. 
 

If that was true and if this government is truly committed to 
rescuing children from drug addiction, will they follow 
Alberta’s lead now and bring in legislation giving parents the 
power to protect their own children? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think in Alberta they 
introduced this Bill with a first reading on March 14 of this 
year, and we’ve known about this. We knew that they were 
discussing some of the possibilities of going forward with this. 
They are, I think, moving forward quite carefully as well. I 
think it’s prudent that we work together and understand what 
they’re doing there and see how it can accomplish the goal that 
everybody wants which is to provide these children with help, 
and we will continue to monitor it that way. 
 
But what I would say is that we do have services available 
across the system for young people and for their families and 
that they should be accessed through the addictions services 
people in every one of the regional health authorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why we have 
to wait and see what happens in Alberta. Why don’t we do it at 
the same time? Why don’t we do it parallel and see if we can 
learn something together? 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the governments act in other provinces, this 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government just studies. While 
he was in opposition the Premier called for action on youth 
addiction rather than studying the problem. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

The time for delay is long past. The time for action is now. 
We cannot rest while a whole generation is lost. 
 

And today in the Vancouver paper there was something that 
was just about the same. It said: 
 

Either we act now, or we risk watching a generation of our 
youth suffer the nightmare of permanent brain damage. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the Premier will finally heed his own 
words. Two weeks ago all three parties in the legislature in 
Alberta got together to give speedy passage to the Bill, 
protection of children abusing drugs. That Act will help 
families rescue their drug addicted children. 
 
A few minutes ago I gave notice of a private member’s Bill 
based on this Act, and I’ll introduce this Bill later this week. 
Will the government work with us to ensure swift passage of 
this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier we’re 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

looking at this issue very carefully. Our Legislative Secretary, 
working and looking at addictions, has been hearing very strong 
arguments on both sides of this particular kind of legislation, 
and we are going to make sure that whatever we do is 
something that will work. 
 
And we’re very willing to watch what happens in Alberta. 
We’re willing to look at whatever the member opposite brings 
forward, and we will make sure that we do something that the 
professionals in this very serious addictions field say will work. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re strongly committed to all of the people 
of Saskatchewan, especially those people who require our 
assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the time has come for action. 
This government has talked the talk, and now it’s time to walk 
the walk. Let’s do something. Mary’s family needs help right 
now. Other Saskatchewan families, other Saskatchewan 
children need help right now. And we don’t have to reinvent the 
wheel. Let’s look at the legislation that was passed in Alberta, 
supported by all the parties, including the NDP. I have plenty of 
information on the Act, and I’m willing to meet with the 
minister today and go over all the details. 
 
Will the government commit to passing an Act or a similar Act, 
something that’ll help our children now? Let’s not wait any 
longer. It’s time to do it now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are examining this issue 
very carefully, as we know, with the Legislative Secretary 
working on this. We are very willing to look at what the 
members opposite have raised. What I would say is that we in 
Saskatchewan are very well known for our pioneering efforts 
under mental health legislation to provide interventions at 
earlier places than other jurisdictions have done. And many, 
many provinces have modelled what they’ve done in the area of 
mental health. 
 
This particular issue is in that area where there’s a crossover 
with mental health and with the addictions kinds of things. And 
these are extremely complicated issues to deal with. We will 
guarantee that we will provide good leadership in this area for 
all the people of Saskatchewan, but we’re going to do it with 
the help of all the professionals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 

Investments in Navigata 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
hard to believe, but the NDP government has managed to 
produce a bigger government business fiasco than SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], Mr. 
Speaker. The NDP has no money to fulfill their share of this 
year’s CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 
program. They have no money, they say, to roll back their PST 
[provincial sales tax] increase, but they have now lost 42 
million taxpayers’ dollars on Navigata, a telecommunications 
company in British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Navigata is now the biggest loss of taxpayers’ money in 
Saskatchewan history. From the government that brought you 
SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker, it appears that the NDP have learned 
precious little, if anything at all. 
 
The question for the Premier is this: did he learn any lessons at 
all from SPUDCO? Did he learn anything at all from the loss of 
35 million taxpayers’ dollars on that particular deal? How could 
he then lose 42 million more taxpayers’ dollars on a telco 
company in British Columbia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party says one thing, but the facts are this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all, SaskTel last year earned $94 million for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They paid a dividend last year, Mr. 
Speaker, of $88 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they invested $123 million by way of capital into 
the province of Saskatchewan. And what does that opposition 
Conservative party do, Mr. Speaker? They look at the small 
piece of external investments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge them — I challenge them, Mr. Speaker 
— to define for the people of Saskatchewan what are core 
services. They say no high-speed Internet. They say no cellular 
service. Mr. Speaker they say no Max TV, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All telephone companies are entering into the area of 
convergence. I think, Mr. Speaker, if you want to look at this I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition Conservatives would 
probably define core services as two cans and a piece of string, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that is unbelievable that a minister 
of the Crown would say blowing 42 million taxpayers’ dollars 
is small potatoes. It by no means is small potatoes. Neither were 
$35 million blown on SPUDCO. Maybe for the, maybe for the 
high-rolling members of the government opposite who seem to 
be pretty free in spending the taxpayers’ money it’s small 
potatoes, but not for families waiting for a meaningful drug 
addiction treatment from this government, not for families 
waiting for some PST relief from the increase in the last budget, 
Mr. Speaker, not for farm families who are waiting for a 
government to fund its share of a farm safety net program. I can 
assure that minister it is not small. It is very large. 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

To the Premier: will he justify to the members of this Assembly 
and the taxpayers the loss of another 42 million taxpayers’ 
dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister responsible 
for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to review 
Hansard tomorrow to see whether I actually said that. I think if 
you review Hansard, like the member opposite says many 
times, Mr. Speaker, like he says many, many times, what he 
says is not the facts, Mr. Speaker. We’ll review Hansard 
tomorrow to see if I actually said that. I’m confident I did not 
say that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say first of all, remind that Conservative party opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, that member, the critic for Finance said that $365 
million was table scraps, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like him to describe this then, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
every telephone company in the world, every telephone 
company in the world is moving into the area of voice over 
Internet. Yet, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives opposite, what do 
they say? They say no, don’t do this, don’t do this. 
 
In three to four years, Mr. Speaker, when every other telephone 
company is delivering voice over Internet, what would they 
say? They would say SaskTel lacked vision, where was this 
government when they should have delivered on voice over 
Internet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For three years, the 
NDP government has told the taxpayers that Navigata would 
turn a profit in 2004. In 2002, they told us and I quote: 
“Navigata is expected to be cash flow positive in mid-’04.” In 
2003 they told us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask . . . Order, 
please. Order, please. I would ask all members to allow 
questions to be put, particularly the member for Athabasca. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2003, they told us 
and I quote, “Navigata is now positioned to provide profitable 
growth to SaskTel in 2004 and future years.” 

 
In fact just last year, April 22, 2004, the Minister for SaskTel 
told this Assembly that Navigata is projected to be profitable 
this year. And did Navigata turn a profit in ’04, Mr. Speaker? 
No. They lost an additional $16 million. 
 
Why in the world has this minister and this Premier, this NDP 
government been telling people that this company would be 
profitable in ’04 knowing full well, apparently, that it would 
turn a loss of 16 million taxpayers’ dollars last year? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you again, Mr. Speaker. 
Again we have the opposition Conservatives saying one thing 
and the facts being another thing. He actually quoted correctly 
there when he said that there was a projection — note the word 
projection — that it would be profitable. The word was 
projection. He’s absolutely right. Just like every other telephone 
company, Mr. Speaker — projected, Mr. Speaker — that voice 
over Internet would do better than it did last year. But who do 
they chastise, Mr. Speaker? SaskTel. 
 
Let me make this point, SaskTel through its external 
investments, Mr. Speaker, have invested $152 million. What’s 
it worth today? Probably somewhere between 250 and $300 
million. Yet, Mr. Speaker, they say don’t do it. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I ask the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, to get into the real world, understand that SaskTel, like 
every other telephone company, has to diversify to ensure that 
we are able to continue to provide the services that we do across 
our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the real world, the taxpayers of 
the province of Saskatchewan expect this government to treat 
their money responsibly. In the real world, the taxpayers of this 
province expect this government not to blow $35 million on 
potatoes and not to blow $42 million on a BC telco plus $20 
million plus on a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia. That is what 
taxpayers expect in the real world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Now that minister wants to quibble about the words used. 
We’ve quoted three times where he and this government have 
said this company will make money by 2004. One quote that 
doesn’t use the word projection, from the ’03 annual report . . . 
says Navigata is now positioned to provide profitable growth to 
SaskTel in 2004 and future years. Why, Mr. Speaker, then does 
the report say one thing and the facts, a $16 million loss in ’04, 
why does it say quite another from the words they provide the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again in case 
the members opposite don’t understand that Navigata is the 
vehicle for the delivery of voice over Internet, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re the vehicle for the delivery of that service, Mr. 



2658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

Speaker. 
 
And I do want to also point out, I want to point out that under 
the rapid turnaround strategy that Navigata adopted, they are in 
fact cash flow positive and profitable in the first quarter of 
2005. So the plan that they’ve implemented is working, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I note with interest as I sat here listening to petitions that 
the member from Arm River lobbied again, as he and others 
across the way do very often, that we should be delivering 
cellular service into all parts of Saskatchewan. And they’re 
right, Mr. Speaker, they’re absolutely right. They’re absolutely 
right . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. We should take our turn. The 
Minister for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me say that those 
members are absolutely right if they will listen, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m trying to tell them they’re right in wanting those services, 
Mr. Speaker. But here’s the irony. They say that cellular service 
is not part of the core services. They say that high-speed 
Internet are not part of their core services. Yet, Mr. Speaker, 
they want this telephone company to deliver the service. It 
makes no sense whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, actually members on this side 
of the House have the crazy notion that the government-owned 
Crown corporation SaskTel should choose to invest in Arm 
River over Salmon Arm, British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How many cell towers, how much additional service could be 
provided to the people of the province were it not for 2.5 
million lost on Navigata in ’01, 11 million in ’02, 12 million in 
’03, and another $16 million this year? The total, Mr. Speaker, 
$42 million lost. They say they’re not finished; they’re going to 
invest more millions of dollars into this venture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that money would pay to retain and recruit a lot of 
nurses. That money would go a long way towards helping 
producers when they need it the most this spring, Mr. Speaker. 
But instead the NDP are pouring it in to British Columbia. 
 
Will the Premier stand up and justify 42 million lost in BC, but 
nothing for CAIS, nothing for a farm safety net in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again the 
opposition say one thing and the facts say another. 
 
Let’s take a little history lesson here. Back to 1990, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s go back to 1990. Every year since 1990, SaskTel 

has lost over $250 million by way of long-distance revenues. 
That’s a decline, $250 million every year by way of 
long-distance revenues. 
 
How do they and every other telephone company plan to make 
some of those revenues up, Mr. Speaker? It’s going to be 
through probably voice over Internet. That’s what every 
telephone company believes is going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how do you deliver that service right now? Because of the 
rulings of CRTC [Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission], it’s through a vehicle like 
Navigata. That’s exactly how they plan to deliver it. That’s 
exactly how they plan to deliver the service here to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly how they plan 
to continue to provide the high-quality service right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel and its workers are 
providing high-quality service across this province despite this 
government, despite the management they get, not because of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall the Sask Party called for an independent 
public inquiry into SPUDCO so that that kind of disaster would 
never happen again. The NDP refused to hold that public 
inquiry. Pretty easy to understand, we know now as a result of 
the Gomery Commission that public inquiries aren’t exactly the 
best thing for governments who are trying to cover things up, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP keeps telling us that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Just 
allow the question to be put. The Chair recognizes the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP tell us they’ve learned the 
lessons of SPUDCO. That’s what they said. That’s why they 
said they didn’t need a public inquiry. Remember SPUDCO, 
Mr. Speaker, when the government represented it as a 
partnership with the private sector for six long years when it 
wasn’t ever the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It looks like they have not learned their lesson because now 
they’ve been telling us for three years that this company — this 
Navigata — would make money for taxpayers. They said for 
sure in ’04 it’s going to happen. Last year they lost 16 million 
in ’04. The total now, $42 million. Will the Premier stand up 
and explain his priorities to taxpayers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will tell you 
who has not learned their lesson, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
people of Saskatchewan gave that party a lesson in the last 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

provincial election when they told them, quit attacking the 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They said, we want to keep our Crowns. 
Last provincial election was based on provincial Crown 
corporations. The people of Saskatchewan enjoy and appreciate 
the service that our Crown corporations provide into rural 
Saskatchewan. I say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d ask the members to come to order. The 
Minister for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, they say they’ve changed; 
they’ve learned their lessons. Mr. Speaker, I say they have not 
learned their lessons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you have a Crown corporation that 
generates over 900 million in revenues, Mr. Speaker, earns and 
pays dividends . . . had a profit, I should say, of $94 million net 
income and pays dividends of $88 million, and you have an 
opposition party that looks at external investments like the way 
they do, Mr. Speaker, I say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. Order please, 
now. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, to move a motion 
regarding the reappointment of an officer of the Assembly, the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, the Minister of 
Justice has requested leave of the Assembly to make a motion 
with respect to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Justice. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Reappointment of Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks I’ll be moving a motion that Gerald 
Lorne Gerrand, Q.C., of the city of Regina, be reappointed the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner by this Assembly. 
 
We’ve been indeed fortunate, Mr. Speaker, over the last five 
years to have had an individual of the calibre of Mr. Gerrand to 
serve as this province’s Conflict of Interest Commissioner. He 
has provided exemplary service to the people of Saskatchewan 
during his first term and, Mr. Speaker, his work promotes 
public confidence in the activities of the members of this 
Legislative Assembly and for that we owe him our thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act clearly 
defines the concept of a conflict of interest to any member of 
this Assembly. It sets out the duties required for the members of 
the Assembly and cabinet ministers to avoid such a conflict. It 
also establishes the Office of the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner as an independent officer of this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the commissioner’s role in the operation of this 
legislation is vital. Members are required to disclose all their 
personal and business interests and those of their spouse and 
dependent children to the commissioner for use in a public 
disclosure document. 
 
In addition, members of this Assembly must seek the approval 
of the commissioner before participating in any government 
contract. The commissioner also serves as a resource to all 
members of this Assembly in ruling on personal violations of 
the Act and in assisting members with the compliance with the 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the role of the commissioner is one which 
requires the utmost trust of this Assembly. The commissioner 
meets with each member of this Assembly to assist them in 
ensuring that they’ve complied with all responsibilities under 
the Act. Members of course are familiar with Mr. Gerrand, and 
I’ll just say a few more things about the skills and attributes Mr. 
Gerrand brings to this important office. 
 
We will recognize and be familiar with him as a well-regarded 
and highly respected member of the Saskatchewan legal 
community. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gerrand was born in Melville. 
His father practised law and was a member of this Assembly. 
Mr. Gerrand graduated from the College of Law at the 
University of Saskatchewan in 1954, articled with his father, 
and practised law here in Regina. His practice is focused on 
civil litigation, and he is presently counsel with the firm of 
Gerrand Rath Johnson. 
 
As I mentioned, he was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1970. He 
served as a bencher for the Law Society of the province from 
1978 to 1982 and indeed was elected president of the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan in 1981. In 1982 Mr. Gerrand was 
elected a fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers. He 
served on the advisory committee for judicial appointments for 
the province of Saskatchewan from 1992 to 1996 and was 
chairman of the committee during the last three years of his 
appointment. 
 
It’s with great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, following consultation 
with members on both sides of the Assembly, which I 
appreciate, that I put forward Mr. Gerrand for reappointment to 
this position. And I encourage all members of this Assembly to 
join me in supporting his reappointment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would like to conclude by moving the following motion, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That this Assembly hereby reappoint Gerald Lorne 
Gerrand, Q.C., of the city of Regina in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant 
to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin, the Minister of Justice, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Southeast, the opposition critic for 
Justice: 
 

That this Assembly hereby reappoint Gerald Lorne 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

Gerrand, Q.C., of the city of Regina in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant 
to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to second this 
motion. Mr. Gerrand has through the past years provided 
competent and impartial work in this area. This is an essential 
and very significant part of our role as MLAs to ensure that all 
MLAs are free of conflict of interest and free of the appearance. 
 
And I spoke earlier and want to thank Mr. Gerrand for his past 
work and look forward to working with him in the future. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, seconded by 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast, with respect to the 
reappointment of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table responses to written questions no. 1,002 to 1,004 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,002, 1,003, 1,004 
have been submitted. The Chair recognizes the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — . . . 1,005. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered for return. Motion for return 
(debatable) . . . [inaudible] . . . It’s 1,005. Just for the record, 
could we just have that repeated please by the Government 
Whip? 
 
Mr. Yates: — We’ll convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 105 converted. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 
convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 1,006 converted. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 
convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 1,007 converted. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
we’ll convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 1,008 is converted. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
we’ll convert question 109. 
 
The Speaker: — 1,009 converted. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll convert again for debates 
returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 1,010 converted. The Government Whip. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We will 
table responses to questions no. 1,011 through 1,014. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 1,011 through to 1,014 have 
been submitted, those numbers inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for this Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
interim supply. Will the minister introduce his officials? 
Minister introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, seated 
beside me is the deputy minister of Finance, Ron Styles, on my 
left. On my right is the assistant deputy minister of the treasury 
board branch, Mr. Glen Veikle. Seated behind Mr. Styles is 
Joanne Brockman; she is the executive director of the economic 
and fiscal policy branch. And seated behind me is Arun 
Srinivas; he’s the senior tax policy analyst with taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs branch. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m just going to make a few opening remarks, 
if I might. And at the conclusion of that, I’ll move a motion 
with respect to supply. Interim supply provides the opportunity 
for the government to receive approval for certain monies to 
enable the important work of government departments and 
agencies to proceed even though the budget for the new fiscal 
year has not been officially approved. 
 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

The first interim supply Bill is introduced later this year 
because of changes made last year to The Financial 
Administration Act. The changes allow departments to spend up 
to one-twelfth of their last year’s appropriation until the 
government introduces a supply Bill. 
 
With this interim supply Bill, we are seeking approval for an 
appropriation equal to two-twelfths of the budgeted amount for 
departments, with three exceptions. These exceptions are, the 
supply Bill seeks approval for an additional $2.263 million for 
the Centennial Office in the Department of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. The Centennial 2005 Office requires the additional 
funding to proceed with the marketing campaigns and 
centennial initiatives planned for early summer, and to provide 
community-based organizations with the funding they require to 
plan and implement the significant activities and celebrations 
scheduled for their communities this summer. 
 
Secondly, the supply Bill also seeks approval for two-tenths of 
the operating grant funding for K to 12 schools in the 
Department of Learning. This recognizes that school boards are 
funded on a 12-month basis. 
 
And three, an additional $4 million is required for the 
Department of Property Management to cash flow construction 
activities scheduled early in the year, and for 
end-of-the-model-year vehicle purchases delivered in April and 
May. 
 
With the level of funding requested in the interim supply Bill, 
departments and agencies will be able to cover their expenses 
for the months of April and May. In the event that the budget is 
not passed by the end of May, we will seek approval for 
additional funds to ensure the work of government can 
continue. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, with that . . . I’m looking for my copy of 
motion no. 1. No. 1: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,099,149,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2006. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
no. 1: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,099,149,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2006. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. We 
will get around to the question very soon or get to the motion 
very soon. I have a number of questions I would like to put 
forward to the minister in the interim. 
 
I agree with the minister. We are doing very important work 
this afternoon, providing funding for the departments and 
agencies that rely on the Government of Saskatchewan for their 

funding and for their resources. 
 
I’d like to begin in the area of agriculture, Mr. Chair, and we all 
know that the economic crisis that the Saskatchewan farmers 
and farm families are facing in Saskatchewan. We had a chance 
to touch on it in estimates last week about the net farm incomes 
and we all know that they’re taking a real hit. My question for 
the minister, through you, Mr. Chair: are there going to be any 
funds appropriated for agricultural assistance programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, in the estimates under 
the Department of Agriculture and Food, there’s two items, 
farm stability and adaptation, and industry assistance. These 
items, which provide for funding of various government 
programs, agricultural programs, will also receive one-twelfth, 
as will all other aspects of the Department of Agriculture . . . 
sorry two-twelfths, as will all other aspects of the Department 
of Agriculture. If there’s a draw on that — for example, with 
respect to crop insurance — we don’t anticipate there will be a 
draw, but nevertheless we will be providing them with 
two-twelfths of their total appropriation. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Minister, for the answer. I 
just wanted to get into some of the specifics of it. Are any funds 
being put forward into the APF [agricultural policy framework], 
the ag policy framework? If so, which programs through the 
APF will indeed receive funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, under Agriculture 
and Food there are two subvotes, one for farm stability and 
adaptation, (AG08), and within that there are allocations this 
year for the Canadian agricultural income stabilization program. 
And furthermore, there is an allocation for crop insurance, 
(AG10), and within that there is allocations with respect to crop 
insurance. And in this particular instance we propose to provide 
two-twelfths of the amounts that are outlined in the Estimates 
document for the department. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see the 
amount estimated for ’05-06 is less in that line than the 
estimated amount in ’04-05. So I just want to continue asking 
questions along this line. Is any money being used to fund 
payments owed through CFIP, the Canadian farm income 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, we weren’t sure 
whether it was a trick question, but if the member is asking 
about the Canadian farm income program, CFIP, that program 
has expired and there is no allocation or item within our 
estimates for that program. We also looked at the Estimates 
book for last year and again couldn’t find any reference to it last 
year or the year preceding that. So there’s no specific allocation, 
but if there is some residual issues surrounding that program, I 
certainly wouldn’t discourage the members from asking the 
Minister of Agriculture in his estimates about that. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chair, to the minister, my understanding is it’s customary in 
this appropriation debate or appropriation questions that I am 
provided with some information as far as where the 
appropriations . . . I haven’t received any of that information. 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

Could the minister table the general information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The answer is yes, Mr. Chairman. 
And we’ll send that over to the member right away. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On the 
agriculture topic as well: will producers be seeing any of this 
money in the appropriations being dedicated to lowering their 
property tax bills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, that particular 
allocation can be found under the Department of Learning. And 
I think I indicated and I would expect that with respect to that 
particular item, as well, that two-tenths of that allocation will be 
provided to the Department of Learning. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am taken to 
understand two-twelfths — is that what the minister meant to 
say? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, two-tenths, okay. 
 
Moving on to Environment. How much of the funds under 
Environment will be spent on forest fire fighting fleet renewal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
forest fire capital, I would draw the member’s attention to page 
51 under Department of the Environment in fire management 
and forest protection, (ER10). Under that there’s allocations for 
forest fire capital in the amount of $19.24 million. Two-twelfths 
of that amount will be provided to the Department of 
Environment for forest fire capital. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I just want to make it absolutely clear 
that it’s the foundation operating grant funding for the 
Department of Learning which will be provided on a two-tenths 
basis. All other allocations under the Department of Learning, 
including for property tax relief, will be two-twelfths. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Turning now to Industry and Resources. What amount of the 
appropriations will be dedicated towards the Saskatchewan 
Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, Saskatchewan 
Research Council has a separate vote. Vote 35 can be found on 
page 131. The total budget for the Research Council is $8.19 
million and we propose to provide two-twelfths of that to the 
Research Council. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
Will any of these funds be used for further development of the 
enhanced oil recovery technology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I would draw the 
member’s attention to page 53 of the budget document where it 
indicates the nature of the incentives that would be 
implemented in support of the enhanced oil recovery projects in 
this coming year. Part of that is a new generic Crown royalty 
and freehold production tax structure. That would not be 
covered because that’s a revenue item and what we’re dealing 
with is, of course, expenditures. 
 
But also part of that is a renewal of the Saskatchewan petroleum 
research incentive program. And on page 88 of the Estimates, 

there’s an allocation of $1 million for the petroleum research 
initiatives, so we would expect that two-twelfths of that will be 
provided to the Saskatchewan petroleum research incentive 
program. There’s also an exemption of PST and fuel tax, but 
again those are revenue items and would not be covered in the 
request for funds for expenditures. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated in the east 
gallery, it’s my pleasure to introduce some friends all the way 
from Ontario: Diane Chisholm of Stratford, Ontario, and Ms. 
Deb Paul. I’ll ask them to give a wave. 
 
They’re out here visiting their very good son who just had a 
birthday party on Saturday, Mr. Jay Paul, who is husband to 
Mrs. Jessica Paul, our deputy communications director in the 
opposition office. 
 
I’ve met them a number of times. They’ve been out for the 
wedding. We’re always happy to see them in Western Canada. 
And I know that they sure surprised Jay on his birthday on 
Saturday night, as he had no idea that they were coming in, and 
merriment was had by all. So I’d ask all members present to 
welcome our guests from Ontario, and I bid you welcome as 
well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I too would like 
to join with my colleague, the member from Kindersley, in 
welcoming our guests from Ontario. 
 
I have family out in Ontario who I was speaking to on the 
weekend. And I understand that it’s snowing in the London, 
Windsor, Chatham area of Ontario. So I really hope that they’re 
enjoying the sunshine that Saskatchewan has to offer today. But 
that’s for today; it may change in a couple of days. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Chair, back to the minister. In the 
area of rural development in the new department, how much 
money is going to be directed to the new Department of Rural 
Development through these appropriations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the total budget 
allocation in the estimates for Rural Development is $6.626 
million. Two-twelfths of that in this interim supply would be 
$1.104 million. 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
guess I’m looking for the minister to highlight some of the areas 
in these departments that might need immediate expenditures or 
areas that these appropriations will be put towards. Is any 
money going to be directed towards to operations of ACRE 
[Action Committee on the Rural Economy]? Will the 
department’s funds be released to fund the upcoming ACRE 
report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the member would be 
relying on my memory of discussions on this from some 
months ago and I hesitate to do that. And therefore I would 
suggest that the questions should be put directly to the Minister 
for Rural Development who will have far more timely and 
accurate information. I wouldn’t want to assume to answer the 
questions on behalf of that minister. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, we 
certainly will be pursuing these questions in estimates with the 
appropriate ministers. I thought we could touch on each of the 
areas here this afternoon. Maybe we could turn to highways, 
money spent on highways. Which highway improvement 
projects will be receiving money this time around with these 
appropriations, and how much of the appropriation on highways 
will be spent on maintenance? 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of 
Highways will be receiving 174 . . . or their budgetary 
allocations for the year, $174 million, almost 175, and then a 
further $125 million for highways capital. These are funds that 
will be expended on hundreds, if not thousands, of projects, and 
we do not have that level of detail or information. 
 
That again is something that the Minister Responsible for 
Highways and Transportation would be able to let the Assembly 
know about, as to which specific projects would be undertaken 
or started during the months of April and May. One, again, it 
presupposes a detailed knowledge of all of their projects and 
also their schedule for the year. We don’t have that kind of 
information. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
My understanding of this process was that officials would be 
present that could answer these questions in detail. I’ll just 
proceed in touching on some other areas. And if the minister 
does have the knowledge or can undertake to get the 
information, I’d certainly appreciate it. 
 
Moving to Labour, is any money being used from the 
appropriation for the WorkSafe campaign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We expect it would be 
two-twelfths, Mr. Chair. 
 
Might I just indicate that we’ll make note of any detailed 
questions that the members ask with respect to other 
departments. And we will ask if those departments might be 
able to, you know, to correspond directly with the member to 
see to what extent they can answer those questions for him. 
 
The only officials I have with me here are the officials for the 

Department of Finance. And although we would certainly be 
aware of details of matters that are taking place within the 
Finance Department and would have a grasp of, for example, 
budgetary allocations and general purposes of those budgetary 
allocations in departments such as Highways, we would not be 
familiar or have with us a list of, say, specific projects that the 
member’s asking about. 
 
But we will make note of the question. We’ll make the question 
known to the — in that particular case — the Department of 
Highways and ask them to provide as much information as they 
can to the member directly. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Chair, under the Labour topic, also if you could undertake to 
obtain information on the funds for reducing the backlog of 
decisions to be rendered by the Labour Relations Board. I 
suspect some of the funding for Labour will be used to address 
the concerns with the Labour Relations Board and the work that 
they do. Is that indeed the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The answer is that yes, we’ll make 
note of the question and ask the Department of Labour to 
correspond directly with the member and to let him know what 
the answer is to his question. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, if 
we could turn to the Premier’s office and Executive Council 
now and I think this is a question that the minister may be able 
to answer in a general sense. The amount of money being spent 
on the Premier’s communication staff, the minister could just 
generally expound upon the need for this increased funding and 
how much of this . . . how does this amount compare to the 
money that was appropriated last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the Estimate 
documents indicates that the estimate for the subvote 
communications coordination and media services (EX03) in 
2004-05 was $1,063,000. And this year the estimate is 
$1,560,000. 
 
As to the allocations within Executive Council, recognizing that 
it applies to both communications coordination and media 
services, I don’t have the answer to that question. But I know 
the Premier in his estimates would certainly be in a position to 
answer that or we can also make note of the question and ask 
the Premier’s office to correspond directly with the member. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
yes, a further question I guess in that area if you could 
undertake, I’m wondering if the hiring has actually been done in 
this quarter, and how much of that funding will go towards 
those new hirings. 
 
Moving to Finance itself, and can the minister answer this 
question: will any funds be used for the PST rebate on 
energy-efficient appliances, that are appropriated here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, that would be a 
revenue issue, and that’s not something that we would ask the 
Assembly to provide their votes for or their support for. So I 
can say to the member that the point-of-sale exemption went 
into effect on April 1. April 1 and there will be a corresponding 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

decrease somewhere in administration within the Department of 
Finance, but we’re not asking for approval of that particular 
change in the program here today. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could the 
minister outline if there’s any provision in the appropriations 
here directed towards assisting the province in meeting our 
Kyoto objectives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, there’s no 
allocation within the budget as such with respect to Kyoto, but 
there will be initiatives in various departments, particularly in 
the Department of the Environment and the Department of 
Industry and Resources, that deal with items that are intended to 
ultimately reduce greenhouse gas emissions in Saskatchewan. 
 
For example we talked earlier about the enhanced oil recovery 
project. There is currently a project in the Weyburn area — 
around Midale, I believe — that where carbon dioxide is being 
injected into the ground in enhanced oil recovery project there. 
That’s the kind of initiative that I think the Minister of Industry 
and Resources would very much like to talk about. 
 
In this budget as well we anticipate that there will be additional 
funds expended for the ethanol, for the ethanol projects because 
we anticipate that the ethanol plant in Weyburn and the . . . will 
be coming on stream, and also the ethanol plant in 
Lloydminster. There may well be other initiatives that both of 
those ministers would like to speak to. I think it’s . . . My 
recollection though is that there are not specific targets that 
have been put forward for the province of Saskatchewan at this 
point. We look forward to working with the federal government 
at the point that they do. We still are in the process of having 
discussions with the federal government on that. 
 
Some of the implications would not necessarily be directly ones 
that would involve the Legislative Assembly because they may 
be initiatives — say for example, the Crown corporation, 
SaskPower is an example — that may have an implication 
down the road in terms of revenues from the Crowns but would 
not be items that would be line items in the budget that would 
be considered by the Legislative Assembly, although it would 
be considered I guess ultimately by the Crown and Central 
Agencies Committee of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
But there is no specific budgetary allocation for Kyoto that I 
can recall. But there are a number of initiatives in this budget 
that are intended to deal with the question of greenhouse gas 
emissions and ultimately moving Saskatchewan forward to be 
able to meet the standards when they are set down by the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
when you referred to ethanol, is there any appropriations going 
towards capital in regards to the ethanol project in Weyburn, or 
are you just referring to the tax holiday, the rebate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m not aware of any, Mr. Chair. 
The only thing that I’m aware of with respect to ethanol is the 
ethanol fuel tax rebate on page 88 of the Estimates, which is 
budgeted at $4.875 million. That’s the only allocation that I’m 
aware of. 
 

Now if there is some form of industry assistance for the 
proponents of the ethanol facility in Weyburn or in 
Lloydminster that is subsumed under, you know, some existing 
grants to industry, that may well be. I don’t know that, but that 
is certainly a question that you may want to put to the minister. 
But we’ll also make note of the question and get back with an 
answer, or hopefully have those departments correspond 
directly with the member to answer his question. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
also does the same apply then for the Husky ethanol project in 
Lloydminster? Can the minister confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again we’ll ask the department to 
correspond with the member to indicate to the member exactly 
what we anticipate with respect to the ethanol facility in 
Lloydminster. 
 
It’s my understanding that that particular project is due to come 
on stream later in a fiscal year. It may not be until . . . in 2006 
when it comes on stream, and at which point we would begin to 
flow out fuel, ethanol fuel tax rebates. But again I’ll have the 
department correspond directly with the member to let him 
know what it is that they anticipate, and also to answer the 
question, is there any other forms of assistance within their 
expenditures that have to do with ethanol. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, if 
we can move on to the Department of Learning . . . ask the 
minister to confirm if any additional funds, any additional 
appropriations will be used to fund the teachers’ contract? The 
Minister of Learning has informed this House that this 
government will be responsible for the funds, the extra funds 
needed around the teachers’ contract. Will the Minister of 
Finance confirm that for this House as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, at this point there 
is no contract. There is a tentative contract. We’ll wait and see 
what happens with respect to that contract to see what 
implications that might have for us. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to indulge 
you in some conjecture, I guess, if there are indeed additional 
funds that are needed, do you anticipate that they will be funded 
from this appropriation? 
 
[15:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Okay. Again that’s a hypothetical 
question, Mr. Chair. And once the contract . . . Hopefully the 
contract will be signed by the teachers, agreed to by the 
teachers. At that point we’ll certainly let the House know what 
implications that might have for the budget. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
again under the Department of Learning, capital funding for 
schools, could the minister just outline which schools will be 
receiving capital funding, which divisions, and which projects 
will be receiving capital funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have the list of 
the capital projects with me, but we’ll ask the Department of 
Learning to let the member know what specific capital projects 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

they will be funding through the various school boards in the 
province so that the member will have that information. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you for 
that undertaking. Certainly I’ve been hearing concerns from 
members of the Saskatoon Public School Board regarding the 
lack of funding or the lack of resources that are directed to 
capital funding in Saskatoon. And without getting into a debate 
with the minister on it at the present time, I’d certainly 
appreciate any information that he can provide on K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] funding that is happening in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Members of this House are aware of a project in my 
constituency, of the need for a school in the Arbor Creek part of 
Saskatoon. We have 600 students in . . . or 600 children under 
the age of six in Arbor Creek that are in need of a school, and 
just wondering if any of the appropriations will be directed 
towards capital, certainly in my constituency in Saskatoon, but 
more so across the entire province. So I appreciate and I 
understand the minister will undertake to provide me with that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Chair, we’ll ask the 
Department of Learning to let the member know what specific 
capital projects they have planned and that the members will be 
asked to support through their budgetary votes. And we’ll let 
the member . . . we’ll undertake to ask the Department of 
Learning to correspond directly with the member. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, one 
more question in this area while we’re on Learning is the 
foundation operating grant and the formula and the effect that it 
would have on the cities, especially of Saskatoon and Regina. 
Any information that can be provided from the department to 
answer the question would be appreciated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the interim supply 
before us today proposes to provide the Department of Learning 
with two-tenths of the budgeted amount they had for the 
foundation operating grants. But how those funds will be 
distributed to the boards, the nature of their formula, which I 
understand is quite complex, I don’t have that with me. But 
again, that’s something that the minister would have. 
 
We can also make note of the question and ask the department 
to provide the member with an answer directly, to the extent 
that they are able to do that. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, in the budget book under Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming you show a reduction in estimated revenues for 
2005-2006 from the 2004-2005 year of approximately $35 
million. How is that spread out across the year? Are you 
expecting it to be even across the year? Or within the 
two-twelfths that we’re budgeting, that you’ve come before the 
Assembly to budget for today, will that have a 
disproportionately larger or smaller portion of that change in 
and reduction in the amount of revenues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I am trying to 

recall now discussions that we had during Treasury Board about 
this item. Our thoughts were that we were likely to see a greater 
impact earlier in the year from the smoking legislation and that 
over time we’ll see some rebound in our liquor and gaming 
area, but that the impact would be greater as the ban took effect, 
and over time that we would expect to see people making their 
way back to their traditional venues. 
 
That’s based on information that we’ve been able to garner 
from other jurisdictions. That’s what we anticipate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I recognize 
that it’s too early in the fiscal year to have any information 
really back from April till now — that’s only two or three 
weeks — but would you have any information based from 
January forward, a one-month, two-month, I guess, estimate or 
forecast on those revenues since from the time the smoking ban 
went in place? And where does that hit seem to be taking place? 
Is it on the VLT [video lottery terminal] side? Is it on liquor 
consumption, or how is that breakdown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, we hope that 
during the first quarter report — that is after the first quarter of 
this fiscal year — we’ll able to provide the members with a 
more accurate assessment of what has taken place. 
 
There were some initial indications that — and I don’t have the 
information now — but that the projections that we’re making 
in terms of reduced patronage are, in fact are accurate. But 
again, we look forward to providing a more detailed analysis. I 
don’t want to provide analysis based on some anecdotal 
evidence or very limited evidence. 
 
But we look forward in the first quarter report to providing the 
members with a more detailed analysis of how the smoking ban 
has impacted SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority] and of course the casinos, and whether or not our 
assumptions were correct and what our assumptions might be 
going forward based on the first quarter report. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Earlier you 
made an announcement there would be a $75 million top-up of 
the Liquor and Gaming Fund. How was that going to be 
allocated? Is it going to be $25 million a year, therefore 
two-twelfths of that into this portion of the appropriation? Will 
it be front-loaded — could be 40 million this year and a 
descending scale into the other years? Is it going to be there to 
provide the losses as they come in, or is it just going to be $25 
at the end of the year allocated into the Liquor and Gaming 
Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we provided an 
analysis in our budget documents, and I would refer the 
member to page 70 of the budget document where we indicate 
the smoking ban offset. And we expect that in this fiscal year, 
’05-06, the impact of the smoking ban to be $40 million. And 
that in the next fiscal year we expect that impact to be $25 
million. And in the third year we expect that impact to be $10 
million. So those three add up to the $75 million that we 
budgeted and that the member raised here today. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — How will those monies be allocated into 
the Liquor and Gaming Authority fund? Will it be one lump 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

sum payment at some point during the year or is it going to 
correspond to the reduction in revenues based on a monthly or a 
quarterly basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, what we’re doing 
is we’re anticipating reduced revenues from the SLGA into the 
General Revenue Fund. So we put funds aside last year in 
anticipation of this in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund which will 
then be used to put back into our revenues so that our revenues 
are more or less comparable to what it was prior to the 
implementation of the smoking ban, because we again 
anticipate that there will be an impact on the government’s 
revenues as a result of the smoking ban. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will that 
money be trickled into the SLGA fund or will it be a one-time 
payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, we anticipate a reduced 
dividend from the SLGA and therefore we set aside funds in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, not to provide those funds to the 
SLGA, but to bring those into government revenues for the 
specific years in anticipation of reduced dividends from the 
SLGA. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. So let’s 
say it’s $40 million. That $40 million will then not be seen as a 
transfer from SLGA to the Consolidated Fund. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — That is correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much. And to the minister and 
to your officials, thank you for the opportunity just to further 
clarify what the member from Cannington was discussing with 
the funds from SLGA. My concern is the Community Initiatives 
Fund that will obviously receive less money then because of the 
dividend from SLGA. How has your department determined the 
breakdown now? Which areas are going to receive less money? 
And have you determined what the effect is going to be on 
those organizations that have been relying on their funds from 
the Community Initiatives Fund to operate their programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, the government 
distributes net income from the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation to beneficiaries according to The Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation Act, with the GRF [General Revenue 
Fund] retaining 50 per cent while the Community Initiatives 
Fund, CIF, and the First Nations gaming agreements each 
receive 25 per cent. And there’s also a set amount for the Métis 
Development Fund that flows to the Community Initiatives 
Fund. So out of the CIF allocation of 25 per cent, there’s a 
specific figure that’s set aside for the Métis Development Fund. 
 
[15:30] 
 
With respect to the SLGA, 100 per cent of net profits generated 
from slot machines from SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority] is paid to the SLGA. Based on both SIGA and 
Saskatchewan Gaming Commission forecasted net profits, an 

amount is granted from the GRF, the General Revenue Fund, 
through the Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation to the 
Community Initiatives Fund and through the Department of 
First Nations and Métis Relations to the First Nations Trust and 
the Métis Development Fund. 
 
And the current gaming agreement between the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the province, concerning the 
distributions of net profits from SIGA casinos, states that the 
province will retain thirty-seven and a half per cent of SIGA 
casino net profits. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, but you didn’t 
answer my question. You did tell me what I think most people 
know, is that the Community Initiatives Fund and First Nations 
Fund get 25 per cent each, and that there is some money goes to 
the Métis association. But obviously these funds are going to 
receive less money this year than they have the last couple of 
years. Your government has made sure that there is . . . it’s not 
going to affect the General Revenue Fund, because there’s been 
money set aside for it. But there’s going to be less money for 
programming for those two groups — First Nations Fund and 
the Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
I know every year that the amount of money that’s requested of 
those groups is more than the money that they have. So with 
this kind of a cutback there’s going to be organizations and 
individuals who are not going to get the funding who have in 
the past, and who perhaps need it this year. 
 
Is there anything that your government has done to ensure that 
the Community Initiatives Fund and the First Nations Fund isn’t 
going to lose money on this initiative? Did you save anything 
for them or is it all just going into General Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I would certainly 
encourage the member to put those questions to the responsible 
ministers. We’ll make note of the questions and ask those 
ministers also to correspond with the member, to let the 
departments know of the member’s interests to see to what 
extent they can respond at this point. There are issues too about 
when funds are received and what is actually paid out in a year 
that I don’t have the details of all those transfers with me. 
 
But the member raises a good question and we’ll endeavour to 
ensure that the affected departments reply directly to the 
member. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
turning to the topic of the Department of Health. Health is an 
important part of this budget as it is of every budget in the 
country, and the national budget as well. 
 
In this budget the government press release indicated $4 million 
for expanding surgical volumes and reducing waiting lists. How 
much of this $4 million will be allocated in the first quarter to 
reduce wait times? And I certainly understand if the minister 
doesn’t have that information. He can provide that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, in addition to the 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

one-twelfth that was granted for the month of April, this 
particular interim supply asked for a further two-twelfths. 
We’ve not received the request from Health, that I’m aware of, 
for anything extraordinary although if they had we would 
certainly look at that. But it’s my understanding that’s what has 
been . . . was provided with the budget and what is being 
requested today. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. 
Also if the minister could comment on any additional funds 
being allocated for improving cancer treatments capacity and 
also for the alcohol and drug strategy for the province, any 
additional funds coming forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again this interim supply would 
provide two-twelfths of that amount. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And Mr. 
Chair, since the minister is undertaking to provide answers in 
written form, I have a couple of other questions regarding the 
integrated health sciences facility in Saskatoon. We’ve heard 
about the facility and the need for it. Certainly members on this 
side of the House have advocated it for quite some time. If the 
minister could provide any information that this allocation will 
go towards seeing that this facility is . . . the construction begins 
on this facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We’ll certainly let the Department 
of Health know the member’s interest and encourage them to 
correspond directly with the member. Mr. Chairman, just in 
case I wasn’t clear, this particular allocation today is for 
two-twelfths and covers also the first month of April, which 
was allocated at that time as part of the budgetary process. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the budget, 
in performance plan summary on page 20, the document talks 
about: 
 

Approval to proceed with four additional health care 
facilities: new integrated health [care] facilities in 
Preeceville and Maidstone; [and a] Mental Health Facility 
in Saskatoon . . . 
 

I want to concentrate on the mental health facility in Saskatoon 
for the time being, but certainly if the minister has any 
additional information on any of these four facilities, we’d 
appreciate it. 
 
But today in question period we heard the Minister of Health 
talk about the priority for the government on mental health in 
this province. I’ve recently received correspondence from 
advocates for a new mental health facility in Saskatoon, and 
they’ve provided me with documentation that shows that for the 
past seven years this facility has been on the drawing board, and 
different commitments and different announcements have been 
made for this by this government. 
 
I’m very interested in knowing if any of these appropriations 
from the Department of Health will go towards a mental health 
facility in Saskatoon, which I understand is long overdue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — The answer is yes. There is 
provision in this budget to provide for an upgrade of what is the 

Hantelman facility, I believe it is, in Saskatoon. That’s what’s 
in the budget, and this particular interim supply would provide 
for two-twelfths of that allocation. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you for that answer, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Chair, I understand that this will be a province-wide 
facility, a facility that services the entire population of 
Saskatchewan and therefore it will be entirely funded by the 
government, by the Department of Health. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, one would have to 
ask the Minister of Health as to what area of the province 
specifically would see the Hantelman facility in Saskatoon as a 
facility for people in the northern part of the province, as there 
are facilities here in Regina. And I don’t have the particulars of 
that. 
 
But it’s fair to say that there is a specialization and 
concentration of services in some of our larger centres, because 
it’s just simply not feasible to provide for that kind of facility in 
each of the health districts. But again, what the breakdown is, 
how it is, or which health districts would look to refer people 
from their areas to Saskatoon as opposed to Regina or some 
other facility, I don’t have that breakdown. But the minister 
would certainly be able to provide that. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Chair, certainly the people that I have met with have made a 
strong case that this will indeed be a province-wide facility and 
therefore it would affect the funding arrangement with the 
Saskatoon Health Region. But I look forward to receiving more 
information on that. 
 
One final question in the health area. Any money from this 
appropriation will be . . . will any money from this 
appropriation be dedicated to a children’s hospital in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not 100 per 
cent clear as to the state of play within the Department of 
Health on this particular topic. I understand there’s certainly no 
capital or operating dollars within the budget. But in terms of 
planning dollars and so on, staff time that are allocated towards 
this project, I think it’s best that I ask the Department of Health 
to correspond directly with the member and to answer that 
question. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
That’s given me a glimmer of hope. I certainly hope that we do 
find something in there, but I understand what he’s saying and 
will look forward to the Minister of Health answering that 
question in a written form. 
 
Turning to a couple of final questions I guess or one final 
question regarding one of the longest standing promises in the 
province, the promise to hire 200 additional police officers in 
the province. The government maintains that this is a promise 
that they’re still working on some six years after. In fact, the 
promise was made in 1999. 
 
Can the minister tell me if there’s any money from these 
appropriations that will go towards indeed hiring additional 
police officers so we can reach that goal of 200 additional 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

officers that was made by, you know, a previous government or 
previous administration in 1999? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, again we plan to 
provide the Department of Justice, pursuant to this interim 
supply, with two-twelfths of their budgetary allocations. I 
believe there was an announcement on budget day that we look 
forward to hiring additional police officers in pursuit of that 
commitment. But where and how these officers are to be 
deployed, that’s certainly a question I think that’s better put to 
the Minister of Justice. But we’ll make note of the member’s 
question and ask the Department of Justice to communicate 
directly with the member to give him the answer. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chair, thank you to the minister and his officials for answering 
the questions that he was able to today. I understand the level of 
questioning might have been more detailed than the minister 
was expecting, and certainly I appreciate his undertaking to 
provide written answers. 
 
And at this time I would like to indicate to the minister that 
members on this side of the House look forward to co-operating 
with him to provide the resources necessary for the Government 
of Saskatchewan to undertake the services that it does to 
provide to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the member for his 
questions, Mr. Chair. We’re in a difficult position to try to 
answer questions for other ministers, not having the benefit of 
those officials, whether it’s Health or Highways, here with us to 
answer detailed questions. But we’ve made note of the 
questions. We’ll be asking departments to review the transcripts 
and to correspond directly with the member to provide him with 
the answers to many of the questions that he has asked. And we 
look forward to proceeding. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
interim supply no. 1: 
 

Resolved that the sum not exceeding $1,099,149,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2006. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the committee to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $1,099,149,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 
 

The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 
interim supply no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2006, the sum of $1,099,149,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Minister of Finance has asked the 
committee to report progress and asked for leave to sit again. Is 
that the pleasure of the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read 
the first time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First and second readings of 
the resolutions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

The Deputy Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 117 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 1) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move by leave of 
the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 117, The Appropriation Act, 
2005 (No. 1) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 
that Bill No. 117, The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 1) be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — By leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 57(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. Moved by the 
Minister of Finance that Bill No. 117, The Appropriation Act, 
2005 (No. 1) be now read a second and third time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second and third reading of 
this Bill. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 109 — The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act. 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to keeping 
Saskatchewan communities safe and creating a hostile 
environment for organized crime and gang-related activities. 
Members will be aware that in the same session we are 

introducing The Seizure of Criminal Property Act and that in 
previous sessions we have introduced legislation such as The 
Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act and The Pawned 
Property (Recording) Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sole purpose of this new Bill is to continue to 
provide tools to Saskatchewan’s policing community to 
undercut the activity of criminal organizations. This Bill 
provides that where the court is satisfied on application by a 
police chief that the owner or manager of a business is a 
member of a criminal organization, the court may cancel or 
withhold any provincial tax or liquor licence needed to operate 
the business and, if applicable, prohibit the premises from being 
used to store or distribute liquor. 
 
Simply put, this Bill was intended to make it clear that 
organized crime members may not expect to freely operate any 
provincially licensed business in this province. 
 
If the court is satisfied that a business is knowingly being used 
for unlawful purposes, it may issue an order to cease business 
operations. It may liquidate and dissolve a business. It may 
deregister the corporation, and it may cancel any licences — 
including liquor licences. If the court is satisfied two or more 
people have conspired to commit unlawful activities that would 
likely cause injury to the public, the court may make an order to 
restrain those activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is being brought forward at the request of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police as an 
additional method through which they can address organized 
crime issues. Under this Bill our police services will be able to 
address the purportedly legitimate business enterprises that are 
controlled or owned by a member of a criminal organization. 
Once again we are seeking to use civil procedures to address 
those who would seek a profit from criminal operations. 
 
This process occurs under the direction of the court, and it is 
careful to provide the property owner with the right to answer 
the allegation of wrongdoing in a court of law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, along with the criminal property 
forfeiture Act, represent the next steps in this government’s 
continuing commitment to create a hostile environment for 
organized crime in the province of Saskatchewan. I would 
invite all members of this Assembly to join us in supporting this 
Bill. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Civil Remedies against Organized Crime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the minister that Bill No. 109, The Criminal 
Enterprise Suppression Act, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is an 
honour to be able to stand today to speak very briefly on Bill 
No. 109. Organized crime is and always should be a serious 
concern for all of us in the Assembly, and we must do whatever 
we can to curb the activities of organized crime within our 
province. 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

I think the latest statistics on gang-related activities in our 
province is alarming. And if there is legislation that’s being 
requested by our police officers within the province, we should 
be looking at what their suggestions are, because they of course 
are the front-line workers that are trying to deal with the 
organized crime within our province. 
 
So it will be with interest that the opposition party will be 
reviewing this Bill and meeting with the interested groups and 
seeing or getting their input as to whether this Bill is going to 
address the issue of organized crime. And then we will have a 
better knowledge of whether or not this Bill is going to meet the 
need that’s being asked for. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Humboldt has 
moved debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 110 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Seizure of Criminal Property Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this House will be aware that this 
government’s been making a special effort through a series of 
recent Bills to assist our policing and justice officials in their 
efforts to address organized crime and gang-related activities in 
our province. As a result, The Pawned Property (Recording) 
Act and The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act were 
passed in previous sessions, and they are now being 
implemented throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
This session I am pleased to be introducing this Bill, The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Act, as well as The Criminal 
Enterprise Succession Act as the next steps in this government’s 
ongoing commitment to improving safety in Saskatchewan 
communities and creating a hostile environment for organized 
crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides that where the property’s the 
product of or is owned by an individual or business that’s 
committing unlawful acts, that property will be subject to 
forfeiture by an order of the court. The Bill provides that a 
police chief in Saskatchewan can apply to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench for an order forfeiting the proceeds of any unlawful 
activity. 
 
In this context, proceeds of any unlawful activity means any 
activity that would constitute either a provincial or federal 
offence where the property in question is obtained, in whole or 
in part, indirectly or directly, through such activities. Under this 
new civil process, rather than viewing the forfeiture of illegal 
property as an aspect of the punishment for a crime, this Bill 
recognizes the property that’s being used for or which is the 
product of unlawful activities should not be retained by the 
individuals committing these crimes. 

Accordingly the police chief may make an application to the 
court to establish on a balance of probabilities that the property 
is either an instrument or proceeds of an unlawful activity. If 
the police chief is successful in establishing one of these 
criteria, the property will be forfeited to the Crown . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Saskatchewan and liquidated. The proceeds of 
that liquidation will then be used to pay for the cost of the 
liquidation proceedings for the Crown and for the cost of 
proceedings undertaken by the police chief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a court controlled process that permits 
legitimate interest holders to be protected and allows the owner 
of a property to demonstrate that it’s not the product or the 
instrument of unlawful activities. If, however, if they are unable 
to show that the property in question is not the product or 
instrument of unlawful activities or that they are not a member 
of a criminal organization, that property will be forfeited in the 
manner I have described. 
 
Mr. Speaker, gangs and other organized crime activities are 
motivated by profit. By removing these profits and the tools 
used to make that profit from the hands of criminals, this 
government is committed to continuing to create a hostile 
environment for organized crime and other criminal gang 
activity in the province. 
 
In the same way that electronic reporting procedure under The 
Pawned Property (Recording) Act or the new procedures under 
The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act provide new 
tools for the police to make the operations of such gangs more 
difficult, this Act will provide an additional tool to our police 
services. 
 
It is this government’s position that all efforts should be made 
to assist our police services in their quest to provide safer 
Saskatchewan communities. Through legislation such as The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Act, we are hopeful that additional 
inroads can be made in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to join me in supporting this important, new tool for 
our police services in their efforts to make Saskatchewan an 
undesirable location for organized crime activities. Mr. Speaker, 
I move second reading of An Act respecting the Forfeiture of 
Property Acquired by or Used in Criminal Activities. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the minister that Bill No. 110, The Seizure of 
Criminal Property Act, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and again 
it’s an honour to stand and speak to Bill No. 110. And again I 
stress that the Saskatchewan Party supports any legislation that 
will allow . . . [inaudible] . . . to be at the disposal of the police 
to deal with organized crime within our province. 
 
We will be taking this piece of legislation to the affected groups 
to ensure that it does indeed address what the minister has just 
told us that it will address. And we have a few questions on the 
issues that he mentioned. In particular he said that the proceeds 
accumulated through the liquidation of confiscated properties 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

will go towards the expenses incurred in confiscating those 
properties. But if those proceeds become excessive, what 
happens to the funds at that point in time? Is there any 
programs, for example victim impact programs, that that money 
would be directed to? 
 
So there’s a number of questions that we will have for the 
minister. And we will be looking forward to being able to pose 
those questions to him. So with that, I adjourn debate. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Humboldt has 
moved that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. Committee of 
Finance. I do now leave the Chair, so the House can go into 
Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
estimates for the Department of Government Relations. Will the 
minister please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
appreciate the opportunity to be in front of Committee of 
Finance again. The officials with me today include, to my right, 
the deputy minister of Government Relations, Harvey Brooks; 
next to him, the assistant deputy minister, municipal relations, 
Maryellen Carlson. 
 
Also we have executive director, policy development, John 
Edwards. We have executive director, grants administration and 
provincial municipal relations, Mr. Russ Krywulak. We have 
executive director of finance and management services, Wanda 
Lamberti. We have assistant deputy minister, trade and 
international relations, Paul Osborne. We also have the director 
of grants administration, Doug Morcom, and acting executive 
director, community planning, Ralph Leibel. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Sub (GR01). Is the committee ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome and welcome to your officials here today. I have a few 
questions — questions that I have been trying to get answers 
for, for probably five years since I took my position as MLA. 
And the questions are regarding forest fringe problems. 
 
Now there’s a group set up in my area, and they’ve been trying 
to get some answers regarding forest fringe questions. And to 
date there’s been a lot of talk but again no answer’s been done. 

And I’m sure one of your officials today, Mr. Edwards, 
hopefully will have some answers for my questions today. 
 
To date what has taken place regarding the changes made to 
legislation where the RMs [rural municipality] have the ability 
to tax permit land — not lease land; permit land — in the forest 
fringe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for that question. 
And I know, and I can signal to your constituents I know of 
your interest in this issue. And as you had mentioned in your 
statement to your question, indeed you have been bringing this 
issue forward for a while. As you are also aware, this 
department has been discussing this matter at least as long as 
you’ve been asking those questions and have basically 
concluded this is a lot more complicated than it actually appears 
on the ground. 
 
Just by way of background, Government Relations did conduct 
a survey of RMs affected in July 2001 and did prepare a 
discussion paper incorporating both the survey results and 
feedback from the interested parties. That survey showed 7 of 
32 rural municipalities within the forest fringe actually assessed 
and taxed grazing permit holders. Total grazing permit taxes, 
including both municipal and school, were just over $100,000. 
 
Government Relations officials have since met with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 
Saskatchewan Environment, Saskatchewan Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Revitalization to examine this issue and identify 
potential options to address the concerns that had been raised. 
As I’d indicated, they have discovered the complexity of 
different views. It quickly became apparent during the review 
that there are indeed different views of what the problem is or 
what could be done about it. And therefore because of the 
different views, it was necessary to ensure careful consideration 
before any changes are proposed. 
 
Government Relations provided an overview of the issues at a 
January 2005 meeting of the Crown land stakeholders forum 
and suggested that this group could discuss this matter to 
provide direction to the Department of the Environment. 
Government Relations is prepared to consider direction from 
Environment and Crown land stakeholders to resolve the 
various issues. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for the 
answer. As you mentioned, the information you gave me was 
back in 2001. From 2001 to date there has been no change. The 
farm grazers that are grazing cattle in this permit land . . . And I 
do stress that it’s permit land; it is not lease land. And this is 
something that I stressed to Mr. Osika when he was the minister 
and he did take the time to understand the forest fringe problem. 
And I think that’s what the farm people are saying to you as 
your government, that you have to understand this problem 
before you can make any recommendations. 
 
Now in previous talks that I’ve had with different ministers, 
your government has always said it’s left up to SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] to make 
the final decision. Well I believe it shouldn’t be left up to 
SARM. It should be left up to you because you’re the 
government. 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

And I find it ironic that this is probably the most ironic tax 
imposed on a group of people ever. When you have a certain 
group of people paying tax for 365 days a year, and the 
maximum days of use that they can use is only 145, why should 
they be taxed? This is a question they have. 
 
Now also to that, Mr. Minister, there are other users of that 
land. There is woodcutters. There is outfitters who use the land 
a lot more than the forest grazing people do, and yet they’re not 
assessed any tax at all. 
 
The grazing people have wrote letters. They have talked to 
SARM. SARM will not budge on this. When is your 
government going to take a serious stand and look at this 
properly so that the grazing people of the forest fringe do not 
have to pay tax on a year basis when they can only use the land 
less than half of the time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much again for the 
continuing line of questions. The member does talk about the 
role of government and government having to make decisions. 
By making decisions, government makes choices. You examine 
options. You make decisions based on the options that are 
brought forward to you, and you move forward having made 
those choices. 
 
One of the options available to government is always status 
quo. And the status quo remains in place unless a significant 
change comes forward. When government makes choices for 
change, government always wants to ensure that the people 
affected by the change are supportive of that change or provide 
you with evidence that a majority of the membership wants that 
change. 
 
One of the complexities in this case is that the majority of rural 
municipalities affected want no change. The majority of rural 
municipalities are saying that the status quo is the right decision 
for this government to make. 
 
We have agreed to continue to work with individuals in the 
Crown land stakeholder group, with the Department of the 
Environment to try to determine and work out options that are 
available to the people that you are representing as their MLA. 
 
But we do have a broader issue here in which government has 
devolved certain authorities to rural municipalities. And as I’d 
indicated earlier, only 7 of 32 rural municipalities within the 
forest fringe actually assess or tax grazing permit holders. And 
on top of that, a rural municipality currently has the ability to 
cancel or pro-rate taxes. And RM councils also may choose to 
exempt grazing permit holders by bylaw. So government action 
already provides local councils to do some of the things that 
you’re asking government to do across the province. 
 
So bottom line is right now we are assessing all of the options. 
We are talking to all of the players, and we are looking for a 
compromise to come forward that gives us reason to believe 
that there’s an acceptable choice to be made that takes us 
beyond the status quo. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I’ve always been led to believe, and I’m sure you will agree 
with me, that in order to implement the tax or have the ability to 

implement the tax, you must be able to provide a service. Can 
you tell me in regards to the permitted land that we’re dealing 
with, permitted land and forest fringe, where the RM provides a 
service that gives them the empowerment and power to levy a 
tax? They do not provide any service; yet this government has 
given them the ability and the power to levy a tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chair, all I can say to that is 
that we do believe that local decisions are best made at the local 
level. We provide rural municipalities with certain powers that 
takes the provincial government away from the 
decision-making table and allows the local governments to 
make certain decisions. And I would ask the member opposite if 
he has attended an RM meeting and asked that very question to 
the RM. They are at this point the decision-making power. They 
are the people that can best address the issue that the member 
raises. 
 
On the other hand, this government is also open to examining 
other options that are available to us and we continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
little while ago you said that you relate to the status quo. Well 
back when this was implemented by your government, why 
didn’t you just stay with the status quo? Why didn’t you leave it 
the way it was when it was under the jurisdiction of SERM 
[Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management] who 
have the ability to permit each users of that said land in a fair 
and equitable basis? Why did you not stay with the status quo 
and listen to SARM and a few members of SARM, and right 
away give them the opportunity to tax this land without this 
government knowing the full details of that proposal? 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I just would like to reiterate, but add this 
one piece of information. The power was provided to the rural 
municipalities in 1989 and rural municipalities are required by 
legislation to assess grazing permits. But they have the ability to 
cancel or pro-rate those taxes if they feel the taxes based on the 
full year are not appropriate. RM councils may also choose to 
exempt grazing permit holders by bylaw. Those are the powers 
that have been provided to the rural municipality. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, you 
have given the RMs the power to levy that tax. It comes back to 
my former statement. How can you allow a body like the RMs 
to impose a tax on certain individuals when they don’t provide 
any service? 
 
And when the RMs at their RM convention passed this, I can 
guarantee you that 99.9 per cent of the people there didn’t know 
what the heck they were talking about when they’re talking 
about forest fringe. In fact, the former ministers that I was 
dealing with since year 2000 didn’t know what forest fringe is 
and it wasn’t up until the time that Mr. Osika took the office of 
minister that he actually sat down and understood it. 
 
Now you had a former deputy minister last year, Mr. Larry 
Steeves, who also took the time to understand forest fringe. He 
is no longer in your department, but he is the deputy minister of 
Northern Affairs. He understands the problem with forest 
fringe. 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

It is the most unfair tax ever imposed on a certain group of 
people and your government stands here and says as long as 
SARM says it’s okay, we’re going to let them be the power that 
will grant the levy of taxes. 
 
Yet it’s your job, Mr. Minister, as the minister of municipal 
relations, to understand the problem and then allow this body to 
tax where it’s taxable where the taxable people are getting a fair 
shake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I find it interesting that the member 
would say that 99.9 per cent of SARM delegates didn’t know 
what they were voting on. I hope that that’s not what the 
member was trying to say. I believe that elected members of 
local governments know what they’re voting on when they go 
to conventions. And I believe that when they voted on this issue 
or one similar to it they were understanding that this 
government, and governments before it, have devolved 
authority for local issues to local governments. 
 
Don’t ask the provincial government to make decisions on local 
issues. People stand for election to rural municipality 
governments, to urban municipality governments — just as they 
do for provincial governments — to take responsibility for 
issues that are within their individual jurisdiction. And this 
government, with the support of members of SARM and 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], have 
devolved certain authorities to the local level without provincial 
government interference. 
 
So I’ll go back to what I said earlier. There’s a local 
government decision-making process that exists here. But this 
government is also prepared to continue to look at existing 
options where the province might play a role. In other words, 
the Department of the Environment is taking a look at the role 
that decisions that are made within that department are affecting 
people on the land. But other rural municipalities have dealt 
with this issue differently than the municipality that you are 
representing in this case. 
 
And I have to say I respect the decisions that local government 
members make. I’m willing to discuss their decisions with them 
as I do on an ongoing basis. I’m willing to discuss the role that 
the province should play in local government. And in fact, later 
this session the member will have an opportunity to discuss The 
Municipalities Act which we have worked out in conjunction 
with local governments, that establishes a relationship between 
local governments and the provincial governments respecting 
each others jurisdiction and moving forward issues that are, in 
most cases, very local in nature. 
 
So I simply stress in closing on this issue, we are doing what we 
can through the Department of the Environment to address the 
issues that the member has brought forward. They are more 
complex because a decision this government makes for this 
rural municipality will have an impact against almost all other 
municipalities in the province, whether they have forest fringe 
elements to them or not. 
 
And I urge the member to continue to work on the big picture, 
as well as the interests of his own constituents. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 

Minister, 99.9 per cent is just a figure of speech. But I can 
guarantee after questioning ministers in the year 2000 and again 
up until last year, most of them don’t understand what forest 
fringe is, don’t understand what the forest fringe problems are. 
 
And when you look at this from the forest fringe . . . [inaudible] 
. . . perspective, they’re charged tax on 365 days of the year and 
they only get to use it 145 days. How can one say that that is a 
proper taxation system? How can you, as a minister, say that 
that is a proper taxation system when you have to pay for the 
whole year and only get to use it one-half a year. If this is the 
case, if you’re going to keep on charging the forest grazers tax 
on a year-round basis, will you impose tax on all the other users 
of that said land, for instance, the wood people — people that 
cut wood — or forestry people or outfitters, or anybody else 
using that land? Will you impose a tax on them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the member opposite is trying to 
provide or ask me to take over authority that in fact the local 
members have and want to protect themselves. When he talks 
about 99.9 per cent being a figure of speech, I think he’s 
forgetting something very important here and that is that 7 of 32 
municipalities within the forest fringe assess these taxes, the 
people at the local level who understand completely the issues 
of the forest fringe because they live there. The rural municipal 
councillors and reeves in seven municipalities have imposed 
this tax and not exempted it. 
 
They understand the issue. They understand it very well and 
they have chosen to impose this tax, not this government. Seven 
of thirty-two have done that. The others have chosen to provide 
exemptions or have chosen to change the delivery of the system 
somewhat. 
 
So it’s not that this government doesn’t understand, it’s that 
those who are there and have the authority to deliver it do 
understand and are taxing accordingly. I ask the member 
opposite again to discuss this issue where the decisions are 
being made, at the local level. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, this forest fringe land is under the jurisdiction of 
SERM. It is SERM land yet the taxation system is imposed by 
Municipal Affairs. Three years ago, the SARM convention, 
there was a resolution having the Environment COs 
[conservation officers] collect the taxes. And their answer was, 
and I quote: 
 

We are not tax collectors, because there should not be a 
tax. We do it in a permit basis so that everybody using that 
land gets permitted to the amount of days they use it on a 
fair and equitable basis. 

 
Why won’t the government allow that to go back to the 
department of SERM where it should be, and was in the first 
place, before SARM introduced this amendment to the 
legislation that gives them the power to levy a tax yet not 
provide any services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I really believe that the member opposite 
now is trying to unduly complicate what is already a very 
complicated issue. Is the member opposite asking me as 
minister not to allow rural municipalities to cancel or pro-rate 



2674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

taxes, not to exempt permits across the board? Or is he asking 
me to remove local authority altogether and not to give them the 
ability to tax any local issues, and that these are provincial 
issues and not local ones? 
 
I’m just wondering what authority the member wants me to 
assume on behalf of rural municipalities, and will that 
suggestion that the member is making have the support of the 
majority of rural municipalities across the province. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, what I’m asking you to do is 
go out to the RMs, at the seven if that’s what you want, and talk 
to the people in government, local government. And also talk to 
the farmers that graze in this area and understand the issue — 
understand it. Because this is in permit land under the 
jurisdiction of SERM, not SARM — under SERM. And yet the 
government has allowed another body, which is SARM, to levy 
that tax. And they do not provide a service. 
 
And that’s where you come in as a minister. That should have 
been done way back when — when instead of taking SARM’s 
decision that yes, we will amend this legislation, you should 
have went out there and understood what the problem was. And 
then you’d have realized then, Mr. Minister, that this is an 
unfair tax, and that it should not be allowed. And that the 
department of SERM should be the ones doing it under a permit 
basis, because it’s a fair system to every user of the land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member opposite simply provides 
evidence to all members of the Chamber how complicated the 
issue really is. But when we break it down to its very simplest 
form, its very simplest form, the rural municipalities have 
authority to, once a tax has been levied, to pro-rate or to cancel 
it. We give that authority to the local rural municipalities. The 
councillors and the reeves that are elected at the local level can 
make this decision for each community that they represent. This 
is something that rural municipalities have lobbied for for years. 
 
Is the member opposite telling me that it’s his party’s position 
today that we should withdraw that devolution of power that we 
provided back in 1989? Should we withdraw that power and 
assume it ourselves? Is that the position of the party represented 
by the member opposite? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, the land in question, forest 
fringe, is it SERM land or is it SARM land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, I answer the member’s question 
by saying this is SERM land. It belongs to the province of 
Saskatchewan and the rural municipality has the ability to tax it. 
The rural municipality also has the ability to cancel that tax, 
depending on what the citizens at the local level want. So the 
rural municipality has the ability to tax and to not tax that land 
regardless of who owns it. If it was private sector land, if it was 
corporate land, provincial land — it doesn’t matter who owns 
the land, it’s assessable and it’s taxable. But the rural 
municipality at the local level has the ability to pro-rate or 
cancel that tax. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, is this the same for all 
Crown land in the province of Saskatchewan, as you have just 
identified? 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The province of Saskatchewan provides a 
legislative authority to local governments to assess and tax the 
Environment land. The other land I can’t speak for. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, if it’s good enough for forest 
fringe land, then why is it not the same for all land? Or is it 
different? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Actually, I’ve had confirmed for me what 
we’re talking about is land leased for taxable purposes. In other 
words the property, the land, the purpose the land is used for is 
otherwise a taxable situation. So as a result, that’s why this land 
is currently assessed for taxable purposes. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re talking about 
apples and oranges. Forest fringe land is permitted land. 
Permitted land is year to year to year. It is not leased land. That 
is the difference. And that’s what took Mr. Osika a long time to 
understand. He kept referring to permitted land and leased land 
being in the same kettle of wax. Well it is not. It’s two different 
jurisdictions. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, when the government allowed the 
RMs the power to tax this land — and, like you said, there’s 
only 7 of 32 RMs that’s doing it and yes, you say they have the 
empowerment now to levy a tax or not — do you think an RM 
considering the conditions of rural Saskatchewan and 
agriculture today, where they’re looking for any kind of dollars 
out there, this is the easiest tax dollars they can make? They can 
charge taxes for 365 days a year, allow them to be in that land 
for 145 and provide not one service. It’s a freebie. Why 
wouldn’t they want that? The reason they have that is because 
this government has allowed that to happen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member opposite continues to argue 
a case to the Minister of Government Relations that ideally 
should be argued to the reeve and council of the municipality or 
municipalities to which he refers. This issue does come down to 
jurisdiction and areas of authority. 
 
The member tries to make an argument to the Minister of 
Government Relations, an argument that I will argue with him. 
I understand; and he knows I understand it because I was a 
Member of Parliament for that area for eight and a half years 
and I represented those very, very people that he’s talking 
about. I’ve been there. I’ve talked to those people. I understand 
their circumstances, and I’m sympathetic to them. 
 
At the same time, however, I have a responsibility as a minister 
of the Crown of a department that has devolved certain 
authorities to another level of government. I respect rural 
municipalities. I respect the government structures that are in 
place. I respect the decisions of their representative 
organizations, and I will continue to work with them to ensure 
that their ability to work within their own communities is as 
strong as possible. 
 
Now the member argues that I don’t understand. But it’s the 
local authorities that have assessed and taxed that land and have 
chosen — even though they fully understand the implications 
— have chosen not to pro-rate or exempt their taxpayers from 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2675 

that area of taxation. 
 
The member’s words are not mine, that this is an easy tax to 
take from their own people. But if that’s an argument that he 
wants to make back home to the local reeve, I say feel free. Go 
home and make it. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I have made 
that argument with many reeves regarding this. And I’ve said to 
them, just like I’m saying to you, when you levy or have the 
power to levy a tax, will you provide a service? And their 
answer is no, we don’t have to; we don’t own the land. 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, that you were not the minister of 
Government Relations when this first was implemented. I 
understand that. All I’m saying to you as minister now: will you 
undo a wrong that was done some years ago? Will you take 
back that legislation and put it in the hands of SERM where it 
belongs, where it’s fair for everybody, through the SERM 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll just wait till the member opposite is 
prepared to listen to the answer. The Department of 
Government Relations is working with SERM to examine other 
options that might be available in these circumstances. We have 
signalled that to the local leaseholders and we are including 
them in consultations and discussions. This is the way we do 
business — consultation, understanding, working together to 
find solutions that are acceptable to the majority of people 
involved. 
 
In the case that’s in front of us, again I can’t stop thinking that 
the member opposite is trying to complicate the issue by 
requesting that this government take back authority that’s been 
given to the local municipalities. 
 
The member opposite argues that since SERM owns the land, 
the service must be provided for taxable purposes. The member 
is not thinking clearly, as I understand it, about who owns the 
other land in the RM. Private ownership, individuals who own 
the land, are they providing a service that’s taxable? 
 
A corporate structure, a railroad, pipeline, all of these are 
taxable services within the RM. But who provides the service to 
the rural municipal residents? It’s the rural municipal 
government elected by the local residents, who ask their local 
governments to set budgets and deliver services. Every year the 
municipal government must sit down and balance revenues and 
expenditures against public criticism, public accountability, and 
public review. 
 
The local government — regardless of who owns the land — 
makes assessments, provides a mill rate, and is held accountable 
at the end of the day for it. The municipal governments also 
have the authority to pro-rate for seasonal taxation or cancel 
taxes based on their own assessment of the local circumstances. 
 
Again I tell the member opposite, we are continuing to look at 
what we can do within our jurisdiction. We ask the member to 
continue to argue where the jurisdiction currently exists, to seek 
the changes that he wishes. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 

definitely will be arguing. 
 
My final line of questioning in regards to this is, there is a 
landowner in the Preeceville area who phoned me a month ago 
and has now been taken to court by the RM because he did not 
pay taxes on forest fringe permitted land. Now I’ve just talked 
to him to see what is happening with it, and apparently the court 
day has been cancelled. I really believe that when this finally 
does go to court, that the members that belong to the forest 
fringe association will understand and that the government will 
understand that this was a wrong and that two wrongs don’t 
make a right. 
 
I just hope that it doesn’t cause for financial hardship on the 
government which therefore was turned back to the taxpayers of 
this province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I ask the member opposite, because I 
haven’t been served with any paperwork from the members 
opposite in this regard: is the province of Saskatchewan a party 
to this lawsuit? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I don’t know if that . . . I think it’s just 
between the RM and the individual at this time. I don’t believe 
that the government is brought into it. But I am quite sure that 
this is where it’s going to be headed because of the amendment 
to the Act that allowed the RM in the first place to charge this 
tax. And that’s why I believe that when this finally does go to 
court, that when it all comes out in the wash, the wrong that was 
done some years ago will have to be undone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think the member’s preamble there 
indicates that the legal system and the courts understand that 
this is a matter where the jurisdiction lies with the municipal 
government. They’ve been given the authority to both levy the 
tax and to cancel it, and that the courts would not involve the 
provincial government in this issue because the jurisdiction 
does not lie here. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I look 
forward this year to raising my issues with local governments, 
in regards to this issue, to try and come up to a solution that’s 
fair for not only the forest grazing people of the province but 
also the RMs. But I will like to conclude my questioning and 
pass it on to some other members. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister and to 
your officials, Mr. Minister, I would imagine your office is 
getting a number of phone calls and letters from people who are 
looking at the new assessment or the reassessment, and 
questioning where the changes have occurred. I know that in 
my part of the province, in the northeast part of the province, 
there’s been a considerable increase. 
 
Can you tell me how many of the RMs had a . . . where the 
switch was? How much of . . . Where the main switch was in 
the assessment? I believe it was from the southwest to the 
northeast, but could you give me those figures, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will answer the question a bit generally, 
and I’ll in doing so ask my officials if we do have some of those 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2005 

numbers available to hand them to me before I finish. But I’m 
not sure that the numbers the member is asking for are easy to 
come by. 
 
Assessment is done in the province by the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency. The agency exists at arm’s 
length from the province of Saskatchewan. Decisions are made 
by SAMA [Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency] 
by board, a board that’s made up of representatives of the Rural 
Municipalities Association, the Urban Municipalities 
Association, and a number of appointments that are provided by 
government through Department of Government Relations and 
Learning. 
 
The board of SAMA has consulted extensively with regards to 
developing guidelines for assessment changes in our four-year 
cycle. The member opposite will know that in 1997 there were 
certain decisions made on farm land that resulted in significant 
increases in assessment. And a result of increases in assessment, 
local governments set a tax system . . . tax rates in place that, 
based on the assessed numbers, increased taxes to some and 
decreased to others. And there’s no doubt in 1997 the 
assessment increased substantially on the west side of the 
province over the east side. 
 
Going into the 2001 reassessments, of course the government 
was looking at mitigation issues to try and deal with that. There 
was point eight three factor that was put in there. There was a 
program of tax rebates on education property tax. We have 
changed the percentage of value on farm land and on pasture 
land . . . but a number of things that were done over the years to 
address this issue. 
 
But the significant issue that rural municipalities raised on 
assessment with us, on this shift in assessment, was that we 
wanted to go from the market approach to assessing farm land 
to the productivity approach to assessing farm land. And the 
board, after receiving a request from SARM, the board of 
SAMA made a decision prior to this year’s reassessment to go 
from a market system to a productivity system. 
 
The result of that change, requested by the RMs, has now 
shifted some of the assessed increase of assessment from the 
west side of the province to the east side of the province. In 
other words, it’s taking us back to those pre-1997 days where 
there was an increased shift to the west side. So the decisions 
that have been made by SAMA, on the request of SARM, have 
taken us back to the pre-1997 days of equalizing the assessment 
across the province and doing it on a market-based . . . or a 
productivity-based approach. 
 
When you combine changes in the economy, changes in the 
school divisions, changes in a number of other things, the way 
in which taxes will be applied east and west — oh, and pardon 
me — changes in assessment related to urban . . . or residential, 
commercial, and farm land, make it very difficult and 
challenging to come up with some exact numbers that the 
member opposite is asking for. 
 
I’m told that we have projections with regards to taxes based on 
the current assessments on Government Relations’ website, so 
if the member opposite wishes to go because it’s quite . . . 
Every RM will have different projections. Please feel free to 

access the website, and you’ll be able to determine where the 
substantial shifts have occurred based on projections. We don’t 
yet know what the mill rates are going to be like until the RMs 
set those. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the total 
assessment increase is after this year’s assessment over 2001, 
over the whole province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Trying to answer that question . . . I’m 
informed that not all municipalities have their numbers in yet, 
so I can’t give you the complete comparison of 2005 numbers 
versus 2001 numbers. But I can tell you that generally we have 
a good assessment increase across the province. 
 
Let’s not forget that everyone wants assessment increases. This 
is a good thing for the province. It means that the value of our 
land and our businesses are increasing. So assessment increases 
are a positive sign of a very productive and strong economy. 
 
On the other side of it, obviously municipalities make choices 
with regards to the way in which they apply their mill rate 
factors across the piece on assessments. And of course, we do 
have the issue of how the school boards fit into all of that. 
 
But the assessments that the member is talking about come to us 
as a result of guidelines put in place by Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the committee to report much, much progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Members of the Assembly, I’m advised that Her Honour is here 
for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 16:51 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 



April 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has at its present session passed several Bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — The Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 304 — The Concentra Trust Act, 2005 
Bill No. 305 — The Saskatoon Foundation Amendment Act, 

2005 
Bill No. 306 — The Soeurs de la Charite de St. Louis Repeal 

Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 117 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 1) 
 
to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:53.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2649 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2649 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2649 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2649 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2649 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2649 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2649 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2650 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2650 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2650 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2650 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2650 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2650 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2650 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2651 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................2651 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2651 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2651 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2662 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2662 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Contacts Win TELUS Cup 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2651 
 Saskatchewan Children’s Health Foundation 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2652 
 Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association Banquet and Awards 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2652 
 Saskatchewan Centenarian Mrs. Appolonia Jansen 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2652 
 Batoche Theatre Company Presents Ernestine’s LaValise 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2653 
 Govan-Strasbourg Youth Curl in International Event 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2653 
 Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2653 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2654 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2654 
 Investments in Navigata 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2656 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2656 
MOTIONS 
 Reappointment of Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2659 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2660 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2660 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2660 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2660 
  Cheveldayoff..................................................................................................................................................................2661, 2666 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2665 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2666 
 



 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2668 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 117 — The Appropriation Act, 2005 (No. 1) 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2669 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 109 — The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2669 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2669 
 Bill No. 110 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2670 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2670 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations — Vote 30 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2671 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2671 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2675 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................2677 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




