















































Hansard: March 31, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 82A  THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2265 
 March 31, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to present a petition on behalf of a number of 
residents from the Broadview and surrounding areas regarding a 
renal dialysis unit for their facility to facilitate and assist many 
people who need dialysis in the area and help alleviate some of 
the costs that they face. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray the your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary step, action to implement a strategy that will 
see a dialysis placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Broadview, Whitewood, Mr. Speaker, from the 
communities of Wolseley, McLean, Montmartre, Indian Head, 
Carry the Kettle First Nation, Cowessess First Nation, and 
Wawota. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I hereby present a petition for a 
private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the Concentra 
Financial Services Association in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I also hereby present a petition for a private Bill on behalf of 
petitioners from the Saskatoon Foundation in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents from Cypress Hills 
concerned about the impact of forced amalgamation of school 
districts. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are 
signed by constituents from the community of Gull Lake. I so 

present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good citizens 
of Swift Current, Gull Lake, and Webb. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise on behalf of 
residents of Swift Current concerned about the deficiency in 
residential support offered to people with lifelong disabilities. 
The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from Swift Current, 
McMahon, Rosenhof, and Pambrun. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about the growing scourge 
of crystal meth in our province. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine, the education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Rama, 
Invermay, and Margo. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition concerning the provincial government’s response to the 
Boughen Commission and the fact they are just picking pieces 
of the recommendations to the detriment of the entire report. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Rosetown, Herschel, and Sovereign. And I’m 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with forced amalgamation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Yorkton, Melville, Fenwood, Goodeve, and Saltcoats. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Estevan, Midale, 
Tribune, and Oungre. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the flawed CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization program] program. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Riceton, 
Assiniboia, Bengough, Viceroy, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by citizens to halt crop insurance premiums and 
coverage reductions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston and Hawarden. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of citizens who 
are gravely concerned with this government’s plan to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Melville, Duff, Fenwood, and quite a number 
of citizens from the city of Regina have also signed this 
petition. So I’m pleased to be able to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I hereby present a petition for a 
private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the Soeurs de la 
Charité de Saint-Louis in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 637, 640, 715, and 720. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 87 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: which investments 
held by SGI or any of its subsidiaries were subject to an 
independent third party review in 2005, and what were the 
results of the review? 
 

I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for 2004-2005 . . . or 
2003, excuse me. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 87 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: how many new residential spaces for 
individuals with lifelong disabilities were funded for Swift 
Current in the 2005-2006 provincial budget? 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 87 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Agriculture: what 
percentage of money allocated for the 2003 CAIS program 
has been paid out to the Saskatchewan producers? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 87 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what is the 
cost charged by SaskPower to villages, towns, and cities 
per street light in their jurisdiction? 
 

And I’m also asking on day no. 87: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: what is 
SaskPower’s policy regarding dates for turning on 
Christmas lights and decorations? And what is the policy 
regarding any village, town, or city that does not adhere to 
this policy? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
shall give notice on day no. 87 I will ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: which 
investments held by SaskEnergy or any of its subsidiaries 
were subject to independent third party review in 2003, 
and what were the results of the review? 

 
In addition I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

Which investments held by SaskEnergy or any of its 
subsidiaries were subject to an independent third party 
review in 2004, and what were the results of the review? 
 

And also: 
 

Which investments held by SaskEnergy or any of its 
subsidiaries were subject to an independent third party 
review in 2005, and what were the results of the review? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 87 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskPower: which 
investments held by SaskPower or any of its subsidiaries 
were subject to an independent third party review in 2003, 
and what were the results of the review? 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the years 2004 and 
2005. Mr. Speaker, I will also ask the government on day no. 87 
the following questions: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: which 
investments held by SaskTel or any of its subsidiaries 
were subject to an independent third party review in 2003, 
and what were the results of that review? 

 
I have similar questions for the years 2004 and 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I should give notice that I 
shall on day no. 87 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Crown Management 
Board: which investments held by Crown Investments 
Corporation or any of its subsidiaries were subject to an 
independent third party review in 2003, and what were the 
results of the review? 

 
And I have similar questions for the years 2004 and 2005. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 87 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: was a third party 
review completed prior to DirectWest purchase of 
Midwest Marketing? Who was hired to conduct the 
review? What fee was paid by SaskTel for the review? 
And will the review be tabled, and if so, when? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 87 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: have any facilities run by 
community-based organizations that provide addiction 
services been closed? If so, please provide the names for 
the years 2000 to the present. 

 
Second question: 
 

Have addiction programs previously provided by those 
closed facilities been cancelled? If so, please provide the 
names. And are any addiction programs previously 
facilitated by CBOs now being provided by regional health 
authorities? If so, please provide the names. 

 
[13:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, today I am very, very 
pleased to introduce in your gallery five young men and their 
coach. About two weeks ago, a little bit more, they were in 
Pinerolo, Italy, representing our province and our nation in the 

World Junior Curling Championship. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce to the House today the World Junior 
Curling Championship men’s team, from Saskatchewan, from 
Canada, the Kyle George team. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would like members to 
greet them individually. Let me say, however, they are all, all 
from the north end of the city of Regina. That I think has made 
some Regina members very, very proud. I would invite the 
members of the team to stand as I introduce them: skip, Kyle 
George; third, Justin Mihalicz; second, D.J. Kidby; the lead, 
Chris Herbert; and the alternate, Dustin Kidby; and their coach, 
Dwayne Mihalicz. Please let us welcome and congratulate 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, we want to join with the Premier in welcoming Kyle 
and his teammates and Coach Mihalicz to their Legislative 
Assembly and to thank them for representing not only our 
province, but our country so well, for coming back safely from 
Italy, and most importantly, for coming back from Italy with the 
championship. We want to congratulate them on their efforts. 
 
And I especially note Dwayne as well, the coach, who has also 
represented Saskatchewan proudly at the Brier in curling. We 
just want to join with the Premier and ask all members to again 
welcome this great team to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation, the member from Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you, in your gallery, delegates who are in Regina 
attending a conference of Canadian Government Houses. And 
there’s far too many of them, so maybe I’ll just ask them to 
wave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conference delegates are from across Canada 
and represent Government House management, Government 
House Foundation . . . [inaudible] . . . groups, national historic 
sites, and private secretaries to lieutenant governors. 
 
This conference is the first of its kind and will provide a useful 
exchange of information and ideas on how each of our 
government houses can best serve the people within our 
jurisdictions across this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that we have been able to host this 
conference during our province’s centennial and that delegates 
have been able to enjoy not only our provincial hospitality but 
also the opportunity to see phase 1 of the Government House 
heritage property centennial project. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming the delegates. 
 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I would like to join 
the hon. minister in welcoming the delegation here this 
afternoon. I see Dr. Jackson up there and his delegation. I 
welcome you all. I hope you enjoy your visit to Regina, and I 
hope you have safe travels. So I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to Regina, on behalf of the official opposition. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also 
introduce to you a constituent of mine. Seated in your gallery is 
Darcy Hill of Torquay. Darcy is a grade 11 student at the 
Estevan Comprehensive School, and he maintains a 90 per cent 
average, and he plans to enter politics when he has completed 
his university. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
him to this legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to recognize in the west gallery this afternoon, Gail 
Schuster. She’s a constituent of mine from Yorkton. She’s 
served for many years as the senior executive on a number of 
community-based organizations in the city, worked for some 
time with SecurTek, and is between jobs today and is here 
visiting with her daughter who is at the University of Regina. 
So I’d like to welcome Gail to the Assembly today and have all 
members of the Assembly join me in welcoming her here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to have on the public record, I want to say to Mr. Kyle George, 
his cousin . . . or his uncle, Tom Seeley, is a very good friend of 
mine in Yorkton. And Tom tells me that Kyle has learned all of 
his curling skills from him. And I want Kyle to know that I’ve 
watched Tom curl, and you didn’t get any of your skills from 
Tom. Welcome. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature two people who are seated in the top row to the far 
right of your gallery. And these two people are Sue Cherewyk, 
who is one of the organizers of the Parkinson’s curling classic, 
which is going to be held in Regina this weekend. 
 
And seated beside her — and I’ll ask her to wave — is Phyllis 
Fox from British Columbia. Phyllis is the mother of Michael J. 
Fox and, as many of you know, Michael was diagnosed with 
Parkinson’s a few years ago and has founded and continued to 

operate a Parkinson’s research foundation in the United States. 
 
This is the seventh consecutive year that Phyllis Fox has 
attended the Parkinson’s curling classic here in Regina and to 
date this event has raised over $350,000, all of which remains in 
Saskatchewan. We’re one of the leading researchers for 
Parkinson’s disease in the world. 
 
We’re privileged to have Dr. Ali Rajput and his son Alex at the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan] who have been doing a lot 
of work around Parkinson’s, and this event supports them. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome these two, but especially to 
welcome Mrs. Fox to Saskatchewan again. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation on 
welcoming the delegates who are here today from across 
Canada with regards to heritage structures and particularly to 
introduce to the members of this legislature one member, one of 
the delegates in attendance here today who also happens to be a 
constituent in The Battlefords. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you, to the members of 
the legislature, Mr. Speaker, the mayor of the town of 
Battleford, Ms. Gail Sack who is at this conference because of 
Government House. And we all are aware of the sad and tragic 
loss of the original Government House in the town of Battleford 
a couple of years ago. And we wish Gail well here, in her visit 
to Regina and our legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 
two people in the west gallery that I would like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of this House, one who has 
attended this House on a number of occasions, Mr. Dave 
Morgan — if Dave would just make a wave. 
 
And I’m informed by his cousin, the Hon. Minister for Industry 
and Resources, that though the minister himself is a very good 
politician, Dave would probably be a much, much better 
politician. And so, we’d like to welcome him to this House, and 
we would like to thank him for the tremendous work that he has 
done in the area of addictions in this province. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask members to join me in welcoming him. 
 
And the other person I would like to introduce is Melanie 
Dolton. Melanie is new in our office as a ministerial assistant. 
She is from a farm in Preeceville, and was most recently a 
reporter with the Melfort newspaper, and I think will be a very 
welcome addition to the office of the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
So I’d like you to welcome both of them to this House. 
 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

2005 National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased that 
tonight I, along with some of my colleagues including the 
Premier, will be attending the 2005 National Aboriginal 
Achievement Awards in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of Canada’s showcase Aboriginal 
events and the only one of its kind in North America. 
 
Since 1994 the National Aboriginal Achievement Awards have 
been inspiring and empowering First Nations, Métis, and Inuit 
people through the recognition and celebration of powerful role 
models. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year 14 outstanding individuals will receive 
awards for their achievements in a variety of fields including 
the arts, business, law, community development, health, 
heritage, medicine, public service, science, and sports. 
 
I want to mention one recipient in particular, Mr. Speaker. Dr. 
Eber Hampton, who has been director of Harvard’s American 
Indian program, who has served as the Chair of the department 
of education for the College of Rural Alaska, and who is 
currently president of the First Nations University of Canada 
here in Saskatchewan, is being recognized for his contribution 
in the field of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tonight’s event is being hosted by Saskatchewan’s 
own Andrea Menard and Michael Greyeyes and will feature top 
Aboriginal performers from across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating this 
year’s recipients of the National Aboriginal Achievement 
Awards, for their successes, and especially for being such 
positive role models for the First Nations, Métis, and Inuit 
youth who will follow in their footsteps. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Bottled Water Company from Broadview 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to speak about a thriving small business in the 
community of Broadview. Mr. Speaker, Gene’s Water Care is 
finding new ways to market their line of bottled water called 
Imibe. The Broadview company recently began designing 
custom labels for their bottled water for companies and events 
such as weddings and . . . said the owner of the company, Gene 
Ottenbreit. This enables the company to sell directly to 
customers. 
 
Recently, Mr. Speaker, a new salesman for the competition 

walked into the Co-op Convenience Store in Broadview and 
immediately took note of the Imibe bottled water sitting in their 
cooler and asked their store manager, what is this, as he’s seen 
it all over the area. To which the manager replied, it’s the best 
water in the world. And he was speaking truthfully, Mr. 
Speaker, for Gene’s Water Care entered a water tasting 
competition in Berkeley Springs, West Virginia, February 26 
and 27, and their Imibe bottled water won first place in the 2005 
Berkeley Springs International Water Tasting competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the criteria for determining the best tasting water 
is based on the taste, smell and texture of the water. Winning 
the competition gains the company recognition within the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Gene Ottenbreit, his wife 
Gaylene and their son Darren on a very successful business 
enterprise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Budget 2005-2006 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan budget for 2005 and 2006 is a budget about 
building Saskatchewan for the next century. Based on a strong 
economy that is setting job records in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, the centennial budget is Saskatchewan’s 12th 
consecutive balanced budget and contains no tax increases, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what does it contain, Mr. Speaker? A $6.7 million 
centennial university tuition grant that will allow our two 
universities to hold tuitions at 2004-2005 levels for the 
centennial year. It contains $6.5 million in new funding for 
youth initiatives. It contains over $55 million in property tax 
relief — $110.1 million over two years, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the 2005-2006 Health budget contains a record $2.9 
billion, that is an increase of over $190 million over last year. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, contains the education spending of 
$1.2 billion, up almost $75 million over last year. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when including teachers’ pensions and benefits, the 
total education spending climbs to $1.33 billion. 
 
Those are just a few of the highlights in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. This budget marks year two of our four-year fiscal 
plan, a plan that continues on the path of sound and reasonable 
financial management to make Saskatchewan an even better 
place to live, work and raise your families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

New Biodiesel Facility 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today 
to talk about a new business, a $50 million biodiesel facility 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2271 

that is being built. Mr. Falk Beindorff, a German immigrant 
now living in Canada says I want to make the biodiesel hub of 
North America. 
 
This plant will include crushing facilities along side the 
biodiesel manufacture that will use canola from more than 
355,000 acres. That translates into a 100,000 tonnes or three — 
excuse me, 30 million gallons of biodiesel. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will mean over $8 million of increased 
personal income, he says, and it will be a win for farmers. The 
plant will create 45 permanent jobs in the plant as well as 300 
indirectly related to the biodiesel. The annual revenues are 
expected to exceed 53 million. A University of Missouri study 
concluded that long-term economic implications of a 
100,000-ton biodiesel complex would generate as many as 
6,000 temporary and permanent jobs for the region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only fly in the ointment on this proposal is that 
the plant is being built in Minot, North Dakota, Mr. Speaker — 
Minot, North Dakota — with the intent of using canola from 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan to meet the demand. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a pity. Why is it not here? Perhaps because of an NDP 
[New Democratic Party] government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 

Economic Developer of the Year 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
pleasure and honour to stand in the House today to recognize an 
outstanding member for the Battlefords who has been chosen as 
the Economic Developer of the Year by the Saskatchewan 
Economic Developers Association. 
 
Ryan Bater is the general manager of the Battlefords Regional 
Economic Development Authority. For those of us who have 
had the great pleasure of working with Ryan over the past 
years, this award does not surprise us as we have all witnessed 
the incremental growth of our economy driven by his 
commitment to our community. 
 
As members of this House know, building community — 
economically and socially — takes dedication and drive. In 
Ryan’s words, and I quote: 
 

I think that what we do in economic development is 
extremely important. A lot of the work we do goes 
unnoticed because it’s the little things . . . What makes it 
important is that it’s about people. People own those small 
businesses and . . . work at them, and I guess the 
importance of our work comes down to creating 
opportunities for people and creating a healthy community 
and a healthy province. 
 

Ryan is also the general manager of a three-REDA [regional 
economic development authority] alliance created to foster 
expanded economic development activities in west central 

Saskatchewan. This initiative is the only project of its kind in 
Saskatchewan and represents a new and innovative approach to 
economic development in the province. 
 
I am confident that the economic future of the Battlefords and 
of this province will continue to grow and prosper under his 
direction, vision, and commitment. I ask all members of the 
House to join with me in congratulating Ryan Bater on 
receiving recognition as the Economic Developer of the Year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Eston Panthers Win Two Titles 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The headline on 
the front page of the Eston Press Review reads, “Panthers win 
two titles in six days.” The Panthers are the Eston midget 
female hockey team. The team is based in Eston but also draws 
on players from Rosetown, Kyle, Fiske, Kerrobert, Dinsmore, 
Eatonia, Beechy, Elrose, Kindersley, and Outlook. 
 
The first title, the Provincial Championship, was won on March 
14 in Wilcox where they defeated the Notre Dame Hounds 2 to 
nothing after a 1-nothing win at home. The second title was 
earned on March 20 when the Panthers outscored the North 
Battleford Sharks 3 to nothing at home, to take the North Sask. 
Female Hockey League Championship. They had previously 
tied the Sharks in the Battlefords. 
 
Team members include Caitlin Veronelly, Michala Jeffries, 
Kylie Waite, Amanda Swan, Katelyn Ptolemy, Kristin Bews, 
Laura Connor, Brittney Erlandson, Shelby Davey, Amanda 
Howe, Brooke Thome, Aleisha Moore, Robbi Phillips, Shelby 
Nisbet, Kristen Graham, Crissy Brown, J.J. Marshall, Susanne 
Schulz, Kali Gillanders, and Aline Charpentier. 
 
Congratulations to these fine athletes and their coach, Blyth 
Stevenson; assistant coaches Glenn Connor and Kelly 
Stevenson; trainer Carole Stevenson; and manager Fern Howe. 
We say, well done Panthers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 

Spartan Girls Basketball Team 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some 
reference has already been made to this in the legislature, but I 
am also very pleased to take this opportunity to tell my 
colleagues about the success of a talented basketball team from 
my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake Spartan Girls Basketball Team 
recently won the gold medal in the girls’ 4A final at the Hoopla 
Provincial Championships. Originally in third place, Mr. 
Speaker, the Spartans played two extremely close games against 
Weyburn and Caronport to win the championship title. 
 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, in one game the Spartans were tied at half time, 
down in the third quarter, and then came back in the last quarter 
with a 8-nothing run to move on to the final game. The Spartans 
faced another close game in the final but stepped up their 
defence in the fourth quarter and came out on top with a tally of 
78 to 57. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the top scorers in the last two games were Kristin 
Gislason, Sheylee Belanger — yes they’re related, Mr. Speaker 
— and Shyla Pickett. I also want to recognize the hard work of 
all the players who contributed to the team’s success. It takes 
dedication, commitment, and talent to excel at this level of 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating the Meadow Lake Spartan Girls and coach Carla 
Waterman on their achievement. I wish them the best of luck in 
the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Population and Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, according 
to the latest numbers from Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan’s 
population dropped by about 1,000 people since last fall, Mr. 
Speaker. In this our centennial year, at a time when our resource 
prices are very high, in an environment of $50-plus in terms of 
the price per barrel of oil, in that environment in a province that 
has more resources than most nations, that has all of this 
potential, would the Premier please explain to the Assembly 
and the people of the province how his policies are resulting in 
a population loss? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as usual, Mr. Speaker, we get half the 
story from the opposition but not the whole story, because of 
course what Statistics Canada really says is that in 2004 the 
population of Saskatchewan went up, Mr. Speaker. It went up 
by 837 people. Now that’s not a huge increase, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
grant you. But when the Leader of the Opposition is saying our 
population went down and it actually went up, Mr. Speaker, we 
see the games that the Leader of the Opposition tries to play. 
 
And you know, if the Leader of the Opposition would take note, 
Mr. Speaker, of what it says in the media these days — “Banks 
bullish on province’s outlook”; “Sask. tops growth rate.” And 
by the way, our growth rate for 2005 will be twice the national 
average in investment. So where are we going, Mr. Speaker? 
We’re going up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Statistics Canada numbers are 

clear. We are losing population since last fall. And more to the 
point, Mr. Speaker, over the last three years, over the last three 
years in Saskatchewan here’s what Statistics Canada has to 
highlight as our population growth: point zero two per cent — 
165 people over three years, Mr. Speaker. The government 
added more government jobs than that in the last budget, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the population growth for the last three years. 
 
What about the province of Manitoba? Seventeen thousand 
more people in that same period of time, Mr. Speaker. This 
Premier presides over that population record and the worst job 
creation record in the dominion of Canada since he took the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is to the Premier: why are his policies 
letting down the future, the promise of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as anyone can see, they 
don’t just have a Wailing Wall in Jerusalem, Mr. Speaker. The 
opposition over there is a wailing wall as well. 
 
But I want to say to this House and to the people of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, that contrary to the constant doom and 
gloom that we hear from the so-called Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, what do the numbers really 
say? The numbers really say, Mr. Speaker, that in the last year 
the number of jobs in Saskatchewan has done what, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s gone up by 11,400, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, the Leader-Post recently had an editorial, Mr. 
Speaker, that says that the “Saskatchewan’s economy is 
performing robustly.” It says that the jobs are up and the 
economy has a definite spring in its step. It says that the good 
news in the economy and the increased jobs are welcome news, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that news is welcome to everybody but the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is right about 
something. The opposition, the Saskatchewan Party and the 
people of the province do not welcome the news that we 
continued to lose population over the last quarter of last year 
and early in the months of this year. We don’t welcome the 
news that we have the worst job creation record under the NDP 
in the country over the last five years. We do not welcome the 
news that this government continues to squander the amazing 
potential of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the government seems to not have any ideas. The 
editorials the minister refers to have confirmed that as well. The 
government is bankrupt of ideas in how to turn this amazing 
potential in our economy around. 
 
We direct this minister and this Premier to our 100 ideas for 
Saskatchewan’s future. He should check out no. 58, 66, 62, 91, 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

8, 10, 83, 71, and 69. And maybe most importantly, will the 
Premier check out idea no. 100? That would see an election in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, while I’m 
referring to some of the things actually going on in the province 
instead of the doom and gloom from the Leader of the 
Opposition over there and the wailing and gnashing of teeth we 
hear every day, I would like to refer the Leader of the 
Opposition to a report from March 8 which indicated this, Mr. 
Speaker. It indicated . . . It’s from the Fraser Institute, the 
conservative cousins of the opposition over there. It said: 
 

Saskatchewan has vaulted past Alberta to become one of 
the best places in the world to invest in mining [Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re at the top, Mr. Speaker. And 
because of what this Premier has done, Mr. Speaker, in the 
world of oil and gas, we’re seen as a good place to do oil and 
gas as well, Mr. Speaker. And we’re also, because of the 
policies of this government, seeing $1 billion of new investment 
in forestry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what these policies of this government are doing, Mr. 
Speaker, has resulted in 11,000 jobs in the last year. And that’s 
progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Legislation Regarding Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister responsible for public sector 
compensation stood in her place and attempted to mock our 
concerns about negotiating in good faith with public sector 
unions. I find that ironic, Mr. Speaker, when in fact this NDP 
government has a Bill on the order paper that will circumvent 
The Trade Union Act. Bill 88, an Act to amend the labour 
relations reorganization Act takes away the right for health care 
workers to choose their union. Section 3 of The Trade Union 
Act on rights of employees states, and I quote: 
 

Employees have the right to organize in and to form, join 
or assist trade unions, and to bargain collectively through a 
trade union of their own choosing; 

 
I repeat, their own choosing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: how can this NDP 
government purport to abide by The Trade Union Act when it 
continues to introduce legislation that circumvents the Act? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would say to the member opposite, he may not be aware, but 
The Trade Union Act does not allow for decisions to be made in 
multi-employer bargaining units by the Labour Relations 
Board. And what the health labour relations Act put in place a 
number of years ago was restructuring for unions and 
regulations that defined the restructuring process when there 
were some massive changes made in health districts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s review what that minister 
and this government has done over the last nine years. She 
makes reference to a change. The first change was in the Dorsey 
Commission, put in place a system that said, we need stability, 
and we need this stability to determine what we’re going to do. 
Four years later, they passed an Act that said, we will extend 
this for another five years. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, this very Bill extends that again. Now for 
that government to sit there and say, well we need stability, and 
it takes them nine years to determine a path? Bill 88 takes away 
the right of these workers from applying to the Labour 
Relations Board to choose their own union. Why does this NDP 
government want to circumvent The Trade Union Act and take 
away workers’ rights? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the member 
opposite he should maybe do a little bit of research on The 
Trade Union Act, and that The Trade Union Act does not allow 
the board to make decisions in the cases of multi-employer 
bargaining units, which the health authorities encompass in 
their bargaining units. Mr. Speaker, the health districts and 
workers in the health care industry have undergone a couple of 
substantial reorganizations over the past number of years. This 
was put in place to provide stability, to put in place processes to 
provide for those multi-employer bargaining units, for 
adjustments in the contracts, and for time for those changes to 
take place with stability within the labour movement. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — It’s going to take that minister at least nine 
years to get stability. Yesterday the minister responsible for 
public sector compensation stated, and I want to quote, “You 
have to look at specific occupations and what their issues are.” 
 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

That’s exactly the point of the medical laboratory technicians 
and technologists who have been thrown into four different 
unions and are subject to four different collective agreements. 
This forced arrangement does not address the issues of wage 
parity and working conditions specific to these workers. 
 
The NDP government had ample time to redress the situation 
and ensure that the rights of these health care professionals are 
upheld in accordance with The Trade Union Act. When will this 
NDP government abide by The Trade Union Act and drop this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, part of the intention of this 
piece of legislation is to allow the Labour Relations Board and 
The Trade Union Act to make decisions in the cases of 
multi-employer bargaining units, which the Labour Relations 
Board has no ability to do. So when the health authorities had 
have been restructured, there would have been no ability under 
The Trade Union Act for these employees to seek any redress 
under The Trade Union Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite should do his homework and 
realize what he’s talking about before he stands up in question 
period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I will continue to stand up on behalf of these 
technologists and technicians who have submitted letters that 
are also cc’d to the Minister of Labour asking for that minister 
to correct the wrong of eight or nine years ago. That is what 
these letters are asking for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government doesn’t like a provision in The Trade Union 
Act — it simply introduces legislation to circumvent it. Medical 
technicians and technologists are tired of being pushed around 
by this government. They are tired of working under different 
rates of pay with different benefits. Will this government listen 
to these workers? Will the Minister of Health honour The Trade 
Union Act and pull Bill 88 from the order paper before us 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would say to the member he really should do some history on 
this because it was a request by the unions to have a 
commission that would come in and lay out regulations and a 
process for the health reorganization to be followed and to 
accomplish what we have over the past number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unions that were involved were all party to the 
agreements, they were party to the regulations, and have felt 
that it has assisted the process — which has been very difficult, 

Mr. Speaker, not only for the health system but for those that 
work within the system. There’s been major reorganization and 
changes and, Mr. Speaker, it has ran very smoothly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Investments In Navigata 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for four 
years now the NDP has been pouring more than $1 million a 
month into a BC [British Columbia] telecommunications 
company called Navigata. The NDP sunk 20 million taxpayers’ 
dollars in 2001; 14 million in 2002; 11 million in 2003; 15 
million in 2004; and now another 12 million in 2005. That’s 72 
million Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars on a money-losing 
communications company in BC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day the NDP government stands up and say 
they don’t have money for tax breaks; they don’t have money 
for farm programs; they don’t have money for children’s 
hospitals. But they’ve got $72 million to pour into a 
communications company in BC? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
what the question was there but let me make this observation. 
Mr. Speaker, first of all we had the member from Swift Current 
running around telling us, Mr. Speaker, that people in 
Saskatchewan had voted wrong for 60 years; they should not 
have supported a progressive, socialist democratic government, 
Mr. Speaker. Then the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the Opposition he said the same 
thing, Mr. Speaker. He said for 60 years people were wrong. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, he’s trying to convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that he’s a New Democrat, Mr. Speaker; that he 
supports Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe it, 
the people of Saskatchewan don’t believe it. And, Mr. Speaker, 
if you look in the eyes of the people behind the Leader of the 
Opposition, they don’t believe it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You can see them squirming in their 
seats, Mr. Speaker. They are uncomfortable. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why, that’s why their true colours show again when they 
get up and they attack the Crowns as they did, Mr. Speaker, 
when they said they were Conservatives. They were 
Conservatives yesterday, today, and tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people who are 
going to lose their level of comfort is going to be the Minister 
for SaskTel when the Navigata report comes out. Mr. Speaker, 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

this government has been saying that this is a good business, a 
good company. Compared to what, SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company]? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has acquired a copy of an 
independent report that was done for SaskTel on Navigata by 
RBC Capital Markets. And this report concludes, and I quote: 
 

Navigata has met neither the strategic expectations 
outlined at the time of acquisition nor the financial 
objectives stated in numerous business plans. 
 

It goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

The company will be challenged in maintaining its current 
revenue base. 
 

In other words, Navigata has been a complete failure so far and 
it’s probably going to get worse. Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP 
just pour 12 million new dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, into a BC 
company that has met none of its expectations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, when SaskTel made the investment in 
Navigata, Mr. Speaker, it was a new venture in terms of voice 
over Internet protocol, Mr. Speaker, and I do want to make this 
point. It is interesting that virtually every telecommunications 
company in North America is investing on a percentage basis a 
much, much larger amount than SaskTel has in this particular 
venture, Mr. Speaker — hundreds and hundreds of millions of 
dollars. Because they realize, they realize as does SaskTel, and I 
think as do the public generally — unlike the opposition — that 
this is where technology of the future is going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to say in response to the question 
though, that RBC Dominion Securities who did the third party 
analysis, Mr. Speaker, indicated, indicated that with a refocus of 
the business plan — which is taking place and making 
significant difference — that with the refocus this was a solid 
investment, Mr. Speaker, and that additional dollars should be 
invested in this company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Okay, Mr. Speaker, 
let’s talk about refocusing Navigata and its business plans. In 
fact, let’s talk about 13 refocuses of Navigata. Thirteen business 
plans in the last five-month period of 2004, and that’s according 
to the RBC report. No wonder they’re not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please. Order, 
please, members. The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s no wonder 

Navigata is not making any money. They’re too busy writing 
business reports, business plans. Mr. Speaker, according to the 
RBC report, and I quote that: 
 

This is a very high risk plan due to the relatively 
significant upfront capital investment, and risk is 
compounded by combining large capital investment and 
uncertain outcome of a new fixed wireless strategy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what kind of a company has 13 
different business plans over a five-month period and manage to 
miss the objectives of every one of them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the member 
from — I’m not sure what constituency, Mr. Speaker, any more 
— in response to the member, Mr. Speaker, I would say it is 
interesting, again . . . You know, I note that every 
telecommunications company, as I’ve indicated, in the country, 
Mr. Speaker, in North America, is investing hundreds of 
millions of dollars in this technology. 
 
Not a peep from over there; not a peep about a private sector 
company making these investments, Mr. Speaker. And yet 
when SaskTel makes this investment, when SaskTel makes this 
investment, gets, Mr. Speaker, the acknowledgement from a 
third party, an independent third party analysis that this is a 
solid investment, it needs refocusing — we acknowledge that, 
refocusing has taken place — there have been . . . there has 
been, I should say, a significant turnaround in that company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that our company, that our 
company — SaskTel, the people’s company — has an 
opportunity as well to invest in this technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Mr. Speaker, let’s just go over some of those 
13 refocuses that the minister is talking about. 
 
There is one called the “SaskTel Growth Committee Option 
Review.” There was one called “A Modified Navigata.” There 
was the “Navigata Stand Alone Plan.” There was the “Third 
Party SaskTel Navigata Strategic Overview.” There was one 
called “A Strategic Option for SaskTel and Navigata.” There 
was the “Navigata Strategy Update.” And one was called — get 
this — “The Rapid Turnaround Strategy.” Mr. Speaker, there 
was even one with a Latin name, “Quo Vadis,” which means, 
“where are you going.” Mr. Speaker, that is the question. 
 
But here is an even better question. How much longer will 
Saskatchewan taxpayers be raptus regaliter by this NDP 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Saskatchewan Tel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will speculate that 
after two nominations those words, “where do you go,” will 
come back to bite that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. I want 
to say this, Mr. Speaker. I want to say about SaskTel, Mr. 
Speaker, SaskTel through its many investments . . . SaskTel 
International has overall made much, much more — many more 
dollars for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, than it has 
lost. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, they are not 
bankrupt of ideas. They will continue to invest, they will 
continue to diversify, they will continue to make money for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if those members 
opposite don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, that VOIP [voice over 
Internet protocol] voice over Internet, is the way of the future 
and if they’re going to suggest that SaskTel should not be 
getting into this industry, into this business, Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest they really, really are bankrupt of ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Problem Gambling 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The wave of 
the future needs to be money-making proposals, not 
money-losing ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. I know the Premier 
in the past has shown a great deal of interest in the subject of 
gaming. I understand the Premier was a vocal opponent to 
gambling in Moose Jaw. In fact, he even led the parade down 
Main Street in the 1980s fighting gambling. Mr. Speaker, my 
question to the Premier is this: is he aware of the study on 
gambling published this month in The Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are aware of 
the study in the Journal of Psychiatry. I would point out that 
this study is based on StatsCan’s information from about three 
or four years ago. The numbers of people interviewed in their 
study were about 600. The study that we’ve relied on and the 
studies that are used by all the provinces across the country 
have three times as many people interviewed and we’ve been 
using that information to further develop the programs and 
things that we do around problem gambling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The study was 
written by a team of respected scientists and it says that 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba each have about 290 problem 
gamblers for every 100,000 people. That’s far higher than the 
national average. Our province and Manitoba also have more 
VLTs [video lottery terminal] per capita than the national 
average. Mr. Speaker, is the NDP government finally ready to 
commit itself to a study on the social costs of promoting 
gambling? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the provinces in Canada 
have been using a Canadian problem gambling index which was 
introduced for the first time or used for the first time in 
Saskatchewan. That’s being continually used across the 
government. It is more specific, it provides more information 
than the study that the member opposite is talking about. We’re 
continuing to use that information. 
 
We spend about $4 million a year on problem gambling 
addiction treatment. This is the second highest in Canada only 
to Manitoba which spends more than that. But what we know is 
that we’re continuing to work in this particular area. There are, 
unfortunately, a small number of people who have problems 
with addictions around gambling and we’re going to continue to 
try to make sure we can help them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the government is pulling 
in more and more revenues for gaming, yet continues to ignore 
the problem of gambling addiction. Mr. Speaker, idea no. 16 in 
the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas commits a percentage of 
liquor and gaming revenues be dedicated to addiction programs 
and facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier and every last one of his NDP 
members voted against this idea and the 99 others. Mr. Speaker, 
given this latest study and the Premier’s own recognition of the 
dangers of gambling from the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, will the 
Premier now endorse dedicating a part of the gaming revenues 
to addiction programs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a $4 million annual 
budget for the problem gambling addiction treatment. It’s 
second only to Manitoba on a per capita basis how we do this. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, once again the member opposite is stating 
one position as it relates to this particular issue but when we in 
government, we have a difficult job to make sure we provide 
balance across the board. There are members from that 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

member’s constituency who run hotels, who are pressuring us 
continually for more VLTs, right across the whole system. 
 
I ask that member opposite: what’s his position as it relates to 
the Hotels Association of Saskatchewan and their request for 
more VLTs? Because that all relates to this. We’ve set a cap 
here in the province and we’re sticking with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased again to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions 914 through 916 
inclusive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 914, 915, 916 have been 
submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a pleasure to resume the debate on this centennial 
budget, Mr. Speaker. I made a number of comments yesterday 
dealing with the lack of vision on the part of this government 
and the missed opportunities and their failure to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would just like to remind members of the rules, that members 
can only speak to the particular special order once. And the 
member yesterday gave up his seating position. So I cannot 
allow the member to speak at this time. 
 
So government orders, special order. I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. What is the member’s . . . Why 
is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the debate was not adjourned . . . 
Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member did not give up his 
place in speaking. The House adjourned. It was the end of the 
day. The Speaker chose to adjourn and, Mr. Speaker, it would 
be our position that the . . . and our submission that the member 
has not finished his time speaking yet. It was not his choice to 
. . . end of the day. And may I read from the last portion of . . . 
Mr. Speaker, I think the words from the Chair were: 
 

It now being . . . close to the hour of 5 . . . this House will 
stand adjourned . . . 

 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for raising the point of 
order. It is my clear understanding and recollection of the 
circumstance prior to adjournment yesterday, that was 
approaching . . . the clock was approaching close to 5 o’clock, 
was not yet quite 5 o’clock. The member brought his sentence 
to an end, he sat down. I looked to the right. I looked to the left. 
There was nobody rising. I got up, and I at that stage used the 
Speaker’s prerogative to call the clock. 
 
Point of order is not well taken. However if the member should 
wish to request leave of the Assembly to continue his speech, 
the member might do so. I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Ask leave of the House if you want to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to continue my budget 
speech. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood 
has requested leave of the Assembly to be allowed back into the 
debate. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to thank all 
members of the House for granting me leave. I did have a few 
more comments that I’d like to make with regards to the budget. 
I will attempt to be brief because as I said when I started 
yesterday, I feel it’s important that all members should be given 
an opportunity . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member is 
on his feet. The member has been given the floor. I would like 
to be able to hear what the member has to say. I recognize the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — As I said I will attempt to be fairly brief so that 
all members who wish to speak to this . . . enter into this debate 
will have an opportunity. 
 
Overnight I was able to gain some information that I think is 
important to be put onto the record, and it has to do with the 
recent announcement of federal funding to the agricultural 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

industry. Often times when you look at the headlines as the 
headlines were in yesterday’s paper, there were of couple of 
headlines that I think were somewhat misleading to the public. 
And one of them had to do with the amount of taxpayers’ 
dollars that were being injected into the agricultural industry 
across this country, and in particularly into Saskatchewan. 
 
The information that came into my hands last evening is by a 
market analyst who does a particularly good job of analyzing 
agricultural issues and so on, and I would just like to provide 
some of the information that this individual put on the Internet 
last night. And as I said it has to deal with the cash payment to 
agricultural producers all across Canada. 
 
The money that will be going particularly to the grain and 
oilseed producers will be coming under a transition program 
that the federal government has in place, and it will be based on 
producer’s eligible net sales which is a figure that is calculated 
by the old NISA [Net Income Stabilization Account] program, 
and it had to do with the value of production on an individual 
farm. 
 
The money that will be flowing, according to this report, will be 
flowing by the end of April, will be 4.4 per cent of those 
eligible net sales. 
 
And as yesterday I gave, recounted for the House, some facts 
and figures dealing with an average farm in Saskatchewan, well 
using that same example, that average farm under this program 
will receive about $4,400 by the end of April and a further 
$1,100 further on during the year. And what that . . . We need to 
put that figure into context, Mr. Speaker. What that figure 
would do on that farm operation would pay the education 
portion of the property taxes, and that’s all it would really do. 
 
Although it certainly is welcomed by farm producers, it is not 
some large amount of money that is going to make producers 
wealthy and allow them to go on extravagant holidays or things 
like that. It’s a small amount of money in comparison to the 
total expenditures that the average farm incurs in a production 
year, but it certainly is welcome. And I’m sure I can speak on 
behalf of all the producers that they are certainly grateful that 
the federal government is recognizing the hurt out there and is 
providing some small assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One other area that I didn’t get a chance to cover yesterday was 
this budget’s . . . and what it does in the area of the Department 
of Environment and environmental issues. And if you look at 
the expenditures in the budget estimates, we do see an increase 
in this year’s budget, but most of that is taken up by capital 
purchases of two land-based air tankers for forest fire 
protection. 
 
Now I plan to discuss with the Minister of Environment during 
budget estimates as to the appropriateness of this type of fire 
protection, and I’m sure there are very good reasons for them. 
But certainly I would wonder if the Minister of Environment 
and this government looked at other options that are out there. 
 
There are a group of entrepreneurs in this province who have 
looked across the border in Manitoba and have seen what that 
province is using for, at least for a portion of their forest fire 
protection, and that is using single aircraft, single-engine 

aircraft tankers that people in private industry own, particularly 
those people involved in aerial application of pesticides. They 
also have the ability to aid in the forest fire protection. 
 
And I guess . . . We need to look at those programs. We need to 
see if that has a fit. Obviously it has a fit in Manitoba. Why 
hasn’t it got a fit here in Saskatchewan? Is it necessary to spend 
over $19 million for these aircraft? Would it not been possible 
to perhaps use the private aircrafts to provide that same sort of 
forest fire protection? I look forward to discussing those matters 
with the Minister of Environment during the estimate process 
that we go through in this House. 
 
Certainly we heard in the budget, we’ve heard the Premier 
speak and a number of other members of that caucus and 
government about the green and prosperous economy. Well 
when you look at the budget we don’t see a whole lot that 
would substantiate a green economy. 
 
We have regional waste management areas who are living from 
hand to mouth, barely being able to operate. I would hope that 
this government would step forward and assist them to continue 
their operations and expand on their operations. We have small 
communities and large communities — small communities such 
as Duff, Saskatchewan — and the city of Regina who are 
struggling with the large volumes of paper that are entering into 
our landfill sites. I don’t see a strategy in this budget. Hopefully 
there is something there that I haven’t been able to pick up in 
looking at the initial estimates. And those would be issues that 
we need to discuss, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to look at and 
perhaps get on record what some of the other interest groups 
had to say about this budget and one that particularly caught my 
eye, particularly seeing that this government claims to be the 
champions of the working men and women in this province. 
And what did the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour have to 
say about this budget? Well I’m looking at their news release on 
budget day, and the headline reads, “Labour calls budget 
‘underwhelming’.” And the first sentence of the news release, 
and I’m quoting now, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The organization that speaks for the province’s working 
people says while today’s budget contains some 
worthwhile announcements; overall it will be regarded by 
wage earners as underwhelming. 

 
And I think that speaks volumes, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
about missed opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, I did yesterday mention that there was a lost 
opportunity in the innovation agenda. And I would simply like 
to re-stress that. We have this great opportunity in this province. 
I’ve raised this issue in this House before and in committees 
with the number of ministers with the tremendous opportunity 
that the Canadian Light Source presents this province with. And 
I see very little if any initiative in that whole area on innovation. 
And I certainly don’t see anything in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will certainly conclude my 
remarks. And I will state that I will certainly not be supporting 
the motion, but I will be supporting the amendment. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m happy to take to my feet today to support a most excellent 
budget presented by the Minister of Finance and the 
government. 
 
And first of all, I just want to overview the fiscal direction of 
the government. You know, ever since I was elected — and it’s 
been quite a while now, Mr. Speaker, since 1991 — it’s been 
the direction of this government to provide balance between 
debt reduction, tax reduction and program enhancement. And I 
think again, Mr. Speaker, with the introduction of this budget 
we’ve achieved this balance and stayed on the path of fiscal 
accountability. I’ve seen certainly the Finance minister’s budget 
described as prudent, cautious, risk-averse, and I interpret that 
to mean responsible, Mr. Speaker. And certainly that’s 
recognized with our increased credit ratings. 
 
The one thing that surprises me about the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is their view that you can spend the same money more 
than once. The Premier relates a story to us of driving down the 
street in his car listening to the member from Silver Springs on 
an open-line talk show, where in the space of four blocks he’d 
managed to spend over $1 billion — and not to mention $1 
billion that was primarily already allocated. And the Premier 
actually had to turn his radio off because he was afraid if he 
drove any further listening to him he would have bankrupted 
the province. 
 
So I just wanted to mention that the mid-year report where it 
was indicated that there was additional resources, those 
resources were allocated, Mr. Speaker, and they were allocated 
in the following way: for the utility rebate, there was a total of 
54 million; for the property tax relief, a total of 110 million; for 
health care, 66 million; for the BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy] program, 40 million; for third party capital, 80 
million; for government-owned capital, 110 million. And there 
was some additional spending from ’04-05 in pressure areas of 
13.6 million; retained in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 171 
million; and permanent debt reduction, Mr. Speaker, of 179 
million. 
 
So I’m not sure how the member from Silver Springs intended 
to re-spend the money that has already been allocated and spent, 
but maybe he’s got a different kind of math that he’s operating 
under. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I represent the constituency of Regina 
Rosemont which is by and large a group of hard-working 
families; hard-working men and women with children, 
teenagers. They’re growing families. And when people ask me, 
well what does this budget mean to us in Rosemont — and I 
think that’s a good way to think of a budget — what does it 
mean to me where I live, in my household? And I want to just 
spend a little bit of time talking about that. 
 
One of the largest initiatives in this budget is the money that’s 
allocated to early learning and child care. Now there’s hardly 
anybody in that area which doesn’t require some additional 

assistance with child care and with early learning because we 
have children who have developmental needs, as well as parents 
who certainly need support so they can go to education and 
school. 
 
I remember knocking on the doors of young, single parents for 
whom child care was a very pressing issue for them in order for 
them to attend their education programs. When I went to the 
Rosemont Community School for a pancake breakfast, certainly 
they talked to me about the need for funding for child nutrition 
programs. And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we added 500,000 
for the child nutrition programs that operate out of the schools. 
 
Now you may remember before Christmas and the amount that 
was . . . I mentioned just a few moments ago in the mid-year 
financial report. There was $137 per household for a utility 
rebate. And certainly everybody received that just before 
Christmas, and I think that was appreciated. I’ve mentioned the 
property tax rebate that people will see on their taxes this year. 
And I’m sure in that area in Regina Rosemont, as well as other 
areas of the province, that will be appreciated. 
 
Some of the things that parents are interested in is the funded 
tuition freeze that will make it more possible for young people 
to go to post-secondary education. The other thing of course is 
the increase in the graduate tax credit, where a young person 
who graduates from post-secondary education can now make an 
additional $6,000 in a year without having to pay tax on that 
money. So this is a very good initiative for young people in the 
province. 
 
The other things where we’ve seen investments that are very 
close to my constituency are in increased funding to the cancer 
clinic in the Pasqua Hospital. There’s new diagnostic 
equipment, money for staffing. In terms of infrastructure, right 
on the edge of our constituency we have the funding for the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] museum, 
Government House, the new multi-purpose facility at the 
Regina Exhibition grounds connected to the Jeux du Canada 
Games, and certainly there’s been upgrades allocated for Luther 
College. 
 
And I would have to say that overall this is a very good budget 
for the people in my constituency. As well, there’s the $1 
million Centennial Merit Scholarships, the student jobs 
increase, as well as the Green Team. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for young families there’s a lot in this budget 
to be happy about and a lot of things that are going to take the 
pressure off family pocketbooks in the city. 
 
I spoke to a reporter from Fort Qu’Appelle shortly after the 
budget and she said, well how do I explain this to the people in 
Fort Qu’Appelle; what does this really mean to us out here? So 
I went through some of these same things with her and she said, 
well you know, that sounds pretty good; I think that’s the kind 
of things that Fort Qu’Appelle can be pleased with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I think again this is a 
good budget for the working people, of which certainly Regina 
Rosemont is reflective. In partnership with our city MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] and with the federal 
government, there’s a substantial number of projects we’ve 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

been involved in Regina. We’ve invested over 80 million in 
various kinds of infrastructure related to science and research, 
related to tourism and community services, and related to better 
neighbourhoods. Things like the health science and kinesiology 
building, the Allan Blair Cancer Centre, the Innovation and 
Science Fund, the Indigenous Peoples Health Research Centre, 
the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, the Population 
Health Evaluation and Research Unit. I could on and on, Mr. 
Speaker, but you get my drift. We’re investing a lot in research 
and development and we’re doing it in partnership with our 
Regina City Council and certainly with the federal government. 
 
To our municipal government more than 49 million was 
provided from various sources to support municipal programs 
and budgets. And as well, of course, we had the deepening of 
Wascana Lake that really preserves a jewel in the centre of our 
community. And I commend our pioneers who had the foresight 
not only to build that lake in the first place — if you can 
imagine, they did that with picks and shovels — but also to 
build this wonderful building that we’re in today, which really 
is a legacy for the people of this province and will continue to 
add to the province’s attractiveness and history in the centennial 
year. 
 
A couple of other good news items I want to mention for 
Regina. And I wouldn’t want people to think that only Regina 
got money in this budget because that wouldn’t be true. 
Certainly there’s resources across the province for health and 
education and services. 
 
But I want to mention particularly some of the housing projects 
in Regina. Transcona Park, phase 2, a 35-unit rental housing 
project for low-, moderate-income families, is under way. 
Highland Manor, a 50-unit three-storey seniors’ life lease 
apartment complex, will be completed in the spring and adds to 
our downtown. Wessex Place will be up to 36 affordable family 
condominiums. I met one of the young women and her child 
that will be moving in there, and she was sure very pleased 
about having a nice place like that to live and raise her son. 
 
So all together, 121 new affordable housing opportunities under 
our HomeFirst strategy. But as well, in the YWCA [Young 
Women’s Christian Association] there is now 19 new spaces 
and 35 existing spaces. The only wheelchair accessible 
domestic crisis shelter for women and children in Regina, again 
made possible by the HomeFirst strategy. 
 
And one of the things I’m particularly proud of, Mr. Speaker, is 
the low income bus pass program, because everywhere you go 
the people who have access to this program talk about how it’s 
changed their life, given them the freedom to take advantage of 
education, recreation, to go shopping where they can get good 
prices, to visit friends and family who may live in other parts of 
the city. And we’re very proud to be a partner with the city of 
Regina in providing a $15 monthly bus pass, instead of the $52 
bus pass that was out of the reach of most of the low-income 
families who now get this. So that’s certainly something we’re 
hoping to see extended to Saskatoon in helping support people 
who have transit needs in the city. 
 
So just to recap overall on the budget, Mr. Speaker, no tax 
increases in this budget. Transfers to third parties are up 7.3 per 
cent. There’s a 3 per cent real GDP [gross domestic product] 

growth in 2005 and a 28 per cent debt to GDP forecast 
compared to a high of 69 per cent in 1993. 
 
Now 28 is pretty good in contrast to 69 and, of course, 69 was 
the debt level ratio we were left with when the members 
opposite formed the government of Saskatchewan and spent 
totally out of control because, of course, they didn’t understand 
that you can only spend a dollar once. And as we’ve seen, the 
member from Silver Springs has not grasped this concept either. 
 
So again, I want to say that we’ve removed 179 million in 
permanent debt reduction this year, saving people another 300 
million in interest payments on the debt. And I must have hit a 
sore point, Mr. Speaker, because they’re chirping from the other 
side. But the fact is that Saskatchewan government debt is at its 
lowest point in 14 years — the lowest point in 14 years, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s because the budget under this Finance 
minister was prudent and cautious and responsible and certainly 
contained for our economy both tax incentives and expanded 
skill training. 
 
And you know, sometimes we hear this comment about where’s 
the vision. Well, Mr. Speaker, since 1997, in the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment, we adopted — and 
I’m going to read the vision so that people understand that this 
has been here and in writing for quite a long time and then I’m 
going to talk a little bit about what we’ve done in some of these 
areas. And the vision reads: 
 

Saskatchewan people, regardless of differences in needs or 
circumstances, have opportunities to contribute and be 
included in the economic and social life of the province. 

 
And certainly in our department we work to make sure that that 
full range of community supports and opportunities are there 
whether you’re a disabled person, whether you perhaps did not 
have the advantages that some of your neighbours had when 
you were growing up, whether you might be a new immigrant 
or refugee to Saskatchewan, whether you might be someone 
who needs their neighbour’s help for a time being until you can 
get on your feet, or find some of those other opportunities. 
 
And certainly one of the areas I’m proudest there is our 
supported employment programs so that people of disability can 
really have the pride of contributing their skills and their 
knowledge to the workplace and we’re having many successful 
experiences there. 
 
We’ve been very consistent in our goals in the Building 
Independence program. In the first phase we starting the 
employment supplement for people who are working on low 
income, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit which helps people 
with children who want to go into the workplace, family health 
benefits so there can be coverage for children to have their 
health needs met when their parent were moving into 
employment, and the provincial training allowance to assist 
people in getting the training they require. 
 
In phase 2 we built further on that. And I have the enthusiastic 
support from the member from Saskatoon who certainly shares, 
along with my other colleagues, a passion for these kind of 
improvements in our community. We have a contact centre now 
located in Regina which has a very customer service focus in 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

terms of people getting services from our department. The Jobs 
First program that helps people link up with employment and as 
well transition planning services to assist people in life change 
activities. 
 
Because of this program, Mr. Speaker, unlike the Conservative 
Sask Party promise in the last election of a 25 per cent 
reduction in the number of people on assistance, we have 
achieved in fact, Mr. Speaker, a 41 per cent drop in the number 
of Saskatchewan families on social assistance. And every one 
of those families is materially better off today, Mr. Speaker, 
than they were when they were living on assistance because of 
our Building Independence program and the extra supplements 
that we provide outside the social assistance system. 
 
In fact I’m going to give you an example, Mr. Speaker, for a 
single parent with two children under the Building 
Independence program — they would be $6,000 a year better 
off than they were when they on social assistance. And I think 
that’s a very great achievement of the department. And I 
commend all of the staff of the department and the people in the 
community who provided advice to the department so that we 
were able to turn around the experience of people living on 
social assistance and have them have access to the same 
opportunities as everybody else. 
 
[15:00] 
 
In child and family services we’ve been making big 
improvements in child protection. And one of the most 
important changes, Mr. Speaker, is the ability for extended 
family to be more involved in the care of children. We try to 
keep children as close to the family as possible because we still 
believe that a family is the best place for a child to be raised and 
to have the supports that they need. 
 
And we’re certainly discussing with our First Nations partners 
the possibility of kinship care legislation. And we just recently 
signed an agreement with our 18th child and family service 
agency on First Nations land and are working very closely with 
them to make sure that families are kept intact as far as possible 
and that children are supported by family and community. And 
it’s a very, a very rewarding relationship that we have with the 
First Nations communities in our province. 
 
The other thing I just want to mention is housing because of 
course in this budget we saw a huge increase to the shelter 
allowance. Now in Regina and in Saskatoon there’s certainly a 
lot of people working on the quality of housing in some of the 
neighbourhoods in the city. 
 
In Regina there’s a very strong partnership between the city of 
Regina police, the mayor of Regina and the city council, all the 
people who do the regulatory work for the city — building 
inspectors, etc. — the Regina Qu’Appelle Health District, and 
as well the Government of Saskatchewan, to make sure that 
houses are up to the required standards. Every week houses are 
targeted for inspection and if those houses do not meet basic 
health and safety standards they are placarded. If people who 
have a relationship with our department are in those houses, we 
help them to relocate to better housing. 
 
But this year, Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken that one step further 

and we have introduced a shelter supplement. Under the shelter 
supplement, in order to get it you have to call the call centre and 
go through a checklist. And the checklist would include basic 
things — does the house have all its windows, do the toilets 
work, is there a fire alarm — all of the kind of things that we 
would expect to find in the most basic of standards in a house. 
 
In order for the person to get the supplement those things have 
to exist. If it exists they qualify for the supplement. If not, we 
have the tools for them to work with the landlord to have those 
changes made. And if the landlord is not prepared to make 
those changes, Mr. Speaker, the person can use their 
supplement to move to better housing. 
 
And we very specifically tied this to housing quality instead of 
just handing the money out because we want people to actually 
understand better what a quality house is and also on the 
landlord side of things, to understand the expectations of the 
department for houses that we’re involved in paying the rent 
for. So we’ll have to see what kind of progress we make but 
we’re very optimistic, as are people that we’ve discussed this 
with in the community that this is going to make a big 
difference. 
 
And for a family, Mr. Speaker, up to $131 is available under the 
shelter supplement. And for a family with a disabled person in 
it, $151 is available. And for a single individual who is 
disabled, an additional $93 a month is available. So we’re very 
pleased to be able to add this extra support for folks that are 
benefiting from the programs that our department delivers. 
 
One of the most exciting things, Mr. Speaker, is the child care, 
the early learning and child care enhancements. We will have a 
new $21 million this year in early learning and child care. And 
we’re going to start out by doubling the number of child care 
spaces that the Premier announced under Child Care 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But as well we will be providing an increase to the wages of 
people working in the child care sector. We will be adding 
training spaces. We will be working to ensure that all children 
in Saskatchewan have access to an early learning program. And 
we be will as well improving the operating grants. 
 
And one of the things that I know is very important to the 
member from Yorkton, is we are going to ensure that every 
single special needs child is accepted and funded and does not 
have to be on a waiting list to receive services. And this is a 
very important achievement, Mr. Speaker, for the children and 
their families. 
 
I just want to now turn to what the members opposite provide as 
a vision for Saskatchewan. Certainly they’ve got a new-found 
religion when it comes to support for the public sector. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, that’s not where they are on the record 
regarding these matters. 
 
The fact of the matter is at the Sask Party’s convention one 
year, the quote from one of the members, I think the member 
from Wood River, was the mandate for the civil service should 
be to go out and find a real job. Now I think that speaks 
volumes as to the attitude towards the people who provide 
public services in the province. Virtually every one of the, well 



2282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

of the fairly visible members over there, has indicated their 
support for a core services review, including both the past and 
the present leader. Let’s see what the leader, the current leader 
has to say here: 
 

Make government smarter, smaller and more efficient by 
launching a core services review of every government 
program, commission, agency and Crown corporation. 

 
In addition to that, in terms of the service provided by 
departments to the public, here’s another quote from the new 
leader’s website here: 
 

Red tape and regulations have been foisted on to the 
business community by this government be it through the 
workers’ comp or occupational health & safety or various 
pieces of labour legislation. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I could see there being some disagreement 
with some services that are provided. But to be against workers’ 
compensation and occupational health and safety when 30, up 
to 30 people a year lose their life through dangerous work sites, 
I just can’t understand what this opposition is thinking about, 
Mr. Speaker. This is such a fundamental right to be able to be 
safe in your workplace . . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Right 
off the leader’s website, exactly. And I just think that it doesn’t 
matter how they dress themselves up in soft woolly clothes; we 
still have the same wolf at the door here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As they cast about for a vision, we see that as well the member 
for Lloydminster was thinking, well, maybe the BC review 
wasn’t so good but how about the one Nova Scotia did? But he 
did ignore a few important facts. 
 
After that review the gas tax went up 2 cents. There was a $250 
million annual increase in fees. There was a 4 per cent tax on 
auto insurance premiums. A 50 per cent . . . 15 per cent tax on 
home heating fuel. And as well, a province with the largest per 
capita debt in Canada, rural unemployment at 20 per cent. And 
the Nova Scotia seniors not only pay their normal nursing home 
fees but for all of their medical expenses and their assets can be 
attached if they are unable to pay. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re seeing from the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose, from the leader, from the member from 
Lloydminster, from the member from Wood River, a certain 
consistency in their view of the world and certainly supporting 
a process that did cut health care spending in those provinces, 
delisted drugs and eye exams, put affordable housing on hold, 
eliminated pay equity, affordable child care is now gone, tax 
cuts for corporations and the wealthy and without any for 
ordinary families. And I might remind you of our tax cuts 
which were the largest in the history of the province in which 
55,000 low-income people were removed from the tax rolls. 
 
So again they can cast about for a vision with their 100 ideas. 
But I just want to say that one of their ideas I found the most 
tragically amusing, Mr. Speaker, was their idea no. 7, to 
recognize the treaties. Well, my gosh, that was the official 
policy and operational work of this government in 1985. We 
have done work with the Treaty Commissioner to make sure 
that this understanding is in the curriculum in the schools. The 
province is 100 years old this year and the Sask Party has 

finally made a decision to recognize the treaties. Well, I guess 
you could call that progress, Mr. Speaker, but it’s darn slow, 
and I wouldn’t exactly call it breaking news. 
 
Idea no. 55, now here’s a unique one. Why didn’t we think of 
this? Mandate Saskatchewan’s major Crown corporations to 
provide high quality utility and insurance service at the lowest 
possible cost. Where have I heard that before? I think they stole 
one of our pamphlets from the last election, Mr. Speaker, and 
maybe by 2099, they’ll recognize that the Saskatchewan 
Crowns already do provide this and that we do have the most 
affordable services. Only 94 years to go to reach that 
understanding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I just wanted to say in closing that we’ve seen in this 
budget increased support for students, increased jobs. We’ve 
seen targeted tax cuts to stimulate the economy. We’ve seen 
1,000 additional training spaces. And I think that the people of 
this province in this centennial year with the growing economy, 
growing investment, more jobs, a better taxation system, we 
know we’re going to keep growing, Mr. Speaker, because we’re 
optimistic. And you know the thing that I just have to say this 
before I finish, Mr. Speaker, because what particularly irks me 
about the members opposite, when they ask why people . . . 
why their children leave the province. 
 
Well what child wouldn’t leave the province whose parents sat 
at the supper table every night and had a constant stream of 
negativity for their home, and their communities, and their 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know where my children are and I know 
that, along with the members in my caucus, I’m a staunch 
supporter of the province and in this centennial year, I want to 
commend the Finance minister for a prudent budget and to say 
that I will be supporting the budget and will be voting against 
the amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House to comment 
on the budget on behalf of the citizens of Saskatoon Southeast 
and the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
a budget tells us a lot about a government and a lot about its 
cabinet ministers. 
 
A budget sends a message as to what the government feels its 
priorities are. Conversely, things that are not included in a 
budget send a very real message that those things that the 
government does not see as a priority. What a government says 
means one thing, but what a government funds tells the real 
story of what the government priorities are and are not. 
 
Initially, Mr. Speaker, I thought that this budget was going to be 
a difficult budget to comment on. The NDP has received 
unprecedented amounts of money from oil revenue and from 
federal transfer payments. I thought that as an opposition MLA, 
it was going to be difficult to criticize the government that 
finally had enough money to actually do something and to 
actually have a focus and a direction and a plan. 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2283 

Mr. Speaker, I was very wrong. The budget is clearly the 
product of infighting in the NDP cabinet. It is a collection of 
bizarre compromises. It has the uncanny ability to please and 
satisfy absolutely no one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I like to play golf and I’m not a particularly good 
golfer, but I enjoy going out. I thank the people who play with 
me for their patience and their tolerance. Mr. Speaker, early in 
most games, I usually make one or more terrible mis-hits where 
the ball either dribbles off the club face or slices viciously into 
the bushes. My golf mates will usually say, go ahead Morgan, 
we know you’re a terrible golfer, we know you’re not going to 
beat us anyway, take another shot, call it a mulligan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I know my abilities and I’m quite willing to take a 
mulligan when one is offered to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to urge the Premier and his cabinet to 
do the same with this budget. Call the budget a mulligan. Go 
back to the drawing board and redraft it again. If I’m entitled to 
a mulligan when I play golf, the government should be entitled 
to a mulligan with their budget. If they want to redo it, they 
won’t hear any criticism from this member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve looked at the various things that this budget 
does and does not include, so that we can get a sense of what 
the message for the citizens of Saskatoon . . . Saskatchewan is. 
I’ve looked at the pathetic and embarrassing increase in 
monthly food allowance for social service recipients. The $10 a 
month increase is the first increase in many, many years. It does 
not include any indexing to allow for inflation. The increase 
buys about a half a cup of Tim Hortons coffee a day and a 
rather small cup at that. 
 
The NDP would’ve been better off doing nothing than to send a 
signal to those people that they genuinely are not cared about. 
I’m sure that if those people weren’t so broke, they would 
rather not have received anything and feel that they were 
accidentally forgotten than to receive the $10 that they received 
in this budget. 
 
It is roughly the same kind of cruel mentality where you go out 
for a large restaurant meal and instead of forgetting to tip, you 
leave a 5 or 10 cent tip instead of no tip at all. What they’re 
saying is, this is what we think you’re worth. Mr. Speaker, it is 
a cruel message to those people. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I looked further into the budget and I saw a huge 
increase in funding for what I refer to as the Premier’s 
propaganda politburo. Media services has increased its staff and 
its dollar funding by massive amounts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suspect the Premier and cabinet looked at 
which members of the media were offering criticism to them. 
They probably were shuddering at the criticism because the 
criticism was probably fair and it was probably right. They 
thought they might diffuse the criticism by saying, well let’s 
hire them; let’s get them on our payroll, knowing of course that 
once they’re on the government payroll they can’t criticize them 
anymore. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see that the media services 

has not yet absorbed Murray Mandryk, Stefani, or John 
Gormley. We at least have some voices in the media that have 
some experience. Mr. Speaker, the year is still young and 
maybe those three will get off and will eventually be hired by 
this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my message to the Premier is simply this: you can 
spend money and you can jazz up media services all you want 
by hiring all the media people you want, but the message is still 
the same — this government has ran out of steam. You can 
dress up all you want, but the government is still the same 
pathetic lot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also looked at what was set aside in this budget 
to renew the contracts of teachers and nurses. It appears that the 
government mandate of 0, 1, and 1 is still the message of the 
day. I think we should stop for a minute and look at what the 0, 
1, and 1 really means to teachers and to nurses. We have 
inflation running at 2 to 3 per cent. In reality, 0, 1, and 1 to 
these people is actually a net reduction in take-home pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba teachers settled for 3, 3, and 3. I’m 
not advocating any particular percentage. But, Mr. Speaker, if 
we want to be competitive and retain people in this province, 
we have to pay them competitively with other jurisdictions in 
which they might be seeking employment. We have made a 
very substantial investment in educating teachers and nurses. 
We can ill afford to have those people take employment out of 
province when we have shortages here and are having growing 
problems with recruitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, teachers are some of the most important people in 
this province. They are educating our next generation of 
citizens. They must be appropriately recognized and they must 
be fairly compensated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses are leaving this province at an alarming 
rate. Negotiations are at an early stage. I would like to invite the 
province and the NDP government to look carefully at what is 
happening in other provinces and develop a competitive pay 
scale that recognizes the fact that nursing is hard work and 
requires a great deal of expertise, compassion, and other skills. 
These people are our front line health providers and must be 
paid fairly and treated appropriately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also looked at what is going to happen with 
tuition fees. Once again we have a one-year, band-aid solution. 
We set aside only enough money to freeze tuitions for one year. 
There is no comprehensive plan for long-term education 
funding and no plan for long-term student assistance. To say 
that this is an ad hoc method of dealing with students’ tuition 
problems is an overstatement. At best, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
tiny Band-Aid on a very serious problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see that some money was set 
aside for the Regina Correctional Centre. I have toured the 
existing facility and frankly, Mr. Speaker, it is amazing that it is 
still operating. I understand that the last escape from the Regina 
Correctional Centre was by an inmate who was able to dig his 
way out through the crumbling bricks with a kitchen spoon. 
Rebuilding this facility is overdue. When I saw the amount of 
money that was set aside for this project, I questioned whether 
it would be anywhere close to what this facility is actually 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

going to cost to rebuild. I will be watching closely to see how 
the construction and planning are proceeding. And I most 
sincerely hope that this is not one of those situations where we 
have four years and five years of announcements before 
anything actually goes ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that this budget is an 
indication of how the members of cabinet see themselves and 
want to be perceived. I note with more than some concern, Mr. 
Speaker, that significant amounts of windfall money have 
arrived in this province and that money has come to this 
province in spite of the NDP government and not because of the 
NDP. This NDP government deserves no credit for the windfall 
revenues that have come in. The reality of it is that all of the 
funding is from things that are outside the province and beyond 
the control of this government. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, they have an extra $500 million — a 
half a billion dollars — to work with and nothing whatsoever to 
show for it that’s in . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, what have 
they done with this money? Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve taken 
some $50 million and they’ve set it aside for out-of-province 
investments. This is a government, Mr. Speaker, that has not 
learned from SPUDCO, Navigata, Broe, and the other myriad 
of other failed NDP investments. 
 
We clearly have some cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker, that like 
to play in somebody else’s bank account and pretend that they 
are high rollers. Well, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that these 
people are not big-business people. They should look back at 
what they’ve done in their past and say that’s the limit of what 
my expertise is, and not try and exceed that expectation or that 
level of competence. What they should do, Mr. Speaker, is try 
and focus on providing competent government services instead 
of mucking about in the business sector where they have no 
experience and no ability. 
 
My advice to them, Mr. Speaker, is this: if you want to play 
high roller, big business, take your own RRSPs [Registered 
Retirement Savings Plan], take your own money and your own 
equity of your house, and then play with it. Do it with your 
money, but don’t be doing it with my money, and don’t be 
doing it with the money of the citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that $50 million would be more than enough to 
provide a 3 per cent increase to teachers, build two new 
collegiates, and still provide enough money to twin many miles 
of highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not acceptable to the citizens of this province 
to have this government mucking in out-of-province 
investments. I want to put this government on notice right now 
that we will be watching each and every one of those 
investments, and we will be reporting to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan as each and every one of those investments fails, 
as they inevitably will with the lack of expertise that’s over 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of this budget initiative, they have 
announced a business tax review. We are pleased that they have 
done that. It is an indication that the NDP government is finally 
becoming aware of the importance of business and the 
importance of creating jobs and employment and wealth in this 

province. 
 
It is surprising though, Mr. Speaker, that a government that has 
been in power since 1992 actually now has to sit down and do a 
business tax review. It is embarrassing that it has taken this 
long, Mr. Speaker. This was something that should have been 
done years and years ago. I look forward to the results of that 
study with the hope and expectation that those 
recommendations will be implemented so that there is some 
opportunity to reconfigure and lower taxes. I fear however, Mr. 
Speaker, that what we’re really seeing is some political window 
dressing on the part of the NDP, and little or nothing will come 
as a productive result of that study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that another aspect that we should look at 
in this budget are things that were not included, things that 
could have been included but were rather deliberately left out 
by this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was an opportunity to increase the income 
level before a low- or moderate-income person would start 
paying income tax. This would give people an incentive to get 
off of welfare and to look for work. The government chose to 
leave this segment of the workforce without any help or any 
benefit. This budget does not help these people, Mr. Speaker. 
These people are forgotten about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has twice raised provincial sales 
tax. There were sufficient funds in this budget that provincial 
sales tax could be lowered. Or we could have seen part of a 
phased-in, gradual lowering of provincial sales tax. Mr. 
Speaker, the real reason that this did not happen is that this 
government is far too political. When we see a drop in 
provincial sales tax, we will know that an election is imminent. 
A drop in PST [provincial sales tax] will be saved and will be 
used in an election goody by the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the largest problems in this province is the 
massive amount that our citizens pay in property tax. The 
Boughen Commission made recommendations to the NDP 
government. The NDP government said that they would work 
with the recommendations of the Boughen Commission. The 
recommendations were that provincial sales tax should be 
increased and property tax should be lowered. 
 
Well the NDP only did half. They raised the PST, but they’ve 
done nothing for property tax. Property tax is one of the most 
counterproductive and disruptive taxes in this province. It is a 
huge disincentive to develop property, buy property, or 
continue to own property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this province education must be properly and 
appropriately and fairly funded. We are on the verge of seeing 
tax revolts in a number of municipalities because of the high 
cost of education tax. We are pitting property tax paying 
citizens against our young people and against our students. It is 
wrong. It is the wrong message. It should not and cannot 
continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I looked specifically for some things in this 
budget. I am also the critic responsible for the Information 
Services Corporation. I am pleased to see that the personal 
property registry will be moving from the antiquated data pack 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

system to a web-based system. But I didn’t see anything in this 
budget that was being allocated for the conversion. 
 
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite apprehensive after the 
considerable and incredible disaster with the land titles system. 
I’m hoping that the NDP will look at how the personal property 
registry was computerized in other provinces. We can purchase 
existing software. Mr. Speaker, in the past the NDP had 
delusions of grandeur when they thought they could develop 
their own land titles software. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most members will be aware that The Personal 
Property Security Act is the descendant of the Uniform 
Commercial Code in the United States. That type of legislation 
is now used throughout the United States and Canada. 
Saskatchewan should be able to purchase existing technology 
which would cost a fraction of what it would cost to develop 
our own technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now I would like to put the NDP government 
on notice that if we learn that they are going to go out and try to 
invent their own software, or if they start contracting with some 
of the same parties that were responsible for the land titles 
disaster, I will be standing up in this House and I will be 
shouting long and hard for resignations and firings and trying to 
do my best to bring this government down for it’s utter, total, 
and absolute incompetence. Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this 
province deserve better than this. And I hope that they get it this 
time around with this computerizing process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the NDP made a promise of 200 new 
police officers. Since that time only 81 officers have been hired, 
leaving 119 positions yet to be filled. The NDP like to use a 
figure of 151 new officers. Mr. Speaker, 70 of those officers 
that were hired were RCMP officers that were being hired to 
backfill existing positions. Those positions were existing at the 
time when the NDP made that promise. These are not new 
positions. While we welcome the 18 new positions that are in 
this budget, it is a long way from the 200 that was promised, 
and that 200 is not yet filled no matter whose numbers you look 
at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that we have not addressed crime issues 
in our two major cities and elsewhere in the province. We 
continue to see horrific crime statistics. Police officers are the 
front line in keeping us safe and secure in our communities. If 
we want to turn the tide against rising crime, we have to be 
aggressive. And the only way to be aggressive is to put more 
police officers on the street. Let’s just do it. This government 
has a reputation for making announcements and 
pronouncements with precious little action and precious little 
follow-up. This was a commitment that was made. This is a 
commitment that needs to be filled, and we want to call on this 
government now to fulfill it. Mr. Speaker, we passed legislation 
for safer communities in the last sitting of this House. If we 
want that legislation to be something more than an irritating 
dust collector, we have to put some money and resources 
behind it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m talking about police officers, I would 
like to point out that the Saskatchewan Party’s policy platform 
included a recommendation for legislation that would require 
blood testing for people who have bit or spat upon a police 

officer or health care worker. We have prepared a private 
member’s Bill which we intended to introduce in this sitting 
that would implement that recommendation. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
recently heard the Justice minister make a commitment to 
introduce similar legislation. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be holding back on my private 
member’s Bill and look forward to see what the government 
puts forward. If it is anything close to what we were intending 
to forward, I would like to work with the government so that we 
can ensure that the Bill receives speedy passage and can be 
brought into force immediately. If not, Mr. Speaker, we will be 
introducing our own Bill and will have debate on the floor. But 
Mr. Speaker, that is an issue that should be addressed, and I 
would like to urge both sides to work towards a speedy 
conclusion on that. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, another aspect in our judicial system is our Crown 
prosecutors. We have problems in this province with 
underfunding and with lack of resources for our Crown 
prosecutors. I have the greatest respect for the people who work 
in the Crown prosecutor’s office. I would very much like to 
have seen more money put aside for professional development 
and additional Crown prosecutors being hired. There are people 
in our Crown prosecutor’s office who should be attending 
seminars and conferences. We are badly understaffed, Mr. 
Speaker. If we want to deal aggressively with the . . . 
[inaudible] . . . we have to deal with the resources that are there. 
 
Additional staff and professional development may not provide 
all of the answers to the issues that face our courts and face our 
police system but, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly some steps 
that can be taken and should be taken. I would like to urge the 
Minister of Justice and the Minister of Finance to review 
priorities in that department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that we have significant crime 
problems in the major cities and elsewhere through the 
province. The Saskatchewan Party has pushed this government 
to do something about the growing crystal meth problem in 
Saskatchewan. During the last session we heard the minister of 
Education deny that there was anything unique or anything 
different about crystal meth. We have made recommendations 
for programming and strategies. We know now that this is a real 
problem, and we think the government at least is admitting that. 
The things that we are recommending will cost money. 
 
I am disappointed, and frankly very disappointed, that the best 
this government can do so far is to appoint somebody to study 
the problem. And with the greatest respect for the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, a study is not what we need. Action and 
appropriate expenditure is what is necessary. We need training 
programs for parents, education for children, and long-term 
recovery facilities for addicts. These things are not cheap, but 
what we need is action and what we need now is commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to comment briefly on our 
centennial. I have lived in Saskatchewan all of my life and have 
been a resident in this province for over half the time that the 
province has existed. I’m probably one of the few MLAs that 
can actually remember Tommy Douglas or Woodrow Lloyd 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

when they were premier. Our centennial is an opportunity to do 
something different and to make our mark. What I saw was a lot 
of money that was being spent on crepe paper and fireworks. 
Very little was being spent on anything that was going to create 
any kind of lasting legacy. 
 
While I don’t want to discount the need for the celebrations, I 
would like to have seen things that would have recognized our 
heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Western Development Museum is woefully 
underfunded. The vast majority of their collection cannot be 
restored and cannot be shown because of lack of resources. It is 
kept in storage facilities that are closed to the public. A 
long-term, multi-year financial commitment to the museum 
would show the pride that we have in our heritage and would 
show respect for our parents, grandparents, and 
great-grandparents. Most of us are only two or three generations 
away from when this province came into being. Within our own 
families many of us have historical roots that go back to when 
Saskatchewan came into existence in 1905 or very soon 
thereafter. This is a time to respect, cherish, and reflect upon 
that past. The Western Development Museum is a good place to 
do exactly that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the diamond jubilee of our province — something 
that I’m also old enough to remember — the province made 
grants that were available to family members and communities 
to develop books. They gave local histories of various parts of 
the province. I am pleased now to see at least one Saskatchewan 
encyclopedia is being written. I would very much like to see 
more money being spent to provide more written records of our 
valuable heritage before we lose it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon we have the Persephone Theatre and 
the Mendel Art Gallery. Both are seeking major capital 
expansions. These would make excellent centennial projects 
that would provide a lasting legacy for the province. Around the 
province many communities need renovations to halls, rinks, 
and community centres. I can’t imagine many better things to 
do than to support rural Saskatchewan and create a lasting 
centennial legacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the ideas that is in our 100 Ideas booklet 
. . . And I would like to encourage the members opposite to read 
it a little bit more, I know that they’re presenting some of the 
things out of it, and I commend them for that. The more they 
read it, the more they’ll likely introduce things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that booklet one of the things that they’re . . . is 
why not have every child in the province plant a tree? We have 
an emerging problem with Dutch elm disease. Why not do 
something that would create a lasting legacy of new tree-lined 
streets and something that would support the environment? The 
members opposite talk about a green and prosperous economy. 
This would be something that would be a good step in the right 
direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a shared heritage with our First Nations 
people. Why not make it a centennial initiative to pass 
legislation that would create the obligation to teach treaties and 
treaty rights to all students in the province? I note that a number 
of school divisions are doing this, but why should we not make 

this a province-wide initiative? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of communities in the Far 
North that need all-weather roads. Developing all-weather roads 
through the North would not just be a centennial project, but 
also would provide a huge economic injection into the North 
and would provide a roadway out for lumber and for mining 
products. It would also give access for people to go north and to 
enjoy tourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other things that I did not see in this budget were 
funding for agriculture and funding for the CAIS program. 
Agriculture has been the backbone of this province since 1905. 
Most of us have strong farm ties. I learned to drive on my 
uncle’s farm and spent many happy summers working on the 
family farm. My wife owns farm land in this province and is 
proud of her agriculture and her farm heritage. Last year many 
farmers had net negative incomes. Mr. Speaker, we need to do 
something to make sure the CAIS program is fully and 
immediately and adequately funded. We need to do something 
to protect our diminishing agricultural sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another glaring omission of any kind of funding in 
this budget was any kind of funding to target the waiting lists in 
our hospitals. We have people that are dying and are in chronic 
pain and discomfort because of the unwillingness of the NDP to 
adequately fund health care and adequately manage health care. 
Every one of the NDP MLAs should be truly embarrassed. I get 
the calls at my MLA office and I’m sure that they do as well. 
Mr. Speaker, they should do something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken at some length about things that I 
would like to have seen in the budget, and things that I thought 
were unnecessary in the budget, and how I thought that this 
budget was utterly devoid of any vision or any direction. I 
appreciate the in-fight that probably took place in the NDP 
cabinet room. NDP cabinet work leads to bizarre compromises 
and strange results. There is a saying that if the NDP cabinet sat 
down and tried to invent a horse they would likely come up 
with a camel. Mr. Speaker, this budget is a three-humped 
camel. 
 
What the Finance minister should have done when he realized 
he wasn’t going to be able to satisfy his cabinet colleagues — 
and the one thing he could have done that would have given 
him a lasting legacy if they couldn’t agree on anything else — 
was just take the money and apply it to the provincial debt. That 
would have produced a lasting legacy for generations to come. 
Generations to come would not be saddled with interest 
payments; they would have money for other initiatives later on. 
Instead we will now owe more money at the end of the year 
then at the beginning of the year. 
 
We will continue to hear the inane statements from members 
opposite that we have a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Mr. Speaker, 
what we have is a credit card that is not quite at its maximum so 
we can borrow on it again. The reality of it is that in spite of the 
enormous half a billion dollar windfall, we will be deeper in 
debt at the end of the year then we were at the beginning of the 
year. 
 
The NDP government should be ashamed; it should be 
embarrassed. Fortunately our gross domestic product has grown 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

and we will be able to maintain and possibly increase our credit 
rating. Mr. Speaker, I regularly hear the members opposite 
talking about their credit rating. I’m sure those members 
probably get the same unsolicited offers for pre-approved credit 
cards in the mail that I do. That doesn’t mean you should go out 
and borrow. It just means that people are willing to give you 
money and get you deeper in debt. Our goal as a province 
should be retiring debt or reducing debt, not talking about how 
well and how successful you can be about borrowing and 
getting us further in debt. That is not the indication of a 
successful economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this budget the NDP took a mulligan. They 
should admit it. Go back to the tee box and, Mr. Speaker, they 
should swing again. I will not be supporting this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I stand and join in the 
debate on the budget that was brought down by the Minister of 
Finance. And especially after hearing some of the opposition’s 
comments today, Mr. Speaker, I’m even more doubly pleased to 
have the opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget comes at a very pivotal time in the 
province’s history. While we’re celebrating our centennial, it 
gives us an opportunity to build for our future a solid base that 
has been developed over the last decade of this government 
being in power, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again with this 
budget we are funding the people of Saskatchewan’s priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health and education are again the highest 
recipients of funding in this year’s budget. Health will be up 7.1 
per cent and, Mr. Speaker, education will rise, education 
funding 6.8 per cent. We’re building our future here for young 
people. It’s been a priority for this government, Mr. Speaker, 
and we continue on with this budget. And I think the 
centrepiece of that is the $6.7 million that went into the 
centennial university tuition grant, allowing universities to hold 
the line on tuition fees in ’04-05 at those levels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also the 1,000 additional training opportunities in this 
province for young people, adults that are seeking better 
opportunities in career development. These are extremely 
important, not only for those people and those families, but also 
for the future of the province and the future of those citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economy here in Saskatchewan is performing 
quite well and there’s measures in this budget such as the 
independent business tax review that will encourage the 
economy and encourage the growth that has begun. 
 
And there’s also significant capital budget to build for future 
generations. Mr. Speaker, we talked the other day . . . I had a 
question in question period about why would we be investing 
money into capital projects and re-lifing buildings that are 
owned by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, 
that is important and it’s important to maintain those assets and 

to improve the assets that provide services to the taxpayers here 
in Saskatchewan, services that our citizens rely on. And that is 
important. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the biggest things out of this 
budget is that the government debt . . . And the member 
opposite just ended his comments talking about debt and credit. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this budget and the debt reduction that 
occurs in this budget puts this government debt at its lowest 
point in 14 years, Mr. Speaker, and that’s pretty pivotal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we can look at a number of 
the initiatives that are in the budget. We talked about health and 
education. We talked about . . . Or there is the social programs, 
including the social assistance increases, as well as child care, 
immigration, and affordable housing initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the measures that build on the 
economy, including the establishment of the business tax 
review committee and we can also talk about that capital 
budget. 
 
But I think a big part of when we talk about budgets and we talk 
about the huge amounts of dollars that go into the budget of 
Saskatchewan and the services that we provide, you always 
wonder — and I think it leaves our constituents wondering at 
home — how does that affect me? And what I did as the MLA 
for Moose Jaw Wakamow, Mr. Speaker, you take a step back 
and you have a look at the budget and what does that mean to 
the people that I represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 6.8 per cent education funding means a huge 
. . . has a huge impact on Moose Jaw. Not only is Moose Jaw a 
city that’s close to the university here in Regina, the tuition 
funding gives students the opportunity from Moose Jaw. Many 
commute. If you travel on the highway between Moose Jaw and 
Regina every morning and every evening, there’s a huge 
amount of young people that drive into Regina that attend 
university. That tuition funding will mean a great deal for them, 
give them some stability next year in their planning to go into 
university, and have some predictability for their costs. So it’s 
important for them. 
 
And it’s also important for SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology]. Mr. Speaker, SIAST has a 
huge presence in the city of Moose Jaw. When students are 
there, the activity that’s there, the money that comes into our 
community, businesses appreciate the students when they’re in 
our community. They have a huge presence. 
 
But also the educational value and the access to education for 
those people in the trades and the business area is extremely 
important. And those training positions, the expansion of 
training positions will be felt in our community, at home. 
 
And also the funding that goes to the reduction on the portion of 
education property tax, the 8 per cent reduction, $110 million 
that’s been committed over the next two years, the businesses, 
the residences in Moose Jaw will feel that. The agricultural 
community that is the southern part of my constituency, they 
will feel that, and that’s important especially in this time when 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

there is some real difficulty in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The funding for health, which is increased again. The 7.1 per 
cent increase — you talk about 7.1 per cent increase on a 
budget the size of Health’s and, Mr. Speaker, the numbers are 
hard to comprehend. It’s hard to understand how exactly that 
will affect each and every one of us. But when we start breaking 
it down and looking at the individual issues, some of the 
smaller expenses that will have a real impact on families in our 
communities: $3.9 million to up the childhood vaccines — Mr. 
Speaker, for our littlest of citizens there’s never enough that we 
can do, and if there’s things that are preventable with 
vaccinations, then we need to do all we can in that area; $4.7 
million increase for MRI [magnetic resonance imaging], CT 
[computerized tomography] and bone density testing volumes. 
 
We can say these numbers; we can talk about the numbers but, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you I had a constituent the other day had a 
very serious health problem, was rushed to the hospital in 
Moose Jaw. And the doctor told him, do you know if we didn’t 
have a CT scan in Moose Jaw you wouldn’t have made the trip 
to Regina. Mr. Speaker, this gentleman has been a friend for 
many years, is a huge volunteer in our constituency, and I can’t 
imagine anything like that happening. That CT scan is so 
important in our community. 
 
We’ve had the mobile CT scan going back and forth between 
Swift Current and Moose Jaw, and to have that fixed CT scan 
that is a higher resolution, better machine, the staff at the 
hospital are so proud of that piece of equipment that they now 
have access to. The medical staff appreciate it and, Mr. Speaker, 
the citizens of Moose Jaw appreciate it. 
 
So we can talk about these investments as million of dollars in 
percentages, but when we look around our constituency and see 
how they actually affect people, that’s when we realize the 
importance of these investments and the money that’s been 
designated in specific areas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been $9 million that’s been put aside 
to establish new primary health sites. Mr. Speaker, I just read an 
article in Maclean’s magazine that talked about the importance 
of primary health sites, and that that was the way of the future 
for health care right across this country. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan had led the way in designating primary health 
sites, establishing those health sites, doing analysis on them, 
and providing the care and access to those services for our 
communities that may be farther away from the regional or the 
major hospitals. Mr. Speaker, we need those things; they are 
important to people and they are important right across this 
province. 
 
Also youth. Youth was a focus, not only in the education piece 
but when we talk about new child care spaces. As more and 
more women enter the workforce, as our workforce requires 
more and more women in that workforce, Mr. Speaker — and 
those numbers are expected to grow — who cares for the littlest 
of those in our society? And we know from research, we know 
— we’ve heard it so many times — that young people and 
children need that very good start in life to be contributing 
citizens in our communities, to have healthy, fulfilling lives, 

and to have those opportunities that so many people take for 
granted. We need to make sure that those opportunities, that 
good start, is there for all of those children in our communities. 
And, Mr. Speaker, another 250 child care spaces is important. 
 
And one of my colleagues spoke previously about the 
affordable housing projects. And I know in Moose Jaw we look 
at housing, we look at the waiting list for affordable housing, 
and it’s something that I know is going to have a huge impact 
on our community. To have a good home, to have a quality 
housing, affordable housing is also a huge part of children and 
the good start that they get in life, the stability they have, and 
their health outcomes. Mr. Speaker, we talk about health and 
health care but we need to look at the basics that give us those 
good starts in life, that build a good life — quality housing, 
affordable housing, that’s a huge part of that. 
 
And I know, and we talked other education investments, the 
francophone school that’s going to built in Moose Jaw on the 
old Alexandra site. I know the francophone community was 
extremely pleased when the announcement was made and they 
have picked a site, they have worked with the city of Moose 
Jaw and their constituents to find the most appropriate site, to 
actually utilize an old facility that was there — the old 
Alexandra School site. They have tore down the old school but 
they have maintained the gymnasium that was there to add on 
with the new francophone school. And I know they’re really 
looking forward to having that facility up and running, and to 
be able to provide the care and the education for their 
constituency that they’ve been working towards for a long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the budget and we hand out 
all kinds of documents, one thing I would say to everyone, to 
look at the inter-city comparisons of taxes and household 
charges that’s within the budget book. Here again when we talk 
about big numbers, we talk about percentages, we talk about 
millions of dollars, quite often it just is overwhelming. We 
don’t grasp what it means to us as individuals and to families in 
our constituencies. 
 
And I would recommend to people that they have a look at 
these charts in the budget. It gives a comparison to comparable 
size cities right across Canada. It talks about the costs that we 
have as citizens. And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
Saskatchewan is consistently with the lowest taxes and 
household charges in Canada. 
 
Our quality of life here in Saskatchewan . . . I mean, it’s in 
black and white numbers. It gives comparisons and it lets each 
of us know that yes, we do, we do have a good quality of life. 
We do have comparable standards right across, but 
Saskatchewan is one of the most cost-effective places to live. 
So we have our quality of life and our low-cost expenses here in 
the province. Mr. Speaker, we have to look at that and realize 
that it is, it is actual. It’s a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can always look at some of the other 
investments that have been made in the province. We can look 
at the budget, but I would recommend to people, stop by your 
local constituency office and pick up a copy of it. It takes a little 
bit of time. There’s a number of initiatives that are very good. 
And there’s a number of areas that they may have questions 
about, but please stop by and pick up a book or look at it on the 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

Internet if you have time. 
 
I’d like to actually spend a few minutes talking about some of 
the comments that the opposition has made. And, Mr. Speaker, 
consistently since we have begun this session, the opposition 
has talked about their little milder side, their softer side. As one 
of my colleagues commented, you know, they dressed up fuzzy 
and figure we’re all going to fall for it. 
 
They’ve talked consistently about this government hasn’t done 
anything for the lowest income earners in this province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s wrong, that’s absolutely wrong, not only for 
the social programs and the increases and improvements that 
we’ve consistently made — that my colleague spoke to a couple 
speakers ago — but, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the budget 
book, we talk about provincial tax credits, that they’re generally 
parallel to federal credits, except that Saskatchewan 
implemented basic and spousal amounts that are higher than 
their federal counterparts, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of 
indexation, the basic and spousal amounts are $8,404 for the 
2005 taxation year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they failed to comment on that, that they are 
indexed and that they are improving as the years go on. So 
those with the lowest incomes continue to receive higher 
personal exemptions than what they have. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
something that we purposely established in the income tax 
review that was done a number of years ago. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re still seeing the results of that as the indexation takes 
place. 
 
And we can look at a chart . . . I mean, there’s a number of 
charts that have been put out. And it talks about a one-income 
family with an income of 10,000. The pre-reform of the system 
in 1999, that one-income family would have paid $257 in 
combined tax, and that would have been 2.6 per cent of their 
total income in tax. And, Mr. Speaker, after reform in 2005 they 
have had a reduction of 100 per cent in the tax that they pay. A 
one-income family earning $20,000 has had a 69.7 per cent 
reduction in the tax that they pay. And a $30,000 single-income 
family has had a 49 per cent reduction in tax that they pay. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we could go on and on with those numbers, 
but there has been improvements. It is areas that we continue to 
focus on. And, Mr. Speaker, families across Saskatchewan have 
seen results and they will continue to see results and 
improvements. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition stands up and they talk about 
. . . well, they’re very critical of the things we do. And I guess 
that’s what opposition does, is they oppose and they bring 
forward. But, Mr. Speaker, I wish they could be accurate and 
maybe stop and look in the mirror just once in a while. And, 
Mr. Speaker, and then they would have maybe a little better 
perspective on some of the things that they say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know one of my colleagues on the 
government side of the House said, well gee, I think they’re 
trying to be New Democrats over there. We almost brought in 
. . . We looked at their 100 ideas and here they are all soft and 
fuzzy, and we almost thought well gee, they’re all going to take 
out memberships and they’re going to come over and join us. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is look back, and not that 
long, Mr. Speaker. You just have to check back a couple of 
months — even check back some of their speeches over this 
first couple of weeks of this House — and you see, Mr. 
Speaker, they may have changed their song but they just slide 
back into old habits so quickly it isn’t even funny. And we 
don’t believe them. You know, I heard someone the other day 
say gee, they’re sounding so good you know I could almost 
vote for them; I could almost vote for them, if I believed them. 
And that’s the big thing, Mr. Speaker, we don’t believe them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talked about — not that long ago, Mr. 
Speaker — that the other 80-some Crowns would be sold. The 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy said that. And the Leader 
of the Opposition says that he’s open to anything with the major 
Crowns. And that was just a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
Well now they’re saying the Crowns won’t be sold. They’re a 
believer, Mr. Speaker; they have finally realized the value that 
the Crown corporations return to the people of this province, 
not only in good services, cost-effective services, but also in 
their commitment to their communities, the things that they 
support. 
 
Now a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, they talked about . . . 
also on the chopping block is the 25 to 50 million to trim the 
welfare system. Now all of a sudden, now all of a sudden, Mr. 
Speaker, they have turned into the softer side, Mr. Speaker. But 
we don’t believe them. We don’t believe them. 
 
They talk about supporting increases in the food allowance. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. But the member opposite just 
finished speaking and what he said was if the basic living 
increase that we just put in this budget of $10, he said if that’s 
the best you could do, if you’re only giving them 10 bucks you 
might as well not do it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that 
member is so out of touch that he does not have a clue what $10 
means to some of the families and some of the individuals that 
are living on social services in this province. Mr. Speaker, he is 
totally out of touch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re talking about determining best practices 
for dealing with young offenders. Well I think it was just last 
session they were talking about boot camps, for crying out loud. 
Now all of a sudden this conversion, the softer, warmer 
Saskatchewan Party. Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t believe it. 
We don’t believe it one bit and the people of this province don’t 
believe it either. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about this new, softer 
Saskatchewan Party they’re talking about a central control for 
health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the Department of Health; 
that’s what we’ve always had. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
government believes that there needs to be regional authorities, 
there needs to be the health authorities that have input so they 
can accommodate the special and specific needs that are within 
those regions. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, now all of a sudden the Saskatchewan Party says 
oh no, we need to get rid of those, and we’re just going with a 
central agency. 
 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

So what happens to your community input? What happens to 
the regional hospitals? What happens to those community 
health care centres? Everything’s done that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now here they are, they’re all hooting and hollering. Well now 
he says, why are you amalgamating school boards, Mr. Speaker. 
But, Mr. Speaker, amalgamation of school boards, the regional 
health authorities, does not mean everything run from a central 
agency, and that’s what’s in their platform. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the warmer, fuzzier, softer 
Sask Party. And one of their ideas in their new 100 Ideas little 
pamphlet says that they are going to: 
 

Investigate the establishment of a Research Chair in 
Occupational Health and Safety at one of Saskatchewan’s 
universities to improve the health and safety of all workers 
in Saskatchewan. 

 
Well that’s nice, Mr. Speaker, but I hate to tell them we already 
have the chief occupational medical officer at the university of 
Saskatoon, who does research, who runs a clinic, who works on 
these issues already. Now it would be nice if, when they talk 
about putting forward their ideas, that they looked around. I 
mean, these things are already in play. The chief occupational 
medical officer has been at the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon for almost five years doing the research, doing 
papers, doing the clinics, doing a variety of work in this area. 
So, Mr. Speaker, they really need to look at these things. 
 
And then here we go again, Mr. Speaker; we talk about the 
flip-flop. They put on this fuzzy coat and say, well we’re a 
softer, warmer party and we’re moving to the centre. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, then we look at the leader’s website, the 
leader’s website and a speech from June 2000, and the quote is: 
 

. . . red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto 
[the] business community by this government, be it 
through Workers’ Comp or occupational health and safety 
or various pieces of labour legislation, too often . . . [have] 
driven businesses and the jobs they create and the taxes 
they pay out of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, workers’ compensation? An insurance program 
that compensates workers who have been injured on the job — 
or worse yet, a fatality on the job — that compensates and 
provides benefits for that worker’s family. 
 
Occupational health and safety? When every person, every 
person across this country knows that occupational health and 
safety and safety in the workplace means improvements on the 
bottom line for that company — that’s red tape according to the 
opposition. Red tape and an inconvenience for Saskatchewan 
businesses. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they need to open up their eyes and start to 
look at today’s workplaces. Occupational health and safety is a 
benefit. You have a more productive workplace. You have more 
loyal employees, and it means improvements on the bottom line 
for that business. It isn’t an inconvenience, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they can talk about all they like, the newer, 

softer version that they are. But, Mr. Speaker, they are the same 
party that was in power in the ’80s, the Conservatives — same 
thing. 
 
Now the member opposite, he talked about if $10 increase to 
basic living allowance was the best we could do, we might as 
well not bother. And he is out of touch; he is totally out of 
touch. And I would invite him, he can come to my constituency 
office and see what that means to some of the people in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then he goes on to talk about, well no credit for the federal 
funding. He’s going to give no credit to anybody on this side of 
the House for the federal funding that’s come to the province of 
Saskatchewan. Well who does that member think went to 
Ottawa and put up the fight and put up the case for equalization 
improvements? Who does that member think is still going to 
Ottawa, speaking to Ottawa, and putting forward the case for 
equalization? It’s this Premier and this government that has 
done it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — And you know when that member stands 
there and criticizes the work that’s been done by this 
government for the taxpayers and the people of Saskatchewan, 
well you know what I’d say to him — you phone your 
Conservative cousins in Ottawa who sat on their hands during 
the budget. They sat on their hands during the budget; they 
never voted. Well look at us. We’re ready for an election, they 
say. We want to be the government. But you know what? They 
didn’t even have the backbone to stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan and Western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — So instead of criticizing this Premier and 
this government, that member should phone his cousins in 
Ottawa opposition and say, lookit, you guys, we voted for you 
for a reason. Get off your hands and do some work for the 
province that you’re supposed to representing. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the opposition member, he gets up and 
he says, well we haven’t done anything for property tax in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Well you know what, I guess only a 
Conservative could say $110 million is nothing. You know 
what, and it’s no wonder that these guys have this . . . talk about 
the same spending habits that the Devine Conservatives had 
during the ’80s that left this province so close to bankruptcy it 
wasn’t even funny — 110 million is nothing. 
 
Well that’s nice, I guess that’s the way he thinks of it — 110 
million means nothing. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of 
attitude that got us into trouble in the ’80s and, Mr. Speaker, 
this government will stay away from this, will continue to pay 
down the debt, and will continue to provide stable services for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget really does look forward to the 
next 100 years. It provides a base for this province. It provides 
stability to the services of this province that our communities 
will continue to build on. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s only 
appropriate that during our centennial year, we would have a 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

budget that looks forward and gives this government the 
opportunity to provide the services that the people of this 
province are asking for, and our priority is for the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our 100th anniversary; it’s our centennial. It’s 
a year when we can look back and celebrate the contributions of 
those that have come before, from the pioneers to some of our 
grandparents that came over in those early years here in 
Saskatchewan and helped build the communities, build the lives 
that we have now. But, Mr. Speaker, along with this budget we 
can look forward to the future of this province. 
 
Our economic indicators are pointing to very good things for 
Saskatchewan. We have many things on the go. We have a 
knowledgeable workforce and we have futures for the young 
people in this province and we’ll continue to build for education 
opportunities and for careers that they can build here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will gladly support this budget that the 
Minister of Finance put forward and I will not be supporting the 
amendments that have been put forward by the opposition. But I 
will support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I am 
quite privileged to be able to enter this debate. 
 
It was disappointing, quite frankly, to listen to the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow just moments ago. She will never know 
who I support federally; I don’t share that even with my own 
caucus members. 
 
But before she sits there and uses a sanctimonious mannerism 
on the MPs [members of parliament] that are working for us in 
Ottawa, she better think about how many NDP MPs the voters 
in this province supported in the last federal election. And I 
think it’s a little thin. So in making a mockery of our MP, she is 
making a mockery of the voters of our province. She is making 
a mockery of the choices that they’ve made. So I hope she’s 
proud of that. I hope she’s indeed proud of that behaviour. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I need to begin by complimenting the 
government. I’m not, like I said, I’m not very impressed with 
the last speech but I do have to compliment the government on 
one thing, and that is allowing the funding to flow for the 
advancement of the Humboldt hospital. They’ve been waiting 
for 10 years now, so let’s not pat ourselves on the back to such 
an extent that the arm gets tired — I sort of want that to go to 
the Learning minister. It’s been 10 years that they have waited, 
that they have asked for this funding. It is not going to be for 
construction quite yet at this stage; it is only going to the 
blueprint stage. There is still more money that’s going to be 
needed so we’ll see what will happen. But it’s important to 
Humboldt and it’s important to the surrounding community. 
 
We have a hospital here in Saskatchewan that doesn’t have 
wheelchair access unless you go to the emergency entrance in 

order to bring any patient on a wheelchair into . . . and this has 
been in this state for years. It’s outdated. And so I do believe 
that was a motion made by the government that I will support. 
And it’s been a long time overdue. 
 
But you know, let’s just see what the Humboldt Journal wrote 
about what was in the budget. And it’s an editorial in the 
Humboldt Journal and it basically says, finally. Because finally 
they’re getting the funding that they’ve been hoping for, for a 
number of years that has been promised . . . I think it’s been 
announced now four times. There have been three previous 
announcements where they had a, you know, big press 
conference in Humboldt, great photo op for either the Health 
minister, the Premier, or both, where they could make this 
announcement and absolutely not put a thin dime into backing 
up the announcement. 
 
So this is the first indication that perhaps they’re going to 
follow through on what they promised year after year after year. 
It says that Humboldt has been waiting a long time for this new 
hospital, and the fact that funds will be there for blueprints and 
as many other stages as they finish this year is a very good sign. 
 
Why? Well the government won’t move on to the blueprint 
stage unless they’re sure that the actual construction will take 
place in a timely manner. After all, after a few years those 
blueprints and the estimated costs of the project would be out of 
date and they would have wasted all that money. So this is all 
very good news. 
 
But I found myself asking the question, why is this happening 
now after over a decade of waiting? Is it because they simply 
waited long enough now — because we were patient and waited 
our turn? Or was it because enough people pushed and pushed 
and pushed the issue with the government of the day? I’m 
leaning towards the latter reason myself. 
 
People in Humboldt and the surrounding area have proven 
themselves to be doers over the years. That’s why there are so 
many entrepreneurs here; so much industry. If there’s 
something to be done people here tend to say, okay let’s get it 
done instead of asking who’s going to do it. 
 
Last fall they decided they had enough of the airy-fairy 
government promises regarding the new hospital. They wanted 
some concrete assurance from the government that a new 
hospital would be built here in the near future and they 
convinced the Health Minister Nilson that it was a priority. 
How? Well, when Nilson visited last fall, representatives from 
both rural and urban municipalities in the area were there to tell 
him, we need a new hospital, here’s why. 
 
The people in Humboldt made this happen. They saw 
something in this community that was lacking as well as a way 
to make it better and they worked together to change it from 
worse to better. They didn’t sit back and whine; and that’s not 
the Humboldt way. They went out and did something about the 
problem; and that is the Humboldt way. And everyone who was 
involved in getting the government to finally listen should have, 
while they’re sitting back in their chairs sighing, giving 
themselves a pat on the back. So it’s the people, the community 
working together. 
 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

They have their capital funding in place. It’s very, very 
difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to fundraise in relatively small 
communities, in a community that’s rural, that has been 
impacted year after year with different negative impacts to the 
economy, to be able to come up with $8 million; and they have 
their money in place. So I admire this community and I’m very, 
very proud to be able to represent it. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, next year I’ll be looking for the 
funding in the next year’s budget for the capital that they will 
need to actually begin construction. 
 
But let’s look at the budget overall. It’s a deficit budget. The 
income minus the expenditures leaves a number in brackets. 
And I know a number of their members have denied that it’s a 
deficit budget, but I’ve done books for a number of years and I 
know when I get to the end of a column and I put the number in 
brackets, I know it’s a deficit. That’s why I put it in brackets. 
And if they question it, I suggest that they look at their own 
documents. The revenue was 7,006,800,000. The expenditures 
was 7,151,731,000. The expenditures exceeded the revenue and 
that equates to a deficit budget. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So how does the NDP government keep on telling the public 
that it’s balanced? Well here comes the miracle, the miracle 
being the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. The member from 
Coronation Park was so excited when he talked about the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund yesterday. He was ecstatic. He was 
absolutely excited because they had created this absolutely 
amazing Fiscal Stabilization Fund and he felt that it was unique, 
and it was great, and it was the best thing since sliced bread, 
and this government invented it. 
 
Well the Provincial Auditor states that the use of a fiscal 
stabilization as a savings account is not proper accounting 
practices and therefore, when you draw down from a Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, you are incurring a debt. It’s just that 
simple. If he doesn’t believe it . . . And the member from 
Coronation Park’s woke up now and he’s arguing that this isn’t 
the truth. 
 
But let’s just take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at their own 
document, page 51. Let’s read page 51 in the government’s own 
budget document. And it states: 

 
Some of the initiatives announced in 2004-05 were 
multi-year in nature and will be funded through the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. As these initiatives are funded over the 
next three years via withdrawals from the . . . [Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund], government debt will rise. 

 
Government debt will rise. How can he sit there and deny that 
the use of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is incurring debt when 
it’s in his government’s own document. It’s on page 51 if he 
needs to check it out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other . . . You know, in fairness to the 
government, using a line of credit whether you call it a Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund or whatever you want to call it, quite frankly, 
is used all the time. It’s not unique or invented by the NDP 
government. It’s used in the farming community. I use it in my 

own farming operation. It’s used in the business community, 
and it’s a very, very beneficial tool for running a business to 
have a line of credit. We may not in the farm . . . On the farm 
that my husband and I operate we don’t give it a fancy name or 
anything. We call it a line of credit. I enter it into the ledger, 
appropriately, and it goes in the liabilities column because I 
know if I have to draw money on my line of credit, I have 
incurred a debt. It’s a debt, and that is just plain that simple. 
 
So the question becomes — and I’ve had a few constituents ask 
me this — why another deficit budget if we have all this 
money? Last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they raised the PST one 
point, which brings in an additional 140 million into the 
General Revenue Fund last year. And we didn’t reduce it, so 
therefore we can project another $140 million to come into the 
fund this year. There was $1.1 billion in revenue from oil and 
gas and equalization last year that was unexpected for this 
government. And the budget document projects that there will 
be an additional 400 million in new government revenue this 
year. So where did it all go? Like why are we looking at yet 
another deficit budget? We’ve had deficit budgets, quite 
frankly, ever since this Premier took over from Mr. Romanow. 
 
So we’ll take a look at the Estimates book, and, you know, try 
and find out exactly where did this money go. And we’ll start 
with something that’s extremely important to the Humboldt 
constituency, because that’s the area that I’m concerned about. 
So my initial concern of course was to see if the Humboldt 
hospital could move forward. But beyond that, there’s many 
other areas in this document that’s going to affect the people in 
Humboldt. 
 
So starting with Agriculture and Food, it had an increase of $1 
million to the budget and it added one full-time equivalent 
employee. So, how’s that going to affect my farm, my 
neighbour’s farm, and how is it going to affect the constituency 
in general? And so, did they commit to fully funding the CAIS 
program which, quite frankly, is the only management tool, 
finance management tool that the farmers have right now. And 
you find if you look at the budget that it’s just not there. There’s 
no commitment there to fully fund 2004 CAIS. Did they add 
money to Crop Insurance to help the crop insurance situation? 
And . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, we have some important 
guests in the gallery. Is leave granted for the Chair to introduce 
guests? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you very much. We’re very 
honoured to welcome a member of the legislature from British 
Columbia, Brenda Locke, but she’s not here as an MLA . . . Oh, 
I guess she just stepped out. She’s here as a coach of a 26 Junior 
A ringette team, who’ve travelled all the way from British 
Columbia to participate in a tournament here in Regina and I 
hope they do quite well, but not too well. And I would ask all 
hon. members to welcome the ringette team here, and Brenda 
Locke, MLA. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So again 
we’re going back and we’re looking at the budget for 
Agriculture and Food, that section of the budget which of 
course is very important to my constituency. 
 
So we . . . [inaudible] . . . they didn’t fully fund CAIS. They 
have not committed to doing that. Did they add money to crop 
insurance? Well, no, they didn’t add any money to that either. 
Did they reinstate, with all this extra money that they have and 
all the money that they spent, did they spend some of it 
reinstating or replacing any of the programs that they cut last 
year when they said that times were tough and they had to make 
some major cuts? Well there was the farm families opportunity 
program that they cut. There was the conservation cover 
program that they cut. They fired how many agrologists in the 
province. They closed how many rural farm centres. 
 
Let’s just see if they, you know, did they replace any of that 
with their added spending? And when you go through the 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll find out that they didn’t 
replace any of it. They absolutely replaced none of it. They 
slashed everything in rural Saskatchewan they possibly could 
last year, pleading poverty, but now that they can’t plead 
poverty, now that the province is doing relatively well, did they 
replace any of it? Not one bit. 
 
So let’s just take a look at another section. How about the 
increase, you know, how about an increase to research and 
technology? We keep talking about how we need to look more 
and more at value-added processing. I think there has to be 
some research done into that area. I think it’s extremely critical 
for the viability of agriculture into the future. And if you look in 
the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only did they not add to 
the research and technology section of the Agriculture and 
Food, they decreased it. So they’ve given lip service to 
supporting all of this, but in fact when it came time to doing the 
budget, those areas of such importance to rural Saskatchewan 
were decreased. 
 
You know the minister time and time again has said, you know, 
I stand behind our farmers. Well heaven help us if he didn’t 
because we’re being crucified while he’s behind us. 
 
So there is nothing new in this budget for agriculture. APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] had a 
press release after they seen the budget; they’re the 
representative quite often called upon to speak on agriculture 

issues. Their press release said, “Agriculture Not A Priority To 
Government.” 
 

March 23, 2005 . . . The Agriculture Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan . . . is extremely concerned 
over the lack of commitment to agriculture in today’s 
provincial budget. 
 

So it isn’t just my word, Mr. Speaker, it’s also the committee of 
agriculture that’s saying exactly the same thing. 
 
So another department that you know greatly affects my 
constituency would be Government Relations. It’s also 
important to Humboldt, property taxes affect both the urban and 
rural areas within the Humboldt constituency. And when it 
comes to property taxes they re-announced the two year 
reduction of property taxes, so again another photo op, another 
re-announcement. But there’s no thoughts or no vision to fixing 
the problem. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, request leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I understand that you’ve already 
acknowledged some of the guests in your gallery and I’d like to 
add to that introduction. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members in the Legislative Assembly, 
we are honoured this afternoon to have representatives from the 
province of British Columbia, specifically the Junior A Ringette 
Champions of British Columbia; and they are here in Regina, 
where of course the Western Canadians Tournament is 
underway. 
 
And I understand the girls have played two ringette games 
today but we won’t indicate what the results were of those two 
games. We just wish them well in their other games. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce the coach, Kathy Matuziak, who I 
understand has done a great job with these girls for years. These 
are age 13 to 15 year old girls. And I want to thank Kathy. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I also want to make mention of a member of 
the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia currently serving 
as the Minister of State for Mental Health and Addictions, 
Brenda Locke, who has accompanied that group as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

Mr. Krawetz: — So on behalf of the official opposition and all 
members in the Legislative Assembly, welcome to 
Saskatchewan, welcome to the Legislative Chamber here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I hope that your stay in 
Saskatchewan is a pleasant one. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Okay, 
returning to the reviewing the budget on Government Relations, 
and yes the government re-announced the two-year property tax 
reduction, but they have not given any plan, any vision, any 
way that they’re going to address the problem long-term. 
 
They’ve done a two-year rebate on farm land before and they 
ran it for two years, dropped it, and the problem was still there. 
And I think the problem is going to get much worse because we 
are looking at reassessment. In a lot of cases the reassessment 
increase is going to eat up any reduction that they’ve offered, so 
therefore no one in the province is going to be any better off 
after two years. 
 
Was there any increase to the revenue sharing, which also 
affects property taxes, quite frankly? And no, it was frozen. I 
find that kind of ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When I was first 
elected, it was back in 1999. And in that budget, there was a 
few areas where the Saskatchewan Party had run on a platform 
that said that they would hold spending in some of the 
departments at the cost of inflation. 
 
And they went through . . . you know, they were just giddy 
whenever they could say, zap, you’re frozen. Like it just made 
them; they were just happier than heck. And they did it time and 
time again. But this is even worse than what we had proposed 
because there isn’t even any provisions to handle inflation or 
increased costs whatsoever. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don’t have to take my word 
for it. We have two groups that represent municipal or 
government relations, and that is SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association]. They both have press 
releases following this budget. 
 
And SARM’s press release read as follows: 
 

“Status Quo” Still on for Rural Saskatchewan 

They highlighted three areas in their press release. Under 
agriculture, it says: 
 

The Province’s . . . [agriculture] producers are facing one 
of the worst financial . . . [crisis] in the last century . . . 
[where] record losses due to extremely low commodity 
prices, the devastating frost over most of the province, 
several years of drought and the ongoing border dispute 
over BSE. “Despite record setting resource sector 
royalties, there was no new money for the . . . [agriculture] 
sector. They aren’t even going to . . . [find] their share of 
the CAIS program,” said President [Neal] Hardy. 
 

Under education tax on property, the press release states: 
 

At the 2003 SARM Annual Convention the Premier stated, 
“the status quo . . . [was] not on” regarding education tax 
on property. At the 2004 SARM Annual Convention the 
Premier stated, “without doubt there is an inequity in the 
level of education tax on farmland.” “Despite the 
premier’s acknowledgement of the inequity, and despite 
record setting resource sector royalties the education tax 
inequity was not addressed,” said President Neal Hardy. 
 

Under rural revenue sharing: 
 

The Province continues to reap the benefits of record 
setting resource royalties. The resource sector, specifically 
oil and gas, are located in rural Saskatchewan and rural . . . 
[communities] provide the roads to service these wells. 
“Despite record setting royalties . . . [there’s] no increase 
in revenue sharing for rural municipalities” . . . 
 

SUMA. Let’s just see what SUMA had to say about this budget 
that the NDP are so proud of. On their press release it states: 
 

Status Quo Budget Short-changes Future Prosperity 
 
“When you short-change municipalities you are 
short-changing the future prosperity of this province,” said 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities President Don 
Schlosser in response to the 2005 Provincial Budget. 

 
[16:30] 
 
And it goes on to be quite damning of the budget and how it 
will affect the municipal level of government across this 
province. So there is no added money there. That’s not where 
the money was spent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So let’s go on to K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education 
that affects a lot of families in the Humboldt constituency. It 
also affects . . . Quite frankly, the funding for K to 12 education 
directly affects property taxes. 
 
There’s going to be a cost to amalgamation. And there’s 
increased operating costs and each of the school boards have to 
find funding to address those costs. They have to meet the 
needs of the teachers’ contract once that is negotiated. The 
funds have to be found. And again when you look at the budget, 
it was frozen. There’s no extra funding for K to 12 education in 
this province. 
 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

If you look at the press releases for the affected stakeholders in 
K to 12 education, you look at the press release from the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association and it states: “Status 
quo budget does not recognize education cost increases.” “[The] 
STF Calls Provincial Budget a Non-event for K-12 Education.” 
 
So you don’t just have to take my word for it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. These are the groups that represent the different 
sectors within our province and they all stated that this budget 
was not meeting the needs of the citizens of this province. 
 
So the fourth department, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I wanted to 
see if that’s where the money was being spent, because it’s 
important to the Humboldt constituency, was Community 
Resources and Employment. That’s extremely important to 
Humboldt and there is an increase to that department of $35 
million and 36 full-time equivalent employees. 
 
Now there’s two issues that fall within the Community 
Resources and Employment department that affect Humboldt, 
the Humboldt constituency in a large way. There seems to be an 
increase in low-income earners. And although Lanigan was a 
community that has had a food bank for a number of years, 
Humboldt has just recently opened a food bank there as well. 
So there’s an increased need for a food bank in the Humboldt 
constituency. So that is absolutely nothing that this government 
should be proud of. 
 
There’s no tax relief for those low-income earners in this 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the PST that was, you know, 
tagged on last year because supposedly the province was in dire 
straits, was not rolled back. So therefore the low-income earners 
in the Humboldt constituency still have to pay the high tax rate. 
 
There was a $10 increase to the basic food allowance, but it’s 
been 22 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since this allowance has 
seen an increase. And quite frankly I don’t believe it would’ve 
happened if the Saskatchewan Party hadn’t been proposing that 
it needed to happen and needed to happen quickly. There is no 
indication from that government in the last 22 years that they 
were even remotely going to look at that issue. 
 
And yes, that’s one area where I do agree with the member 
from Moose Jaw-Wakamow — $10 when you have none is a 
lot of money. But we need to do more; we need to do more. We 
simply need to do more because it’s not a lot of money. It needs 
to be indexed. It needs to increase with inflation. 
 
And what about, the other thing is what about the front-line 
workers. And this is actually a critical situation that’s 
happening in Humboldt right now. Humboldt is a city and 
they’ve been cut back in their social services workers to such a 
state right now that one worker comes out of Saskatoon one day 
a week for four hours. Well there is no way that poor worker 
can handle the number of clients that are in Humboldt and the 
large surrounding community around Humboldt. And so what’s 
ending up happening is the increased number of people that 
have come into my office, that are frustrated with social 
services, and it’s not the worker’s fault. 
 
We’ve had three different workers come to Humboldt since 
November, so there’s no flow-through of the case files. There’s 
no, you know, continuing with a client till they can get on their 

feet. That just stops. Every time they change a social worker, 
they’re looking at re-looking at the issues. They have to go over 
their situation yet again, and that’s only if they can get the 
appointment in the first place. And fours hours a week in 
Humboldt is not adequate. 
 
The government has received letters from the city of Humboldt 
on this issue. They have received letters from the RCMP in 
Humboldt on this issue. They have received letters from other 
community leaders on this issue and they absolutely refuse to 
look at it. But surely they have . . . they’ve got to know that in a 
city the size of Humboldt and the surrounding community, four 
hours a week is hardly adequate. So I hope those 36 full-time 
equivalent employees, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are front-line 
employees; I really do. I hope they’re not just employees in the 
department because those social workers are working hard and 
they are not able to meet the need. 
 
The other area that falls into Community Resources and 
Employment is the area of addictions. And Lanigan actually 
had some public meetings some time ago, before the issue was 
raised at all in this House, on addictions difficulties in the 
Lanigan area. It’s a huge concern to myself personally — that is 
where my children went to school. They took their K to 12 in 
the Lanigan school. They saw that there was difficulties. 
 
Humboldt now has seen the problems and the challenges that 
are happening with addictions, in particular crystal meth, and 
they now have a community drug action committee. And that 
committee is trying to address some of the issues facing the 
drug addiction in the area. There’s even going to be a meeting, 
Mr. Speaker, on Saturday — this Saturday coming up — 
dealing specifically with crystal meth. 
 
Now this government I don’t even think gave it any thought 
until the member from Kelvington-Wadena brought it up. And 
even then they made a mockery of her, that she was just being 
foolish and silly for bringing it up. And now finally they’re 
starting to wake up, but is there anything in this budget that’s 
going to address the issues? Is there anything in this budget 
that’s going to address the challenges that communities are 
facing, that parents are facing, when they have young people 
addicted to crystal meth? And I don’t think there is. There’s 
nothing that’s going to help those parents. There’s nothing 
that’s going to help the communities deal with this. We need 
treatment centres, we need better education on the specific 
drugs that are there right now. And we need law enforcement, 
quite frankly, that’s going to deal with these difficulties. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other area I wanted to look at very 
quickly was youth in general. And it doesn’t . . . we do have, 
you know, Youth and Recreation. But I wanted to look at it 
overall. We all give a lot of lip service to doing things for youth 
in our province. The government is famous for giving lip 
service to it. And quite frankly, their lips have to be getting sore 
because they’re not doing a whole lot to keep our youth in our 
province, and the demographics are proving it; the statistics are 
proving it. 
 
So we could keep talking about it, and yes, this budget offers a 
one-year tuition freeze — something that the Minister of 
Learning said wasn’t going to work, but they did it anyways. It 
looked good. They can run out and champion this. But I found 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

it rather amusing because the day of the budget, when I returned 
to where I stay when I’m in Regina, a young lady who is a U of 
R [University of Regina] student had come over to visit that 
evening. 
 
Now knowing her parents, I would say that her parents would 
be probably NDP supporters. I’ve never asked. We’ve never 
talked politics but that’s sort of the feeling that I’ve had. So she 
would be coming at it from that type of perspective. And she 
said to me, she said, did the budget give us a one-year freeze on 
tuition? And I said, yes it did. Well is that ever stupid because 
I’m going to pay for it next year, aren’t I? And that’s exactly 
what the minister has said in the past. It catches up to you. It 
catches up to you. 
 
Did they, you know, they care about youth? Did they reinstate 
the funding for the legislative intern program? No. Did they 
reinstate the summer student program, something that was very, 
very helpful to our regional parks? How about the regional 
parks that have hired students summer after summer, the 
summer student program? It was a program slashed last budget. 
Did they reinstate it? No. 
 
But bottom line — even if we have none of these programs, 
what young people need in our province is simple, is 
opportunity. They need an opportunity, and I don’t feel in all 
circumstances they’re given that opportunity in this province 
because we are not attracting business and investment. There 
isn’t an expansion of jobs in this province to meet the needs to 
give these young people the opportunities that they are looking 
for. 
 
There’s a group in Humboldt called Action Humboldt, and it is 
an inspiring group that came together of entrepreneurs and 
community leaders. And they’re looking in every aspect of 
growing Humboldt and area. They want to make it a healthy, 
desirable place to live. They want to attract businesses. They 
want to be able to have businesses that can offer jobs. They’re 
looking at the whole perspective of the area and growing the 
area. 
 
But you know there’s nothing new that I can go to Action 
Humboldt in this budget and say that, this is what you can take 
out, this is new, this is brand new so that you can market a 
Saskatchewan advantage to attract what you need to your area. 
 
Business and investors need to feel confident. They need to feel 
confident that there won’t be competed . . . or have to compete 
against the government. They need to feel confident that they 
have fair and stable tax structures. They need to feel confident 
that they have a business accommodating legislation and they 
need to feel confident that there will be enough consumers, 
quite frankly, to use their product. And then they will come to 
the province and then they will create jobs which will in turn 
create the opportunity for our young people to stay. And there’s 
nothing in this budget that addresses any of those issues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heard one of the members . . . yes, it was 
yesterday. He was talking about how he went out and he asked 
the different sectors what’s in this budget for them. And then 
we had the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow also speak of 
what’s it going to do for everybody within our constituencies. 
 

And I didn’t have that opportunity this weekend, but I do 
believe my own family — and I know the Minister from 
Learning always loves when I talk about my family — so my 
own family is pretty broad representative of an average rural 
family. My husband and I farm. We have one daughter at the U 
of S [University of Saskatchewan]. We have one daughter in the 
workforce, and I have a daughter in the K to 12 system. And I 
look at each of those, and I look at our parents. And I’m 
thinking, what’s in this budget for them? 
 
Yes, the U of S student, the gal that’s in the U of S, she will get 
one year of a tuition freeze. But she’s had — she’s a fourth year 
student — and she has only in the four years of her education 
been able to access $1,100 in student loans. That’s it. She’s had 
to work the whole way through, which is fine. I’m not saying 
that’s totally wrong. But I think there’s times where she would 
appreciate having easier accessibility to get a student loan. 
 
The daughter that’s in the workforce — and the Minister of 
Labour will love this — is a part-time worker. She’s had a 
tough time finding a full-time job, but it will come. It’s very, 
very difficult for her. And what’s going to help her in this 
budget? What’s going to create the environment that businesses 
will come and create jobs? And I’m looking at the budget, and 
there’s nothing. There’s absolutely nothing that’s going to help 
her out there. 
 
I look at my father and my husband’s mother, and we’re 
looking at them on a fixed income. Their property taxes have 
always increased, and they feel the brunt first hand on a PST 
increase. The 1 per cent is significant to them, and there’s 
nothing in this budget to address this. 
 
This is the centennial budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This was the 
time where they could lay out a vision. This was the time where 
they could have some great initiatives for how we’re going to 
move forward into the future. And there is nothing in there that 
does that. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment, and I will not support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join into the debate and support the budget that has 
been presented here on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan in the year 2005. 
 
I think it’s very important that we take into context a lot of the 
challenges that we face as a province and look at the history of 
Saskatchewan in general as to where the challenges are in the 
past, where the challenges are certainly in the present, and 
where we need to go in terms of the future when it comes to 
economic development, when it comes to social planning — 
and certainly all trying to do that under the notion of managing 
our resources well and certainly managing our money well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand in full and proud support of the budget 
today and make a few comments I think is very important that 
people make when we stand up to defend what we think is the 
right direction to go. And what I want to tell the viewers back 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

home is a couple of things. First of all I would say to them, in a 
few minutes I’ll give you an explanation as to where the money 
went, the approximately $890 million that this province 
received last year — certainly in one-time money — so people 
back home have an idea where the government put the money. 
And they can get their pens and papers out, and we’ll certainly 
explain as we have on many occasions, on many occasions to 
many groups how and where the money was spent. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I think that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, because one of the 
challenges I tell people back home is . . . the Sask Party goes 
out and tells people, well what have they done for you. What 
have they done for you? That has been their biggest argument 
when they go out and talk to people. They have done this. They 
have done things bad. What have they done good for you, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And that’s why I think it’s important, why it’s important for 
people back home to know some of things that we have to point 
out on occasion of what those Sask Party are saying to folks and 
what they’re about and certainly what we’re trying to do on this 
side, Mr. Speaker. I think as I mentioned before, as I mentioned 
before we’ll been going through detail as to where the dollars 
went, and I would urge people back home to certainly get a pen 
and paper, and then we can tally it up. 
 
But what I would point out, what I would point out then, Mr. 
Speaker, is that don’t take their word for it as to what the total 
tally was. Take the Minister of Finance’s word where he’s 
actually documented the revenues that we received last year so 
that they’re justified. They’re justified. And so therefore when 
they say it’s $1 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would point out, 
use the Minister of Finance’s figures which the auditor uses, 
which all the independent bond rating agencies use as well, and 
those are the figures. 
 
But what happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that that Sask Party 
opposition does two things. They inflate the number because 
they want to create greater expectations and greater pressure on 
the government. That’s what they do. So 100 million, 150 
million there that they inflate, well that doesn’t matter, rounding 
off 890 million to well over 1 billion. That’s what they kind of 
do. And that kind of Tory math, Mr. Speaker, is present in 
2005, and that’s what got us in trouble in the first place. 
 
So I’ll point out to all the viewers back home because — as I 
mentioned, get your pens and papers out — and we will go 
through where the money was spent, where the $1 billion was 
spent, so people back home know exactly where it went and 
how much exactly in terms of dollars that we actually received 
last year. 
 
Now before I go to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk 
about the opposition a bit here if I may. And I want to point out 
the history of us coming to the stage as Saskatchewan in the 
centennial year of 2005, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are now at 
the lowest level of debt that we’ve been in 14 years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Lowest level in 14 years. And I think 
that sends the right signal, Mr. Speaker, in terms of telling the 
people of Saskatchewan that on this side of the Assembly we 
don’t inflate the numbers like the opposition does. We don’t 
spend the so-called $1.4 billion or $1.8 billion. We don’t spend 
that extra money every year as they would do. And we don’t 
spend it ten times over promising everybody what they want, 
they’ll deliver, Mr. Speaker. And there’s two things I’ll say to 
that, Mr. Speaker, is that what Saskatchewan people have to be 
very, very careful of is that kind of Tory math. That got us in 
trouble in the past. 
 
So the three points I’ll make is . . . I’ll explain where the 
additional dollars went. I will give the true figure as to what we 
received, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of extra revenues last 
year. And what I’ll also do as time goes on during this session, 
is we will keep track of what the Tories opposite have promised 
us on a continual basis as to where they’d spend this money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I mentioned before it is very, very important that people 
not compare us as a perfect government, Mr. Speaker, because 
we know we have a lot of challenges. We know we have a lot of 
issues that we have to deal with, and it will take us some time. 
But the most important thing again is that the money that we 
receive is well managed. The money that we receive is 
balanced. The money that we receive go out to meeting 
priorities over a long term to make sure that some of these 
priorities are being met and some of the challenges that we have 
are being addressed. 
 
So I think being careful, being frugal, and being visionary is 
something that’s so very important when you’re managing the 
finances of the Saskatchewan government. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is that if you look across 
the way, you look across the way and the manner in which they 
address the budget challenges . . . I note that the opposition 
Finance critic, when he was on the radio and there was a 
mention that he, this individual from within this caucus, was 
driving and in four blocks, in four blocks, Mr. Speaker, that 
Finance critic spent over $1 billion — over $1 billion in four 
blocks. And the unfortunate part is we were hoping to listen to 
some more of what they were trying to spend, but of course 
obviously, we have to go to work and we have to govern. 
 
But in the meantime there’s 26 opposition Sask Tory MLAs 
across the way, and they are, and they are going out and they’re 
promising each $1 billion. They want to do everything, Mr. 
Speaker. They want to provide every dollar to every need, to 
every group, to every cause. And everywhere they go — the 28 
of them, I stand corrected, the 28 of them — they stand there 
and they promise everything to everybody. And every day, they 
get up here and they say, we want to give these people this 
much money. We want to put this much money over there and 
this much money over there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not how you govern. The last time 
that happened was in the 1980s. And what I want to say, what I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the entire audience that may be 
listening today is that we went down that road before, in the 
1980s. And many of whose members sit across the way, 
so-called the Saskatchewan Party, they were involved with that 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2005 

particular government, Mr. Speaker. Many of them worked with 
that government and that, Mr. Speaker, is so very important to 
point out — that they try and hide their past. But, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve seen the 1980s. 
 
And the last thing the people of Saskatchewan should be doing 
— and this is my message to them when he talks about budget 
and about being careful how we spend our money — is that this 
government and the people of Saskatchewan together struggled, 
Mr. Speaker. We struggled in the early ’90s trying to arrest that 
deficit. And we still have that debt. 
 
So what I say today as a part of this government, that I tell 
people all across Saskatchewan is, don’t ask, what these guys 
say, what has the government done for you. You ask, who 
cleaned up that Tory mess? Who cleaned up that Tory mess? 
 
It was you, the people of Saskatchewan, in concert with the 
Government of Saskatchewan and happens to be on this side, 
Mr. Speaker. And I tell people, don’t be fooled by that. Don’t 
be fooled by that because you’re paying over $600 million in 
interest, Mr. Speaker — over $600 million. And at one time, at 
one time things were so tough, Mr. Speaker, that to my 
recollection, we were paying more in interest that what we’re 
paying to education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today now, after good management and good budgets of which 
I stand today in support, we are finding now that our interest 
payments are half of the commitment in this budget towards 
education, Mr. Speaker. And I think that is something that we 
should celebrate in our centennial year. 
 
So when these Sask Tory Party people come to your door and 
say, what has the government done for you lately? You can tell 
them, well they cleaned up one mess you guys created. We 
don’t want you guys in there for them to clean up another mess. 
 
So we say, no. We reject your notion of your math. We reject 
your notion of promising everything to everybody because it 
doesn’t add up. And we reject your notion of going back to the 
1980s because Saskatchewan people are still paying for that 
debt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said before, as we’ve said before, 
we are not . . . we are tired, we are tired of hearing of the debt. 
On this side of the Assembly we are tired of hearing that debt. 
But I know right throughout Saskatchewan that Saskatchewan 
people are tired of paying it as well. 
 
But we have to do the responsible thing, and we have to make 
sure that that debt is coming down. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are beneficiaries of that because less debt means 
less interest, and, Mr. Speaker, that means that this Minister of 
Finance is on the right track, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I would point out as well, yes okay, 
every day during question period they doom and gloom and 
spread fear. And all in all, they have to do what they have to do, 
Mr. Speaker. I would point out, I would point out that what I 
tell people back home, and I tell the people of Saskatchewan 
this today, is that we’re at our lowest debt in 14 years thanks to 

this government and this administration. And we can learn 
more; I’m not saying that we’re perfect. But watch what those 
guys across the way promise you because what they promise 
you they cannot deliver. 
 
And now let’s look at why they can’t deliver, Mr. Speaker, why 
they can’t deliver because they have a confusing message. They 
have a confusing message. They’re liberal with the dollars, and 
yet they’re conservative with the real challenge of managing all 
that money. And I look across the way, Mr. Speaker, and what I 
see is I see Reform ideology. Then I see Conservatives. Then I 
see disaffected Liberals. Then I see Sask Party. And I say, well 
who are you guys and what do you guys, what do you guys 
represent? Are you the austerity party? Like what are you guys? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are saying, well 
they’re promising us everything and they’re telling us all the 
bad things you guys do. But the people of Saskatchewan are 
saying, well who are you guys? You know, they’re actually 
stomping their feet and saying, who are you guys? 
 
But, but, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the budget they say, 
we’re going to spend on all these things. We’re going to be 
everything to everybody. We’re going to be Liberals. We’re 
going to be Tories. We’re going to be Reformers. And I think 
there’s a few heads from the Bloc over there. And I look at 
some of the other challenges that they face, the western 
Canadian concept. People are saying, who are you guys and 
what are you about? 
 
And you know what that means, Mr. Speaker? That if it comes 
to budgets, it comes to spending, it’s coming to a consistent 
message. People of Saskatchewan are saying, we don’t trust you 
guys. We don’t trust the Sask Party because we don’t know 
what you stand for. You don’t know how to manage. And we 
don’t know what you are. 
 
So when it comes to this budget, Mr. Speaker, people got to 
know. People aren’t silly in Saskatchewan. People are very 
intelligent. And they know when a snake oil salesman comes 
along and says I’ll give you this and I’ll be that for you. I’ll do 
this. I’ll do this, and I’ll do that, and we’ll make everybody 
happy. We’ll make everybody happy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you have to make sure you’re able to 
manage your resources, and you’re able to control expectations 
and do it in a very consistent, methodical manner. That’s what 
people in Saskatchewan want. So what I tell people back home 
is this. If they come along, they spread doom and gloom. They 
said we’re going to do all of these wonderful things for you. 
You ask them, Mr. Speaker, you ask these people. We’ve seen 
your style. We don’t want you to come along and create another 
mess for another government to come along and clean up that 
may take us another 30 or 40 years to clean up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think I want go on a little further, but I want 
to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Athabasca that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



March 31, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2265 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2265 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2265 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2265 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2265 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2265 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2265 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2266 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2266 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2266 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2266 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2266 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2266 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2267 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2267 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2267 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2267 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2267 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2267 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2267 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2267 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2267 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2268 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2268 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2268 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2268 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2269 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2269 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2269 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2269 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2269 
  Deputy Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................2292 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2293 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2005 National Aboriginal Achievement Awards 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2270 
 Bottled Water Company from Broadview 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2270 
 Saskatchewan Budget 2005-2006 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2270 
 New Biodiesel Facility 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2270 
 Economic Developer of the Year 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2271 
 Eston Panthers Win Two Titles 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2271 
 Spartan Girls Basketball Team 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2271 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Population and Employment Statistics 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2272 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2272 
 Legislation Regarding Health Care Workers 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2273 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2273 
 Investments In Navigata 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2274 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2274 



 

 Problem Gambling 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2276 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2276 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2277 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2277 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2277 
  Morgan (point of order) .........................................................................................................................................................2277 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................2277 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2279 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2282 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2287 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2291 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2296 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Revitalization 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


