
















































Hansard: November 08, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 2A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 9 
 November 8, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
highways continue to be a concern to the constituents of 
Cypress Hills. I have petitions this session from individuals 
from the community of Burstall, Maple Creek, and Liebenthal. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
321 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with SaskTel cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan 
are protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from the town of Strongfield. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition for 
the citizens of Biggar that are concerned about the possible 
reductions of health care services in the town of Biggar. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least the current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so 
present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan and, in particular, citizens who are 
against the closure of Biggar’s rural service centre and 
Environment office. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reverse the decision to close the 
rural service centre and Environment office in Biggar. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens of Perdue and Kinley. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of the Outlook 
area who are very concerned about the unreliable cell coverage. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary action to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents 
along Highway No. 19 and the Outlook area in 
Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Central 
Butte, and Elbow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the width of Highway No. 5. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Annaheim, Naicam, 
St. Gregor, Humboldt, Muenster, LeRoy, and Watson. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today from people who are concerned about Highway No. 310. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Kuroki and 
Lintlaw. I so present. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a great number of questions that I will be asking the 
government, and the first ones relate to the Minister 
Responsible for Sask Property Management. And I just give 
notice that I shall on day no. 7 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Property 
Management: what assets does SPM lease through Cajon 
Leasing? 
 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, rather than reading the whole thing, 
I’ll just read the questions out of these first few. 
 

To the Minister for SPM: what is the value of assets SPM 
leases through Cajon Leasing? What are the terms of the 
lease agreement or agreements between SPM and Cajon 
Leasing? 
 
In 2001 according to the Provincial Auditor the federal 
government determined that lease agreement between 
Cajon Leasing and SPMC did not meet the definition of an 
eligible investment under the federal immigration 
regulations. What changes were made to the lease 
agreements to ensure that these leases qualify as eligible 
investments? What fees have been paid to Cajon Leasing 
for providing leasing services to SPM? 
 
Were other companies given the opportunity to tender on 
providing these leasing services to SPM? If not, why was 
the decision made to offer an untendered contract to Cajon 
Leasing to provide these leasing services as opposed to 
providing an opportunity for other leasing companies to 
bid on this contract through an open tendering process? 
What was the total amount of fees received by Cajon 
Leasing providing these leasing services to SPM? 
 
In his spring report 2002 the Provincial Auditor indicated 
that the Crown, not Cajon Leasing, assumed all the risks 
and rewards of ownership of the assets leased through 
Cajon Leasing. Is this still the case? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have very similar questions to the Minister of 
Sask Property Management relating to R & R Leasing. I have a 
number of questions also to the Minister of SaskTel relating to 
the same issue and I have a number of questions to the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming relating 
to the same issue. And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
have a notice of motion for return that I would like to table. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice on day no. 7 that I should ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: did management of the 
department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect fraud from 
April 1, 2005 to the present? 
 

I have the same question dating back all the way to 2003 asking 
the same question for the years from 2003-2004 until present. 
 
I’ll ask the government on day no. 7 the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how did management of the 
department monitor and establish programs to control or 
mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect fraud from 
April 1, 2005 to the present? 
 

And also questions back to 2002-2003. 
 
I shall also ask the government the following question on day 
no. 7: 
 

To the Minister of Health: does management of the 
department have any knowledge of any actual or suspected 
fraud or illegal activities within the department during the 
current calendar year, and if so what is the nature of this 
activity? 
 

As well I have questions dating back to 2002-2003 for the 
department to answer. 
 
On day no. 7 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what did management of the 
department find as a result of its monitoring of any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
to help prevent or detect fraud from April 1, 2005 to 
present? 
 

Again questions dating back to 2002-2003 consecutive. 
 
And my final set of questions to the Minister of Health to be 
answered on day no. 7: 
 

Is management of the department aware of any allegations 
of fraud or any illegal activities within the department or 
its agencies in the current calendar year, such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or others? And if so what is 
the nature of this activity? 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 7 ask the government the following 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: is management of the department aware of 
any allegations of fraud or other illegal activity within the 
department from April 1, 2005 to the present — for 
example, information received from employees, former 
employees, customers, clients, suppliers, or others? And if 
so what is the nature of this activity? 
 

I have a second question: 
 

To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: does the management of the department 
have any knowledge of any actual or suspected fraud or 
other illegal activity from April 1, 2005 to the present 
within the department, and if so what is the nature of this 
activity? 
 

Third question: 
 

Has management of the department established programs 
and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or 
detect fraud from April 1, 2005 to the present, and how 
has management monitored the above programs and/or 
controls? 
 
To the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment: from April 1, 2005 to the present, what has 
the department found as a result of the establishment of 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the department? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I also have questions similar for the year 
2004-2005, 2003-2004 to the Minister of Community 
Resources and Employment. 
 
I also have questions of a similar nature for the following 
departments, Crowns, agencies: Department of Learning, 
Justice; Culture, Youth and Recreation; Northern Affairs, 
Highways and Transportation, First Nations and Métis 
Relations, Government Relations, Rural Development, Crown 
Investments Corporation, Investment Saskatchewan, SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], SaskEnergy, 
SaskPower, SaskTel, STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company], Liquor and Gaming corporation, SaskWater, Sask 
Property Management, Gaming Corporation, Agriculture, Crop 
Insurance, Finance, Environment, Industry and Resources, 
Labour, Workers’ Compensation Board, ISC [Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], Public Service 
Commission, Executive Council, Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 4 move the first reading of a Bill respecting The Protection 
of Children Abusing Drugs Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is indeed a privilege today to be able to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of this House, Canada’s polka 
king, Mr. Walter Ostanek, who is up in your gallery. 
 
I’ve had the distinct honour to be able to play in the band with 
Mr. Ostanek and also to dance to the great music that he and his 
group play. I have to say right now, Mr. Ostanek is currently on 
tour with Saskatchewan’s own Western Senators and will be 
performing on Thursday night in Swift Current at the Civic 
Centre and then on Friday and Saturday nights at our own 
world-famous Danceland, Manitou Beach. 
 
The Bravo network is currently shooting a special on Mr. 
Ostanek and will be in attendance at Danceland this weekend 
gathering footage for the project. 
 
Uncle Walter, as he is known to the thousands of university 
students who attend the Kitchener Oktoberfest, has just 
completed his 28th appearance at the world-famous event. And 
later this month, he will be headlining the 42nd annual 
international polka weekend in Cleveland, Ohio, along with our 
own Western Senators. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Canada’s Grammy-winning polka 
king, Walter Ostanek. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce some guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce members of the RM [rural municipality] council for 
Canwood. I have eight RMs that I deal with in Saskatchewan 
Rivers constituency, and the Canwood RM is one of them. So I 
wonder if they could give a little wave as I introduce them. I’d 
like to introduce reeve, Terry Lofstrom; councillor, Morley 
Rudolph; councillor, Erik Jensen; councillor Ron Reeves; and 
administrator, Hugh Otterson. The RM council of Canwood is 
in town for the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention, and I ask members to welcome 
them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I’d also like to welcome the members 
from SARM here. We had the opportunity this morning to be 
over at SARM and talk about some very, very key issues like 
education portion of property tax. So I hope you enjoy the 
afternoon here in the Assembly, and maybe you’ll hear some 
good things. I don’t know. So welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly someone 
seated in the west gallery. His name is Trevor Holloway. He’s a 
very diligent university student here at the University of 
Regina, a great ambassador for Saskatchewan. He loves 
Saskatchewan, wouldn’t want to live anywhere else, and 
intends on staying here when he completes his studies. And 
these are the fine young people that we are advocating in this 
province. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Year of the Veteran 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 2005 is a very special 
year. It’s of course Saskatchewan’s centennial year, and 2005 
has been designated Year of the Veteran. Mr. Speaker, in 
addition this is Veterans’ Week. 
 
Every person in this room has a story. My grandfather lived 
with his Vimy Ridge physical injury for 72 years until his 
death. My father enlisted and served during the Second World 
War. My constituency assistant is also a veteran. We all have 
vignettes of veterans who are very close to our hearts. 
 
So it’s fitting that we start this first legislative session of 
Saskatchewan’s second century paying tribute to Saskatchewan 
men and women, our veterans, who contributed and sacrificed 
so much so we could give peace a chance. This year 
Saskatchewan introduced special licence plates available to 
veterans. It is one small way we can show our appreciation. As 
well, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that Saskatchewan will name 
Highway No. 2, from Moose Jaw to Prince Albert, Veterans’ 
Memorial Highway as one more way to honour Saskatchewan’s 
veterans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all Saskatchewan residents to take 
time this week to reflect on the huge legacy Saskatchewan’s 
veterans have given us. For all they risked and all they gave to 
provide the life, freedom, and prosperity we enjoy today, 
veterans have our thanks and will always be remembered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 
Awareness Week 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
SARC Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres is a community-based 
association comprised of 73 member agencies who work to 
support persons with disabilities in our communities. In 
addition to the operation of group homes, SARC’s recycling 

division operates over 70 depots in over 60 communities 
providing important employment opportunities for people with 
disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a difficult year for the member 
agencies of SARC and the 2,000 people they employee. 
Because of this NDP government’s failure to provide sufficient 
funding in the last budget to implement the SARC’s human 
resources plan, SARC agencies continue to experience 
difficulty recruiting and retaining staff. 
 
Continuity of care is vital for persons with disabilities. This 
government’s failure over the past year to provide SARC with 
proper funding has meant uncertainty for worried parents, staff 
and residents. Community-based organizations provide 
important health and social services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The Premier should not have to be inundated 
with hundreds of letters from concerned parents before he 
finally agrees to do the right thing and provide SARC 
organizations with funding. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

National Aboriginal Veterans Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Generations 
of Canadians have served our country and our world during 
times of both war and peace. Through their courage and 
sacrifice, these men and women have ensured that we live in 
freedom and in peace. This is why, Mr. Speaker, I am so proud 
to stand today and recognize our many Aboriginal veterans on 
Aboriginal Veterans Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 7,000 First Nations soldiers served this 
country in the First, Second, and Korean Wars. And countless 
more have served in various roles since. The number of Métis, 
Inuit, and non-status and Indians that have served during these 
wars is still unknown to this day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s soldiers overcame cultural challenges 
and made impressive sacrifices and contributions to help this 
nation in its effort to restore world peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the son of a veteran and that veteran being Leo 
Belanger, this past summer I was very proud to attend the 
unveiling of a monument honouring Beauval and area Métis 
veterans. This monument is another example of Saskatchewan’s 
Aboriginal communities honouring our war heroes and their 
experiences. 
 
And yesterday this government announced that we’d be 
renaming Highway 2 between Prince Albert and Moose Jaw, 
Veterans’ Memorial Highway to honour the memory of all our 
veterans and their contribution and that includes Aboriginal 
veterans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in honouring 
this province’s Aboriginal veterans on Aboriginal Veterans 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

Day. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday I had the 
pleasure of attending the Nation Builders and Community 
Recognition Awards sponsored by the Saskatchewan Provincial 
Council of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. As Dr. Tony 
Harras, Chair of recognitions committee said, in the past decade 
the Ukrainian Canadian community of Saskatchewan is 
represented by the Saskatchewan’s Provincial Council of the 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress has formally paid tribute to the 
contribution of more than 100 of its outstanding members. By 
all measure this has been a gratifying, worthwhile process. 
 
Aside from recognizing these individuals who dedicated a 
major portion of their time and talents for the betterment of our 
community, the Nation Builders Award Project has served to 
educate and motivate our youth in particular, on the need and 
the rewards of community service. 
 
This year will mark the 11th year that our community will 
gather and pay respect to our outstanding members. Only this 
time we’re adding a new category, that being of community 
recognition. In many cases those being so honoured in the new 
category might be the Nation Builders we recognize in the 
foreseeable future. 
 
The winners of the Nation Builders Awards were the late Mike 
Boychuk of Saskatoon, Stefan Franko of Theodore, Ehor Gauk 
from Wakaw, Jennie Ortynsky from Sheho, and Anastasia Zuck 
from Saskatoon. 
 
The Community Recognition Award for leadership and cultural 
preservation and development was won by Patrice Detz from 
Canora. The cultural preservation and development was 
awarded to Shawna Lee Kozun, also from Canora-Carrot River 
area. Youth achievement went to Stacey Nahachewsky from 
Saskatoon, and youth achievement also went to the one and 
only Theresa Sokyrka from Moose Jaw. And volunteerism went 
to Yaroslaw Sywanyk from southern Saskatchewan. Please join 
me in congratulating these very worthwhile recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan War Memorial 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Nearly 10,000 names, 10,000 people — 
lost. How different would our world be if none of them had 
died? What human talents were lost with their passing? What 
would the shape of our world be if none of them had 
volunteered to put on uniforms and defend our society, our 
future? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a quiet corner of our legislative grounds is the 
Saskatchewan War Memorial where all of those names are cast 

in bronze. The serenity of the space and the silence of the snow 
that today settles on the bronze and stone pillars belie the 
manner of passing of our war dead. Bronze and stone — a 
permanent record and a permanent reminder of those who have 
fallen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with its second dedication just one month ago, 
ours is the only memorial in Canada that lists all of the 
province’s war dead in one location. It is therefore important to 
recognize the efforts of the Saskatchewan War Memorial 
committee to ensure that those who have fallen are not 
forgotten. The memorial is a permanent place where we can 
bring our children, where we can tell them about those whose 
names appear so that they too will always remember. 
 
Mr. Speaker, collective memory is more permanent, more 
long-lasting than even the bronze and stone. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

National Diabetes Awareness Month 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November is 
National Diabetes Awareness Month. Over 2 million Canadians 
have some form of diabetes, and what is more astonishing is 
that over 50,000 of those people live right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Diabetes is non-discriminatory upon age. Children, adults, and 
seniors all suffer from this debilitating disease. It can cause 
serious health complications if not diagnosed and treated 
promptly. 
 
Managing diabetes can be costly, but not managing it can be far 
more costly — both monetary and in human lives. While many 
costs are covered by the provincial health plan, some new drugs 
and supplies are not. Cost should not be a barrier to achieving 
proper and timely health care. People with some types of 
disease have more difficulty managing the disease than others. 
They have special needs. Our goal as a government should be to 
keep people healthy and productive. Prevention of 
complications should always be a goal since complications 
create a greater cost and strain on the health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask this government to evaluate and assess the 
needs of diabetics in this province and act promptly on new 
developments that can help ease their disease. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Geo-Memorial Project 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, in 1947 Saskatchewan began 
naming northern landmarks after Saskatchewan men and 
women who gave their lives in the service of their country 
during the course of the Second World War. 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

Saskatchewan’s geo-memorial project was one way for 
Saskatchewan people to show our gratitude and to pay tribute to 
the servicemen and women of Saskatchewan who lost their 
lives while on overseas duty. During the Second World War 
over 90,000 men and women from Saskatchewan enlisted in the 
Canadian Armed Forces. Of those, Mr. Speaker, almost 4,000 
made the supreme sacrifice. 
 
It took almost 60 years, but last November, with the addition of 
the names of six Saskatchewan service personnel who fell 
during World War II, the project was completed. At the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan felt it was important to 
recognize Saskatchewan-born citizens who died while serving 
in the Canadian merchant navy, the Korean War, and Victoria 
Cross recipients from World War I. 
 
In all 3,913 lakes, peninsulas, bays, rivers, and islands in 
northern Saskatchewan bear the names of our fallen, paying 
tribute to Saskatchewan’s valiant men and women who made 
the ultimate sacrifice in our defence and in support of liberty 
around the world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Federal-Provincial Energy Accord Negotiations 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just over an hour ago the Premier 
gathered the media together in this building and announced that 
when it comes to an energy accord for Saskatchewan, a better 
equalization deal, the federal government is simply not going to 
be coming through. There will be no such deal for the province 
of Saskatchewan. This underscores two simple truths: one, that 
the federal Liberal Government of Canada has failed the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan; and two, that the Premier of 
this province has failed the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Why is that, Mr. Speaker? That’s the question. 
Why is that? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the issue that I’ve raised 
with the people of Saskatchewan today is to report on precisely 
the status of our endeavours to build for the people of 
Saskatchewan an energy accord that would be fair and equitable 
with the energy accord that was established with Nova Scotia 
and Newfoundland. 
 
As a result of that accord, Mr. Speaker, we are told today by the 
federal Minister of Finance that in the upcoming year 
Newfoundland will be entitled to 687 million federal dollars. 
Nova Scotia will be entitled to $1.379 billion. And 
Saskatchewan will be entitled to zero. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Because the national Government of Canada has not yet 
seriously negotiated with this province an energy accord. 

Mr. Speaker, we have appeared with Saskatchewan’s case in the 
nation’s capital. We have appeared in the nation’s media. We 
have a joint, unanimous decision, resolution of this House to 
put forward the Saskatchewan case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the Throne Speech you heard Her 
Honour say we will continue to persist in achieving a 
Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier and this government 
have left it to officials to negotiate this. Mr. Speaker, on 
countless occasions this side of the House, and I believe the 
people of the province, have asked this Premier to wrap things 
up a little bit, to make a stronger case for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And he has failed to do it. 
 
Today we find out, Mr. Speaker, today we find out that the 
Premier has some information from the federal Finance 
department showing that Saskatchewan resource revenues will 
continue to be clawed back at a rate more than a dollar for a 
dollar, something that the Prime Minister of Canada said would 
stop. He gave his word on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whatever the Premier of Saskatchewan has been 
doing, it has failed the people of this province. My question to 
him is, what is he prepared to do right now? If he wants, Mr. 
Speaker, we will support him. If he wants to stand in his place 
today and say he will travel to Ottawa this very day, I’ll attend 
with him if that would help. Let us make the case for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Why won’t he do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As a result of the efforts of this 
government, we were able to achieve a payment of over $400 
million to address old inequities in equalization. As a result of 
the efforts of this government, we have achieved a package of 
dollars for the people of Saskatchewan worth $300 million. We 
have every assurance those dollars will be provided for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we, we stood with other Canadians willing to 
work through the federal equalization panel to make appropriate 
changes. We have trusted the word of federal leaders that we 
would diligently provide a Saskatchewan energy accord. 
 
Today what do we find out, Mr. Speaker? Today what do we 
find out? The federal equalization panel has been bumped off 
six months — conveniently, I say — till after a federal election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what do we find out today? That provinces in 
Canada are receiving a fair and equitable treatment for their 
energy resources that are not, that are not provided to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Our diligence in pursuing this will not stop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wrote a letter to the Premier on 
February 4, 2005. And in it I say Premiers Hamm and Williams 
were able to achieve success because of their relentless and 
direct involvement in the negotiations. I said at that point no 
less than your complete commitment, referring to the Premier, 
will assure our success on this file. I add if I can assist in any 
way — if the Saskatchewan Party can — up to and including 
joining you in missions to Ottawa, we would happily oblige. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very serious. The federal Liberal 
government is completely ignoring the compelling case that we 
would make, is ignoring fairness to our province and our 
taxpayers. The question to the Premier is simple. Why won’t he 
get on a plane today or in the next few days? We’ll join him if 
need be to make a strong case for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Why won’t he do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I received the letter from the Leader of 
the Opposition back in February. I haven’t heard much from 
him since that time. But I’m pleased to receive that letter. I’m 
pleased to receive the support. And this is a unanimous motion 
we’ve passed in this House in debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the case that needs to be made today needs to be 
made before the Saskatchewan people. The people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to know what is exactly happening with 
their national government in terms of a Saskatchewan energy 
accord. And I intend to make the people of Saskatchewan more 
than well aware of what’s been happening and what has not 
been happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this question to the Premier. Has he 
made contact with his federal leader, Mr. Layton, who appears 
to have — or believes he still has — some leverage with this 
federal Liberal government? Has he contacted him to insist that 
the federal NDP [New Democratic Party] support 
Saskatchewan’s case with respect to the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on file from that recent 
federal election, I have the commitment of Mr. Jack Layton and 
the federal New Democratic Party to support the Saskatchewan 
position. That is very clear. I wonder if the Leader of the 
Opposition has phoned his Conservative federal leader to 
ensure that that support continues to exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when we get to a federal election in 
this country, whether it’s sooner or whether it’s later, the issue 

of a Saskatchewan energy accord, the issue of a fair deal for 
Saskatchewan people, a fair deal for the energy resources of 
Saskatchewan, I can assure you will be a part of that federal 
campaign in this province and across the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, over the last couple of days all the 
national debate about federal politics has been the leverage and 
the potential influence that Jack Layton has — his federal leader 
has — with the federal government. You would think in the 
light of these developments, which I understand the Premier 
became aware of yesterday, he would have immediately called 
his leader. 
 
I understand the Prime Minister isn’t speaking to him, but 
would he have not called his leader, Mr. Layton, to insist that 
this be a priority in whatever discussions he’s having with the 
federal government? And if he hasn’t taken that simple step, 
would he explain to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan why they 
should have any faith in his ability at all to fight for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I endeavoured last evening 
to speak to the Prime Minister of Canada. He did not return a 
call. He asked his Minister of Finance federal to return the call. 
And I made it very clear to the Minister of Finance that we 
would be raising these issues today, that we would be reporting 
to the people of Saskatchewan the lack, the lack of progress 
being made in Ottawa towards building a Saskatchewan energy 
accord. Does that change our goal, Mr. Speaker? It does not. 
 
And we will use those tools available to us. We will use the 
power of Saskatchewan public opinion to move this file 
forward, Mr. Speaker. That will be our efforts in the next 
several days and weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the time has passed for tersely 
worded letters, phone calls where he expresses his frustration, 
and emails marked urgent. The time has come for some action. 
 
When is the Premier going down to Ottawa? We’ll support him 
if he will. Will he make that announcement today? When will 
he go make the case on behalf of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have been 
to Ottawa, and when and if the time is right, we will be in the 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

nation’s capital. Mr. Speaker, today, today I am informing the 
people of Saskatchewan of the lack of progress being afforded 
to the people of Saskatchewan occasioned by the federal Liberal 
government who seem, Mr. Speaker, if I may say so, more 
interested in provincial issues when they are down in the polls 
than when they are up in the polls. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this will be a matter of public debate in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, we will persist as we have said in the 
Throne Speech to achieve for the people of Saskatchewan a fair 
and equitable arrangement with the national government 
regarding the energy resources of Saskatchewan similar to that 
that’s been afforded to the people of Nova Scotia and 
Newfoundland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Employment Figures 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this debate we’re having today, 
these questions are very much about a lack of leadership from 
that Premier and that NDP Party opposite. 
 
And on that count — new question, Mr. Speaker — on that 
count, how on earth does the Premier’s party, the NDP in 
government, manage to lose jobs in an oil boom in the province 
of Saskatchewan? Last Friday we learned that the Canadian 
economy was creating jobs at a record pace. We heard that 
Manitoba had created 1,000 new jobs in the past year; Alberta, 
31,000; British Columbia, 74,000. But here in NDP 
Saskatchewan, the government has presided over a loss of 6,200 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the Premier is simple: how is that possible? 
How is his government managing to lose jobs in the middle of 
an oil boom in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the 
Opposition did not indicate in his question is that year over year 
there are on average in 2005 about 5,200 people more working 
in Saskatchewan than there were in 2004, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government is not concerned about just 
one month this year over one month last year. We’re concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, about the long term. We have set out an action 
plan to build the economy. And in the Throne Speech 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, this government set out a long-term 
vision for Saskatchewan — a vision in forestry, a vision in 
manufacturing, a vision in renewable energy, Mr. Speaker. And 
it is that kind of long-term planning and long-term vision, Mr. 
Speaker, that will continue to increase the number of jobs in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the plan that the minister is 
referring to was widely . . . well it was ridiculed when the 
government announced it, if you remember. Pundits said it was 
disappointing. They said it was a political cop-out; it didn’t 
recognize the fundamentals of a growing economy which is so 
important to all of us in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that minister there, when presented with 6,200 jobs lost in 
the middle of, you know, an NDP boom, Mr. Speaker, he said 
that these were potentially just an aberration, and he found it all 
quite puzzling, Mr. Speaker. That was his answer to the 
question, why are we losing 6,200 jobs in the middle of an oil 
boom. And the minister responsible said he was puzzled; he 
was confused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is to the Premier: does he have 
anyone over there that can handle this file in terms of the 
economy who is not confused by the economy, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say this. The 
Leader of the Opposition may say that some were critical of our 
plan, but I say at least we have a plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And what did we see from the Leader of 
the Opposition last year, Mr. Speaker? His plan was that if he 
became Premier of this province he would appoint a committee 
and ask them what to do. That was his so-called plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not appointing a committee. We’re 
taking action, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been taking action in mining 
where investment, Mr. Speaker, has been doubling each year 
for the last three years. We’re taking action, Mr. Speaker, in oil 
and gas. 
 
And I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
that in the last two years combined, the Saskatchewan economy 
grew more than any other economy in Canada. And this year, 
Mr. Speaker, investment growth is expected to grow by 12.6 per 
cent. So not only do we have a plan, Mr. Speaker, but our plan 
is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well tragically, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP’s 
growth plan we’ve lost 6,200 jobs year over year. And more 
importantly we’ve lost population in the middle of growth as 
the minister refers to it. 
 
I have a question for that minister. The new Minister of 
Highways when he was the Economic Development minister 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

said, don’t worry when people leave the province because when 
they leave, there is, quote, “more left for the rest of us.” Mr. 
Speaker, I wonder if the minister agrees with that. 
 
And I guess I have one more question. Would he agree that the 
only case where that is true, that when people leave or when 
they go that there’s more left for the rest of us, is after the next 
election when that party is gone, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, that sounds 
a lot like what he said before the last election. But the people 
are not that easily fooled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one thing that the Leader of the Opposition did not 
mention is that the rate of out-migration, Mr. Speaker, of young 
people and other people has gone down considerably, Mr. 
Speaker. And I will say this. It is far less than in the late ’80s 
and early ’90s when that member, Mr. Speaker, was working 
for the Devine Conservative government, when 12 to 15,000 
people per year were leaving this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will say this, Mr. Speaker, that we are not satisfied if we 
have an out-migration of about 500 per year as we may have 
last year or this year. We’re not satisfied with this record, Mr. 
Speaker. But I’ll say this. It is far better than the record of those 
members over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
[14:15] 
 

New Cabinet Ministers 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Premier may have killed off 6,200 jobs for people in 
Saskatchewan, but he did create two jobs — two NDP cabinet 
jobs — one for the member from Sutherland and the other for 
the minister who gave us SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] who lost, Mr. Speaker, who lost 
34 million taxpayer dollars, who covered up the truth for six 
long years. This Premier kills off 6,200 jobs in this province, 
but somehow he finds a cabinet post for the one person in this 
province who should never have been given back that job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are the Premier’s priorities so screwed up? 
Six thousand two hundred fewer jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan, but a cabinet post for that dishonest and 
incompetent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. Order please. Order please. Order please. The 
member from Martensville has breached one of the rules of this 
Assembly. I would ask him to rise, withdraw the remark, and 
apologize to the House for reflecting on the other member. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw that 
comment and apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I do not, Mr. Speaker, intend to go 
where that party will go in this House. 
 
Let me just say this about priority and vision. You heard 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, you heard yesterday the priority and 
vision of this government. In that vision, Mr. Speaker, is a 
vision for the great North of Saskatchewan — opening that 
great North and its resources, opening opportunities for the 
people of Saskatchewan’s North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you heard in the Throne Speech yesterday our 
commitment to a major, a major northern road-building strategy 
which will include a road to the Far North. And I have chosen a 
very able member of this caucus, a very respected citizen of the 
province of Saskatchewan to lead that initiative in opening the 
North and to building the highways and transportation needs of 
Saskatchewan province-wide. I am proud of that member, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 
only last month when that Premier brought that minister back 
into cabinet, and what did he say? The Premier actually 
compared him to Gandhi. Mr. Speaker, Gandhi actually led his 
people. This cabinet minister misled the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s something else the Premier said in the 
same speech back in 1987. He said: 
 

People . . . will forgive mistakes; [they] will [even] forgive 
incompetence; but they will not forgive betrayal. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier is not only forgiving mistakes, 
incompetence, and betrayal, he is rewarding, Mr. Speaker, 
mistakes, incompetence, and betrayal. It must make you wonder 
how incompetent the rest of those NDP MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] must be, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, why 
is the Premier betraying his own words by rewarding, 
rewarding the SPUDCO’s minister’s mistakes, his 
incompetence, and his betrayal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to lower 
myself nor the standards of our government to the levels, to the 
levels of that Saskatchewan Party in this House. Mr. Speaker, I 
am not responding to that kind of personal attack on a member 
or members in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

Saltcoats. 
 

Education Property Tax 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
producers in this province grew a very good crop in most areas 
this year, but rains have cut into the quality, and at the same 
time we have tremendously high input costs and low 
commodity prices. And in the midst of this disaster, Mr. 
Speaker, farmers are asked to pay the highest education tax on 
farmland in Canada, Mr. Speaker, in Canada. Mr. Speaker, I 
was at the SARM convention this morning, and I’d like to read 
you this quote that came up there and the quote goes on to say: 
 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 
as we get new . . . [resources] of revenue to take the place 
of the revenue now realized from that tax. When we 
develop new sources of revenue sufficient to supplant the 
revenue now raised from the tax, we shall do away with 
the tax because we consider it regressive legislation. 
 

Said the premier of the day, Tommy Douglas, August 31, 1944. 
 
Being that this government and that Premier tries to dig up 
Tommy every election to get re-elected, will they now listen to 
what Tommy had to say in the past? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think what the member opposite has forgotten is that over the 
last year and a half this government in conjunction with and 
co-operation with the representatives of SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association], SARM, the school boards 
and others have been working on a long-term plan to in fact 
address the education property tax relief question. We have put 
a two-year program in place that identifies $110 million worth 
of short-term relief over the two years, and we are in the 
process, Mr. Speaker, of working on that long-term plan. And if 
all goes well in the consultations, that long-term plan should be 
in place for the 2007 tax year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Agricultural Policies 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, seeing as we’re into quotes today, I’d like to read you 
another one. And this quote goes on to say: 
 

The word in Saskatchewan is that the . . . current emperor 
has no clothes. He’s exposed for the lack of long-term 
significant agricultural policy. We’ve had too much of 
agricultural politics and [not enough] . . . substantive 
agricultural policy. And, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech 
does nothing, in my view, to change that. 

 
Well who said that, Mr. Speaker. Well that was the current 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, March 27, 1990. At that time he was 
saying there was no ag policy in Saskatchewan. Remembering 

back, we had the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 
program at that time. The GRIP program wasn’t perfect, but if 
you poll every farmer in Saskatchewan, it was 10 times as good 
as any thing that . . . Will the Premier finally address that there 
is a problem in rural Saskatchewan and help farmers out today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think the one thing evident from that quote and evident from 
the very clear lack of any ideas coming from the other side 
about agriculture policy is that things haven’t changed since 
1990. They still don’t have an idea about what could be done to 
help deal with some of these very, very difficult problems that 
people are facing in Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been working very hard to develop policy 
that will work all across this nation. We have unanimity 
amongst the provincial ministers about how to apply some of 
these policies, Mr. Speaker, we are working hard to get policy 
that will provide the kind of support our producers need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing changes in agriculture in 
Saskatchewan, and those changes will lead to prosperity as we 
move forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that Ag minister is 
becoming a joke. If it wasn’t such a serious problem, farmers in 
this province would be laughing at him. But instead of that, 
they’re trying to find ways of bailing themselves out because 
they’re getting no help from this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — There’s a federal election coming, Mr. 
Speaker, and as like equalization, wouldn’t it be a good time to 
go to Ottawa and explain the plight of our Saskatchewan 
farmers? And a month ago we asked them to do that. And the 
Ag minister says, no he can’t go. Why should we go? CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] is working. Crop 
insurance is working. The Deputy Premier’s on record for 
saying the same thing: CAIS is working; crop insurance is 
working. Well again, poll the farmers of Saskatchewan. And, 
hello, it’s not working out there, and we’re losing farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, farmers need help more this 
fall than maybe ever in history. Listen to Tommy Douglas. For 
once, really listen. Help our farmers out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster of 
Agriculture and Food. 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There’s no doubt that many, many 
farmers in Saskatchewan are having a very difficult time. I 
travelled the province extensively this summer and met with 
many farmers. And, Mr. Speaker, no they’re not laughing at me. 
They’re working with me to try and make better policy for this 
province. We have a number of groups with producers that are 
working . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Minister of 
Ag and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think always when there is a lack of ideas, it devolves to 
personal attack. And I hear that from the members opposite — 
personal attack, no ideas, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
meantime we are working with farmers and agricultural groups 
to develop policy that will work for this province. We invested 
over $650 million last year to provide support — the largest in 
the history of this province. To provide support for farmers in 
this province we are changing directions, and, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re there with them to help make those changes. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for Public 
Service Commission. 
 

Saskatchewan Energy Share Plan Unveiled 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Crown Corporations. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to announce that we’ve unveiled the second part of 
the Saskatchewan Energy Share plan. Saskatchewan Energy 
Share is a two-part plan to reduce heating costs and share the 
benefits of increased revenues from natural gas. 
 
We announced the first part of the plan last week. Our 
announcement last week caps the Saskatchewan energy rate 
increase at an average bill impact of 10 per cent for residential 
and farm customers, and 11 per cent for business customers 
over the next five months. We’re providing additional 
assistance for low-income people because they need it most. 
 
We’re also providing $200 rebates for homes and businesses on 
the Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster and for fuel, oil, and 
propane users. This short-term transitional assistance is meant 
to give Saskatchewan citizens some time to adjust to the reality 
of higher energy costs. 
 
Our long-term plan to deal with that reality includes six energy 
conservation programs which we announced this morning. The 
first program will help people save on the cost of buying 
energy-efficient furnaces and boilers by removing the 
provincial sales tax. This PST [provincial sales tax] exemption 
will apply to Energy Star qualified models regardless of their 
intended use. That means businesses are eligible as well. 
 
The second program will provide a rebate of $45 on the 
Saskatchewan Energy bill for residential and business 
customers who buy an Energy Star qualified programmable 
thermostat. 
 

The third program is an expansion of SaskEnergy’s successful 
Share the Warmth home energy efficiency project, and it will 
help 500 low-income families a year over the next five years. 
Volunteers will assist low-income families to install 
improvements such as weather stripping for doors, caulking for 
windows, and compact fluorescent light bulbs. 
 
The fourth program will see Saskatchewan match the federal 
grant to a maximum of $2,000 per home for changes made after 
an EnerGuide for Houses follow-up audit. 
 
The final two programs are meant specifically for people with 
low or moderate incomes whose homes are generally older and 
less energy-efficient. Saskatchewan will cost share and enhance 
the federal EnerGuide for low-income households and will also 
introduce the Saskatchewan EnerGuide for moderate-income 
homeowners. These two programs will help up to 17,000 
households make energy-efficient improvements to their homes. 
 
Altogether, Mr. Speaker, we’re spending $37.3 million on these 
conservation programs which will help people save money on 
their energy costs. Combined with $130.54 million for the 
short-term assistance program, the total cost of the 
Saskatchewan Energy Share plan will be about $167.84 million. 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is an affordable, fiscally 
responsible expenditure on behalf of the people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by thanking 
the minister for the statement provided to me earlier today and 
for her officials with the work in that preparation. I know that 
the officials’ time is very valuable as the plan coming forth will 
require not a small amount of bureaucratic deciphering. The 
statement that these rebates will be provided for by two Crowns 
and two departments is evidence enough that there will be a 
requirement for the fine services of many members of the 
public service. And this begs the question of how much money 
will be left over for individuals in the important task of 
conserving energy. 
 
The ability to have six individual applications programs for 
citizens wishing to conserve energy, I am sure will be received 
warmly by our citizens at a time when they’re having to turn 
down the heat. Thoughtful preparation of this plan is 
completely evident, for the most vulnerable, such as seniors, 
certainly will have no problem deciphering which of the six 
applications will apply to them and which of the two 
departments or two Crowns they will need to contact to obtain 
whether they use application 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or the combinations 
therein. 
 
[14:30] 
 
With the release of this plan, I’m sure that citizens of 
Saskatchewan will have the same confidence in knowing that 
they can return their applications 1 through 6 at any of the two 
Crowns or two departments. Hopefully the applications will be 
accepted at all locations and that applications 1 through 3 from 
SaskEnergy and Sask Housing will not be rejected by 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

Community Resources and Employment, nor applications 4 
through 6 accepted at Finance but rejected at SaskEnergy. 
 
I’d like to end by thanking the minister for her final statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. There’s quite a bit of heckling 
coming. I would like members to allow the . . . Order please. 
Member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s disappointing 
that that had to raise the level here as it’s obvious the serious 
nature of these comments may not be being heard. 
 
I’d just like to finish, Mr. Speaker, by saying I’d like to thank 
the minister and I do believe her when she stated, and I quote, 
“We believe . . . this is an affordable, fiscally responsible 
expenditure on behalf of the . . . [citizens of Saskatchewan].” 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that not only the minister but the entire 
NDP caucus believe that statement to be true. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, 
pursuant to rule 30(1), it is your duty at this time to elect a 
member to serve as Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of 
the Whole. The procedures to be used in this election are the 
same as those used to elect the Speaker. I now ask the Clerk to 
initiate proceedings. 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly, it is my duty to inform you that only one candidate 
has declared her intention to stand for election as Deputy 
Speaker, the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Pursuant to rule 30(4) and rule 
29(3), it is my pleasure to announce that the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains is declared elected as your Deputy Speaker and 
Chair of Committee of the Whole. And I personally wish to 
congratulate the member for Regina Wascana Plains and to 
welcome her to her newest challenge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains, the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly I’d like to say 
thank you for the confidence that you’ve placed in me as the 
newly declared Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
In all my years of elected office I’ve been a strong and firm 
supporter of the parliamentary system of democracy. It will be 
my hope and desire that in support of you, Mr. Speaker, and in 
assisting with the school program and in my time as Chair that, 
together with all members, we would uplift respectful debate — 

for, Mr. Speaker, it is the most important process by which the 
House arrives at any decision that it makes. From the beginning 
I will ask for patience as I become accustomed to this new 
responsibility. This is an important, historic occasion, Mr. 
Speaker. The Assembly should take collective pride in 
declaring the first woman to this position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I now approach this role with 
great honour and pride. Thank you all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The House will now proceed with orders of 
the day. Why is the member on his feet, the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to move a 
motion under rule 49, and I would read the motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes that the plight of 
Saskatchewan farm families is severe, with cash flow 
problems compounded by low commodity prices and high 
input costs including a disproportionate taxation on farm 
land and that this crisis is causing many producers to walk 
away from their farming operations, some leaving the 
province, and that this distress and hardship is not only in 
rural Saskatchewan but in other parts of the province that 
rely on agriculture-based businesses. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
The member from Melville-Saltcoats is requesting unanimous 
consent to debate a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under rule 49. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I would ask the 
Clerk to repeat the special order. Order please. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Consideration of the Speech from the Throne 
delivered by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor at the 
opening of the session. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin my 
remarks I would like to thank you for the guidance you provide 
to the members of this House. You fulfill your role as Speaker 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

of this Assembly both with good humour and good judgment. 
And I want to lend my congratulations to the member from 
Regina Wascana Plains on her election to the position of 
Deputy Speaker. She is the first woman to be a presiding officer 
of this Assembly. 
 
I am pleased and honoured to have this opportunity to move 
Saskatchewan’s 2005 Speech from the Throne and of course I’ll 
be moving the motion in an official form at the end of my 
remarks. 
 
I want to thank my caucus colleagues for their support and 
friendship. We have the good fortune to be part of a team that is 
carrying on the Saskatchewan tradition of fiscally responsible 
and socially progressive government. And I know that I speak 
for each and every one of my caucus colleagues when I say how 
proud we are to be part of that history and part of that tradition 
and to have the achievements of Premiers Douglas, Lloyd, 
Blakeney, and Romanow — not just for inspiration, but to build 
upon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier for providing me with 
this opportunity to play what I consider to be a special role in 
what is very clearly a special time in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
I would like to take a moment to thank the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview who have elected me to represent them for the last 
seven-plus years. I thank them for their continued confidence in 
me. 
 
I also want to thank my constituency executive, led by Stacey 
Dyck-Jiricka, who keep me energized and focused. Thank you 
to April Anderson who runs my constituency office and serves 
the people of Saskatoon Eastview right alongside of me. 
 
The last of my personal thank yous goes to my family: my 
husband, Don, my son, Sean, my daughter, Heather, and my 
son-in-law, Jodi, for always being there for me, for being 
fiercely loyal, and for supporting me in this job that asks for a 
lot of sacrifices from our families. To my mother and father, my 
sisters and their families — my biggest fans — I couldn’t do 
this without all of you, and thank you. 
 
There are many good times in the life of an MLA that make all 
the sacrifices worthwhile, from a little old lady leaning in to me 
to say, you’re a cute doll, and I love your outfit, to a darling 
92-year-old man kissing my hand, to a young man saying, 
thanks to my help he can now go on to post-secondary school. 
All these and many more funny, heartwarming, and even sad 
stories make this job so rewarding and keeps all of us coming 
back for more. 
 
These are not easy times to be a politician. The media has a 
tendency to portray us all as liars, cheats, and swindlers. 
Current events in Ottawa and Washington aren’t helping much. 
Small wonder that the public puts politicians lowest on their 
approval list. So it is sometimes hard to be proud of what you 
do as a politician. But I am, and we all should be, because the 
reality is no matter what our political leanings or underlying 
political philosophies, most of us are just ordinary people who 
have been elected by our neighbours and friends and fellow 
citizens to represent them and their interests in this Assembly. 
 

I believe in the role of government as an institution whose 
fundamental and primary purpose is to do everything in its 
power to make life better for all of its citizens. And with that 
thought in mind, I do feel both proud and privileged to be a 
member of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have been celebrating our 
centennial in spectacular fashion — over 3,800 events. And 
each one of these events speaks directly to the pride of 
Saskatchewan people and the special place we hold in our 
hearts for this great province, as well we should. In 100 years 
we have come a long way. As Saskatchewan people, we have a 
lot to be proud of and a lot to celebrate in so many different 
areas. 
 
Here’s a partial list of Saskatchewan firsts, in no particular 
order. First bill of rights in Canada, first small claims court in 
North America, first provincial archives, first free cancer care, 
first two weeks paid holiday, first arts board in North America, 
first government auto insurance in the world, first free 
province-wide hospital insurance, first minimum wage, first 
40-hour week. 
 
And of course the reason why Saskatchewan has had the benefit 
of these and so many other examples of progressive social 
programs and enlightened labour and human rights legislation is 
that in 1944 Saskatchewan also elected North America’s first 
social democratic government, the Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation under the leadership of Thomas 
Clement Douglas. I just want to say again how proud I am to be 
part of that tradition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you. But as strongly as I and my 
colleagues on this side of the House embrace the CCF-NDP 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 
Party] tradition, the Conservative Saskatchewan Party opposite 
despises it even more. How else can we explain the fact that 
while Tommy Douglas was recently voted the greatest 
Canadian, opposition members continue to refer to both the 
man and his accomplishments on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan and Canada in the most disparaging and 
disrespectful ways imaginable? That’s somewhat disturbing 
because the CCF-NDP tradition and the legacy of Tommy 
Douglas are a direct outgrowth of the history and political 
culture of the province. 
 
The election of the CCF in 1944 was not a radical break from a 
sort of idealized entrepreneurial past as the members opposite 
seem to think. It was simply an extension of already existing 
trends and movements in the province, ones that work to the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. So on that level it is 
disturbing to have the party opposite talk with such disrespect 
and derision about the province’s last 60 years. It indicates a 
fundamental lack of understanding of Saskatchewan’s past — 
of who we are, how we got here, and most importantly, how to 
go about building on all we’ve already accomplished. 
 
Those achievements are based on ideas rooted in Saskatchewan 
values of community and co-operative ownership. Just because 
they aren’t based on some right-wing ideology does not mean 
they have no value and worth for the people of Saskatchewan; 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

in fact, precisely the opposite is true. And what’s really 
unsettling is that we know that, given the opportunity, tearing 
down all that Saskatchewan people have accomplished in the 
last 60 years is exactly what the Conservative Party opposite 
was prepared to do. 
 
Let’s just look for a moment at where we were some 60 years 
ago. This will mystify the members opposite but somehow even 
though Saskatchewan did have the benefit of unbridled free 
enterprise for our entire history up to that point, the province 
wasn’t doing well at all. Sixty years ago Saskatchewan was a 
broken and beaten down province. The effects of 10 years of 
drought and depression still lingered. The province itself was 
mired in debt and many citizens lived in abject poverty. There 
were less than 100 miles of paved roads and only about 300 
rural households had electrical power. 
 
[14:45] 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, when the CCF came to power in 1944 the 
province really was in dire straits. Not the fake disaster the 
party opposite is trying to convince everyone we’re in now, but 
a real one — a larger scale disaster than the one following eight 
years of the right-wing agenda of Grant Devine’s government 
of the ’80s when we almost declared bankruptcy as a province. 
 
The Conservative Party opposite thinks Saskatchewan people 
should have left it to the forces of the free market to address 
those awful circumstances. Had they, Saskatchewan would be 
still trying to recover now. 
 
During the course of their first 20 years in power, the 
CCF-NDP cleared up the provincial debt, restored 
Saskatchewan people’s faith in themselves and in their 
province. They embarked on a trail-blazing path of enlightened 
legislation that transformed the social and political landscape 
not only of Saskatchewan but of the entire country. 
 
Implementing medicare cost the CCF, now the New Democratic 
Party, the 1964 election as they suspected it might. But these 
visionary Saskatchewan men and women were willing to make 
that short-term sacrifice of their own political fortunes in 
exchange for the long-term benefit for all. 
 
By then the province had been transformed from 
poverty-stricken desolation to a province with renewed hope, 
ever increasing prosperity, and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
a province in control of its own destiny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the differences between those of us sitting 
on this side of the House and the Conservative members 
opposite are deep and fundamental. For example, while the 
Conservative Party opposite thinks that governing is like 
running a business where decisions are necessarily based on the 
bottom line, this NDP government and the Saskatchewan 
people know that governing is much more complex than that. 
People are the bottom line and decisions are based on what’s 
best for everyone, within the boundaries of what we can afford 
as a province. 
 
The positions are sharply contrasted by the different approaches 
to the funding of the publicly owned Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. The opposition looks at it and says, 

STC is losing money; sell it. Never mind that it provides an 
invaluable public service to the people of Saskatchewan, 
especially in rural areas. If it’s not paying its own way, it has to 
go. 
 
The approach on this side of the House is, STC provides a 
valuable public service to Saskatchewan people and we will 
continue to support it. And we’ll support it because in 
Saskatchewan we balance the various and often conflicting 
needs of our people. That is what governing is all about. 
 
That idea, that tradition of looking out for the well-being of 
everyone is at the heart of the political, social, and economic 
transformation that has taken place in Saskatchewan over the 
last 60 years or so. The concept of the good of the whole. 
 
It’s a tradition that began with the First Nations over thousands 
of years of fostering strong family and community 
relationships. It’s a tradition that was carried on by our pioneers 
and that came to full bloom in the co-operative movements in 
the province’s early years. It was that the tradition that the CCF 
tapped into in the 1930s and ’40s and continues to be the 
approach to developing the policies and programs of this NDP 
government today — the good of the whole. 
 
Whether we are talking about KidsFirst or SchoolPLUS or the 
Saskatchewan disabilities framework or the child action plan or 
the youth strategy or the action plan for health or the 
Partnership for Prosperity or the HomeFirst housing strategy or 
Aboriginal justice reform or the biodiversity action plan or any 
of the other plans, strategies, and programs we are pursuing, 
each and every one exists for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m talking about plans and strategies, 
I want to point out that the Saskatchewan Party is often heard to 
say that our government does not have a plan. Well as you can 
see from the many plans I’ve just mentioned, they are wrong 
again. They can say they have not seen the plan. They can say 
they have not read the plan. They can say they do not 
understand the plan. But they cannot say we don’t have a plan. 
And to reinforce my statement I’ve brought a sample of the 
plans mentioned and will table them with this House for the 
benefit of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the centennial Throne Speech 
focuses on our young people and the next 20 years. It’s all 
about creating a strong Saskatchewan in which there will be 
opportunity for all and that all will be proud to call this 
province home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the centennial Throne Speech is all about building 
on the strong foundations of the past and creating a 
Saskatchewan that reflects the optimism and confidence of our 
forebears; a Saskatchewan that is both environmentally 
responsible and socially progressive; a Saskatchewan that 
recognizes education is the key to a healthy future; a 
Saskatchewan that continues to lead the way with one of the 
best health care systems in the world; a Saskatchewan that 
maintains its tradition of embracing new technology and 
innovation and so is one of the most competitive economies in 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

the world; a Saskatchewan that is one of North America’s top 
energy producers; a Saskatchewan where business is booming 
and labour is respected and valued. And, Mr. Speaker, a 
Saskatchewan where people from all cultures move forward 
together ensuring that the Saskatchewan family, the 
Saskatchewan household, the Saskatchewan community, is 
healthy, prosperous, happy, and strong. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, we are going to create a province where 
each and every citizen has the opportunity to realize their hopes 
and follow their dreams. 
 
We will continue to foster a provincial economy that is not only 
prosperous but also sustainable. Mr. Speaker. the Conservative 
Saskatchewan Party opposite substitutes myth for meaningful 
public debate at every turn. All of their misrepresentations 
about the province are destructive to some degree. 
 
For example in Saskatoon — or Saskaboom as it’s recently 
been dubbed — there is an unprecedented excitement and 
positive energy. New construction, additions and renovations to 
older existing buildings, and the River Landing development 
demonstrate a vibrant, successful, and prosperous city. There is 
an excitement in Saskatoon that we are on an economic roll. 
But that’s not how the Saskatchewan Party tells it. And it 
appears that the constant negativity of the Saskatchewan Party 
— their constant misrepresentations about the state of the 
economy — is undermining the optimism and confidence of 
Saskatchewan people. And that is hurting the province. 
 
Saskatchewan as a whole and Saskatoon in particular are 
currently experiencing good economic times. But a recent poll 
indicates that Saskatchewan people don’t believe it. At a recent 
awards for business excellence in Saskatchewan, ABEX 
[Achievement in Business Excellence], the president of the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce commented in his 
opening remarks about the need to up our attitude. This is a 
message that the chamber put forward over two years ago. But 
we are still hearing the negative comments from the members 
opposite about our business climate, our economy, our future. 
You name it, they can find something negative to say about it. 
In Saskatchewan these days, finding real things to be negative 
about is a hard job. But the opposition seem to think someone 
has to do it. 
 
Saskatchewan Party is fond of another myth: that environmental 
protection is bad for business. We disagree wholeheartedly with 
that position. Because just as we’ve always recognized that 
social progress and economic progress must proceed in balance, 
so we recognize that economic development should not and 
need not take place at the expense of the environment. 
 
I’m very pleased that with that in mind we’ve been engaged in a 
series of green strategy consultations. These consultations are a 
basis for future initiatives. In this session legislation will be 
introduced that speaks directly to environmental protection and 
supporting healthy and sustainable economic growth. 
 
Saskatchewan has become the third largest producer of wind 
power in Canada. By the end of the year Saskatchewan will be 
producing enough green energy to power a city the size of 
Regina. We’re going to build on that very positive beginning in 
the area of renewable energy. 

Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House are very proud 
of the fact that Saskatchewan is the birthplace of medicare in 
Canada. It says a lot about the Conservative Saskatchewan 
Party on the other side of this Assembly that they do not share 
that pride. These days our publicly funded health care system is 
being attacked by many, including the members opposite. 
 
As a matter of fact, in their campaigns medicare is one of their 
favourite targets. They talk in terms of private, for-profit health 
care, parallel private and public systems, and so on, and couch 
it all in terms of just wanting to provide more choice or better 
access to health services. And although for-profit health care 
has proven itself to be less efficient and far more expensive than 
our publicly funded system, right wingers like the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party opposite continue to support 
and promote privatization of the health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in Argentina a while ago and visited a 
primary health centre in Buenos Aires. When the staff found out 
that I was Canadian, and even though they did not speak a word 
of English, one woman immediately said, ah, medicare. The 
world identifies Canada with medicare and envies us our 
system. 
 
The Saskatchewan vision of health care has always placed 
people before profit and it is the vision of this government to 
ensure that will never change. That is not to say that the current 
system does not need changes. We need to use our human 
resources more effectively. We need to promote healthy 
lifestyle choices. We need to change the way we as users of the 
system seek our care. To quote Tommy Douglas from a speech 
he delivered in 1982, quote: 
 

We have to move increasingly toward care through clinics. 
We’ve got to provide financial inducement for doctors to 
form clinics and [to] go into clinics, whether they are paid 
on a salary or fee-for-service basis. We have to locate 
these clinics in or close to hospitals, so that people will 
have ready access to diagnostic and treatment facilities. 

 
He also said in the same speech, quote: 
 

Let’s not forget that the ultimate goal of Medicare must be 
to keep people well rather than just patching them up when 
they get sick. 

 
The concept of a primary health centre, as one of these clinics 
you can go to for your health services, needs to be better 
understood by the public and expanded into many areas, for 
example into an emergency unit at an acute care hospital. 
 
Here’s how that would work. You go into the emergency unit 
and are seen by a triage nurse who assesses if you need 
attention by a doctor for such things as chest pain, broken 
bones, significant bleeding, or major trauma. If you don’t need 
to see a doctor you could see a nurse practitioner for such things 
as cold and flu symptoms, minor cuts, minor infections, etc. 
This nurse practitioner can treat you, send you for certain tests 
or procedures, and even discharge you. You can see a dietician, 
a social worker, a mental health worker, or a therapist to name 
just a few of the many options that would be available to you. 
This approach would free up doctors to attend to the most 
serious cases coming into emergency. Think how this would 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

improve the wait times in emergency wards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t emphasize this point enough. We do not 
have to privatize the system to improve it. But we do have to 
change the way we deliver the services and our expectations of 
the system as health care consumers. Don’t be fooled by all the 
doom and gloom about the system. It can be fixed without 
destroying the very fundamentals of medicare — universality, 
accessibility, portability, public administration, and 
comprehensive care. 
 
We as Canadians and health care consumers have the ability to 
make these changes happen by demanding them of our policy 
makers. That means our governments, provincial and federal, 
not insurance companies and multinational corporations. 
 
We as a government have an obligation to you the people of 
Saskatchewan to improve the health system, to decrease waiting 
times for surgeries and diagnostic procedures. But 
Saskatchewan people have a very important role as well. It is 
they who determine what they want in a health system. It is they 
who decide where they want to see the province go, be it in 
health care, environmental protection, economic growth, 
education, or social programs. And finally it is they who elect 
the government whose values and policies best mirror their own 
values. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is a wonderful first step into 
Saskatchewan’s second century. It is a document that 
recognizes clearly and fundamentally the concept of the good of 
the whole. I am proud of so many of the initiatives that are 
named in this speech but I want to mention these in particular. 
 
I was very pleased with the announcement in September of the 
construction of the road connecting La Loche to Fort 
McMurray. It is a link that will benefit the people in both of our 
provinces. 
 
I’m even more pleased that in this session we will announce a 
major new road-building project in the North. Literally that 
road-building initiative will go a long way towards connecting 
the people of Saskatchewan’s North with better jobs, health 
care services, and education. As Saskatchewan moves forward, 
the people of her North will not be left behind. 
 
The focus of a good part of my professional life has been on 
health care and improving health care services here in 
Saskatchewan. So I welcome all the strategies in the Throne 
Speech aimed at training, recruiting, and retaining health care 
professionals, particularly building a new academic health 
sciences centre at the University of Saskatchewan. Bringing 
health science educators, researchers, and students together in 
one facility will help draw health care professionals to the 
province and ensure that Saskatchewan’s training needs in the 
health care field are met now and well into the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say how much I support the 
expansion of pediatric services across the province, especially 
the development of the children’s hospital within a hospital in 
Saskatoon. It makes sense that children and their families 
receive care in an environment that is child and family friendly 
but also has concentrated expertise and an integrated approach 
to pediatric care. 

Mr. Speaker, the promise of integrating midwifery into our 
health system has been a project of mine and my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, since The Midwifery Act was 
passed during our time in the Health portfolio. The vision of 
midwives practising in a primary health centre setting is 
exciting for women of this province. Midwives could be 
practising alongside family physicians, specialists, registered 
nurses, and other health professionals to provide women with 
the best possible birth experience and outcome. In fact I think a 
midwife could go into the new Westwinds Primary Health 
Centre in Saskatoon. This project could be a reality very soon 
with the opening of the facility as the district is already 
exploring this possibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it is fitting to close with Saskatchewan’s 
centennial blessing: 
 

As Saskatchewan celebrates the many reasons to give 
thanks throughout the centennial year, we are grateful for 
our many blessings: 
 
For our incredible landscapes and living skies. 
For our natural resources, which are rich and plentiful. 
For an inclusive society that respects others and celebrates 
diversity. 
For the freedom to pursue our dreams right here at home. 
For the vision of our Aboriginal people and our pioneers. 
For the vitality and creativity of our youth. 
For the generosity of our many volunteers. 
For the warmth of our families, neighbours and friends. 
And for a province with 100 Years of Heart! 
We love this place — Saskatchewan — and we give 
thanks. 
 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to make the official statement of 
the motion moved by myself and seconded by the member from 
Regina Northeast: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 
Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 
assembled, humbly thank you for your gracious speech 
which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the 
opening of the present session. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview and seconded by the member for Regina Northeast . . . 
Order please. Order please, members. Order. Order. 

 
That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 
Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 
assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 
speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 
at the opening of the present session. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. It certainly is a privilege for me to rise and to second the 
motion . . . Speech to the Throne. But first, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank you for your ongoing service to this House, and I’m sure 
that I speak for all the members when I acknowledge your 
patience and good judgment in fulfilling your duties as Speaker 
sometimes in a very lively Assembly. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the member 
from Regina Wascana Plains for being chosen our Deputy 
Speaker. We’re part of history, her being the first woman to hold 
such a position in the legislature here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m relieved to know that in your hands and the hands of 
the member from Regina Wascana Plains, I know this Assembly is 
in very, very good shape. 
 
I also want to thank Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, for her 
delivery of the Throne Speech yesterday. I think she did a 
wonderful job of being very punctual and to the point. I also want 
to congratulate my esteemed colleague, seatmate, and good friend, 
the member from Saskatoon Eastview, for her eloquent remarks in 
moving the Throne Speech, and I’m very pleased to have the 
privilege of seconding the motion that she has presented. 
 
It being our centennial year, this Throne Speech represents a 
very significant stepping off point into what I know will be a 
very bright and prosperous future for all people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech is by tradition an opportunity 
for government to present its plan for the next year in a very 
broad forum. It’s a chance for government to set the direction in 
which it would see the province move in the next year. 
 
The reply to the Throne Speech is also an opportunity for the 
members to cast their remarks in rather a broad way. So I would 
like to at this point say a few words about my constituency of 
Regina Northeast. And it’s a privilege to represent the fine 
people in that constituency in this great Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina Northeast constituency is made up of 
really three parts: first the Uplands area, then Eastview, and the 
area north of Dewdney Avenue from Winnipeg Street to Prince 
of Wales Drive. This takes in all the Ross Industrial area. 
 
This summer, as in past summers, I door-knocked a number of 
homes in my constituency. I had set 14 polls as my goal this 
summer, and I was able to achieve that. And what I really find 
interesting about door knocking is meeting people on their 
doorstep that I’ve met in past summers, as well as meeting new 
people who have moved into the constituency. 

And sometimes when you’re visiting constituents you run into a 
humorous situation. One such event happened to me back in 
June when I was visiting a poll where new homes had sprung 
up since the election. And I had the pleasure of knocking on a 
door of a Sask Party staffer who was good enough to send me 
an email the next day thanking me for calling, but he informed 
me that likely he would not be voting for me in the next 
election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my constituency assistant suggested we 
should mark him down as an X but I said no, he is a bright, 
smart young fellow. He may see the light one day. We’ll put 
him down as a question mark minus. 
 
But in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I enjoy visiting constituents 
because it gives me a better understanding of what people are 
looking for in their government. People tell me that they 
appreciate and respect the direction our party’s government has 
demonstrated in the past. I consider this a great privilege to be a 
part of a government that’s helped put Saskatchewan’s financial 
house in order and whose political roots are so deeply 
embedded in the history of this great province. 
 
The Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and its successor, 
the New Democratic Party, are large parts of Saskatchewan’s 
history and have played a significant role in this province’s 
development. The CCF came into existence as a direct result of 
grassroots movement of people seeking practical and workable 
solutions to Saskatchewan’s specific issues and challenges. And 
the solutions that they came up with over the course of the last 
60 years have turned out to be of great benefit, not only to the 
people of this province but to people far beyond our borders. 
 
I’m very proud to be a part of that tradition. Saskatchewan 
people have every right to be proud of each and every one of 
their accomplishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is founded in the spirit of 
confidence and optimism. And while events didn’t always play 
out the way our forefathers had envisioned them, still that 
confidence and optimism was not misplaced. And the 
accomplishments of our first century provide a solid foundation 
upon which we can begin to build the second. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province’s future is bright. Right now we 
enjoy increased revenue from increased oil prices. And that is 
good news for the province, but it creates some real problems 
for people of low and fixed incomes, especially when it comes 
to home heating costs. This is why our government introduced 
the Saskatchewan energy share program that helps consumers 
this winter with increasing costs of heating and will provide 
support for homeowners who make energy-saving upgrades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a message I received this summer from my 
constituents was that they expected the government to continue 
to grow the economy and continue to create meaningful jobs for 
their citizens, especially young people of our communities. 
 
Many of my constituents expressed support for the 
government’s moving ahead on its three-year commitment to 
increasing the minimum wage and providing enhanced 
protection for health care workers and firefighters. Mr. Speaker, 
many of the working men and women in my constituency told 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

me that they believe no one in Saskatchewan should work for a 
wage that still left them in poverty and that everyone should 
have access to health care and pension benefits. 
 
Are there challenges facing our government? Of course there 
are. That’s what governing is all about — identifying 
challenges, taking on those challenges, and coming up with 
solutions that benefit Saskatchewan people in the short and the 
long run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this centennial Throne Speech is about building on 
the lessons and the strengths of the past and providing a bold, 
long-term vision of Saskatchewan’s future — a vision that 
focuses on the children of our centennial and one that focuses 
on the bright sustainable future for everyone in Saskatchewan; a 
future where there’s opportunity for all and no one, no one is 
left behind. 
 
And how are we going to do that, Mr. Speaker? We’re going to 
do it by building on the social, cultural, and economic 
foundations Saskatchewan people have laid down over the 
course of the last century. 
 
Energy will be a key component to Saskatchewan’s green and 
prosperous future. Saskatchewan already produces one-third of 
Canada’s total energy resource. In the coming decades our 
contribution will even grow larger. But in keeping with our 
balanced approach, we are going to continue to explore 
renewable energy sources. In our goal to create Saskatchewan 
. . . that we’ll lead North America in a diversity of energy 
sources and exports, and in the production, use, and marketing 
of renewable energy. 
 
I am particularly pleased with our commitment to the . . . Over 
next 20 years Saskatchewan will lead the country in energy 
conservation practices and that in 20-years time fully one-third 
of our energy requirements will be met with renewable energy 
sources. 
 
Saskatchewan has a great economic momentum headed into our 
second century. We have achieved a have province status. We 
have received 13 straight credit rating upgrades. And our 
provincial debt is the lowest it’s been in 14 years. 
 
The vision of this government is that in 20 years, rather than a 
crushing debt, Saskatchewan will have one of the most 
competitive and diverse business environments in the country. 
 
Saskatchewan is already a major player in Canada’s mining and 
mineral industry, and we’re going to continue to build on that 
strength. 
 
Saskatchewan is already one of the most . . . world’s leading 
export jurisdictions. Last year our manufacturing shipments 
grew by twice the national average. Our goal in the next 20 
years is that the manufacturing shipments in Saskatchewan will 
double. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a history of searching out and 
implementing innovative solutions to the challenges we face. 
The list of firsts Saskatchewan has achieved, especially in 
social policy and labour legislation, is long and impressive. 
 

In the next 20 years, building on the solid foundations already 
in place, Saskatchewan will come to be known not only as the 
province where people are first but also the centre of scientific 
excellence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of the elements that will 
contribute to Saskatchewan’s economy that we envision in the 
20 years of the future. We are a rich province — rich in culture, 
rich in people, rich in resources. A green and prosperous 
economy means responsible, sustainable development that will 
benefit all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our vision here at the beginning of the second 
century isn’t just about building a prosperous and sustainable 
economy. It’s also about creating a social climate that provides 
fairness and justice for all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our vision is a vision of safe, secure communities 
and neighbourhoods. That’s why we are working with the 
police and communities to address problems associated with 
gangs and others who might threaten people, property, and our 
peace of mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live in a rapidly changing world, a world that 
is so influenced by rapidly changing technologies. In order to 
continue to have a strong economy and a prosperous society, we 
must give our children the tools to meet the challenges of the 
future. To do this we must provide our future leaders with 
educational opportunities so that they can be well prepared to 
take on the challenges that lay ahead. 
 
Our vision is that in the near future Saskatchewan will lead the 
nation in educational achievements. And every child in this 
province — no matter their income, background, or 
circumstance — will have the opportunity to reach their full 
potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a healthy society is made up of healthy 
communities. And in support of healthy communities, we are 
continuing to invest in HomeFirst — our strategy to bring safe, 
affordable housing within the reaches of thousands of 
low-income Saskatchewan families — because this government 
knows that quality housing is a key ingredient to a healthy 
family. 
 
I am very pleased that in this session we will establish a new 
home communities fund that will help build stronger 
communities by meeting not only the economic development 
requirements of Saskatchewan communities, but also their 
cultural, social, and recreational needs, Mr. Speaker, in keeping 
with our vision of a province where the opportunity for all and 
no one — no one — is left behind. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that if our 
centennial celebrations have taught us anything, it should be 
that Saskatchewan has a lot to be proud of. The changes we 
have seen, the challenges that we have met successfully, and the 
obstacles that we have overcome could have easily defeated a 
lesser folk. 
 
This Throne Speech is a vision of Saskatchewan’s future built 
on Saskatchewan’s values, which means a future is prosperous 
and sustainable and where there is opportunity for all. 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

With respect and pride I second the Speech from the Throne as 
moved by the member from Saskatoon Eastview. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be able to enter the debate and offer an address in 
reply to the Speech from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
at the outset of my remarks as we convene here again in Regina 
at the Legislative Assembly, how proud I am to be able to serve 
the people of Swift Current as their elected representative and 
how seriously I take the honour that they have given to me to be 
their voice here in Regina to represent them on matters that 
come before the Assembly. And I also want to take this 
opportunity to thank my family, Tami and our kids, for their 
continued support that enables me to be able to do this job to 
the best of my abilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a starting point I will say with respect to the 
Speech from the Throne, that it is entitled, “Toward Our New 
Century.” And right there, right there you get a bit of a glimpse 
as to what is wrong with this NDP government because, Mr. 
Speaker, while the NDP are simply now just moving toward the 
new century, the rest of the people of Saskatchewan, the official 
opposition Saskatchewan Party, we’re already in the new 
century, Mr. Speaker. We’re already here, and what we’re 
looking for as we enter in that new century is we’re looking for 
some leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of this province are looking for a vision of a 
growing economy. They’re looking for a brand new and a bold 
vision for Saskatchewan as a leader within Canada. They’re 
looking for a vision of a Saskatchewan that has attracted 
investment, that has attracted families, that’s retaining our 
young people so that we have a tax base, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what they’re looking for. 
 
Why are they looking for that? Is it for the sake of statistics? Is 
it for the sake of that Stats Canada report that will come out at 
the beginning of next month with respect to jobs? No, as 
important as that is, that’s not the reason that we are looking for 
a vision that will create a brand new, invigorated economy in 
the province of Saskatchewan and attract taxpayers. 
 
It’s not about statistics, Mr. Speaker; it’s about people. It’s 
about being able to provide the services on the part of the 
Government of Saskatchewan that our people in this province 
deserve, you know, because, Mr. Speaker, there can be no 
teacher without there first being an entrepreneur. There can’t be 
a health care provider in Saskatchewan without there first being 
a job creator. There can’t be the kind of social safety net that we 
need in the province of Saskatchewan for those who are most 
vulnerable without there first being a strong economic 
foundation for growth. 
 
That’s why we’re looking for some vision and some leadership 

in this Throne Speech with respect to a growing economy. 
That’s why we want more people living here. That’s why we 
want a government that has set in place the plans and the 
initiatives that we know will keep young people here because 
there are more opportunities here. 
 
We want that, Mr. Speaker, so that we can do something with 
the longest health care waiting lists in Canada that currently 
exist here in the birthplace of medicare. We want that, Mr. 
Speaker, so we can provide addictions treatment and not 
addictions treatment hype for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We want that so we have the 
resources . . . for example, police officers to deal with the 
highest rate of violent crime in all of the Dominion of Canada. 
That’s why we want those taxpayers. That’s why we want some 
economic activity. 
 
We wanted, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to see in this Throne 
Speech a vision for that growing economy so that government 
would have the resources to reduce income taxes for 
low-income people because here in NDP Saskatchewan 
low-income families pay the highest income tax in all of the 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we look into this Throne Speech, we wanted to see 
that vision. We wanted to see an understanding of how do you 
create an enterprising economy. How do you reduce barriers to 
growth in the province of Saskatchewan so we can set that 
table, so to speak, so we can build that foundation for economic 
growth in the province? Is it in here, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I’ve been through it. I’ve read it. It’s not in here. I haven’t seen 
it. It’s simply not there. What we’ve seen though, Mr. Speaker, 
if you look through these pages, is between 25 and 29, some of 
the media are saying today 29 recycled ideas, 29 
re-announcements, 29 of the greatest hits of the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, as the member for Estevan says. The problem, Mr. 
Speaker, is that when you plug in the CD player and you want 
to play those greatest hits, there’s no sound because there’s no 
action behind any of these ideas. There hasn’t been for years. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the great irony, coming from a 
government that purports to be concerned about the 
environment, the great irony is that the only thing not recycled 
about the Throne Speech is the paper that it’s printed on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I don’t see that the paper’s recycled, but it’s one 
of the only things about this that isn’t recycled. 
 
Instead though, Mr. Speaker, instead of a plan, instead of an 
economic vision for Saskatchewan as we have highlighted, as I 
highlighted in a paper that I had the pleasure of presenting at 
the University of Saskatchewan a year ago — a plan the even 
the former Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, was pretty 
impressed with and knew could work for the province as did 
many other pundits who waded in — instead of that, what do 
we see in the Throne Speech? The government highlights its 
Action Plan for the Economy that the Premier and the Minister 
for Industry announced, I think up in Saskatoon just a few 
months ago. 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

They announced 81 sort of general platitudes. That was their 
economic plan, you know. Self-evident statements in their plan 
like, you know, we need more jobs in Saskatchewan, and we 
need some more investment in Saskatchewan. And it would be 
good to keep our young people here, and wouldn’t it be nice if 
it wasn’t quite as windy as it is in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That was the nature of their economic plan. 
 
And what did all of the observers of politics and economics in 
the province have to say about the action plan that’s touted right 
here in this non-recyclable Throne Speech? What did they have 
to say, Mr. Speaker? Well they said that this list of general 
platitudes that the Minister of Industry and the Premier said was 
their plan was really nothing more than a political cop-out. 
That’s what they said. They used words like “disappointing” — 
and that’s a quote as well, Mr. Speaker — disappointing, 
because at a time in our history when we can least afford 
leadership in a government that hasn’t a clue as to how to grow 
an economy and attract those families and retain youth, we got 
platitudes. We got 80-some platitudes in a plan that was widely 
panned in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s why it was 
disappointing. 
 
And so that leaves us to speculate as to what really is the plan 
of the government. If the Action Plan for the Economy as 
they’ve highlighted really isn’t a plan at all, if it’s 
disappointing, if it’s a political cop-out, then I don’t know what. 
You’ve got to go back maybe to 1933 and you can find the 
Regina Manifesto. Maybe that’s the plan for this particular 
government. It’s still on their website, proudly displayed in a 
link for all to see, for all to have a look at, that Regina 
Manifesto that calls for the eradication of capitalism, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know actually when you think about it — when you 
look at the track record of this government in terms of attracting 
investment, when you look at the record of this government in 
terms of retaining young people and growing population, when 
you look at this government and its record of creating jobs — it 
appears to be that pledge to eradicate capitalism from 1933, it 
appears to be one of the only promises the NDP are actually 
keeping on that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So we looked for a signal that they finally got it, 
that they understood what was wrong within the pages of this 
Throne Speech, and we couldn’t find it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think there are two measures though of a Throne Speech, of 
the effectiveness of a Throne Speech. It’s true that these 
documents are generally going to be vague although they 
should provide a blueprint for the economy. 
 
But I think also, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech should be the 
chance for the government and leadership of Saskatchewan to 
demonstrate that it is in tune with the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan, that it has not lost touch with Saskatchewan 
people. But unfortunately as you go through the pages and the 
record of the government you will find that this Throne Speech 
and this government is not in tune with the people of 
Saskatchewan. They’re not connected. And we got evidence of 
that today. 

There’s evidence of it in the Throne Speech with respect to the 
very cursory way they deal with agriculture in this Throne 
Speech, the way they deal with agriculture not only in this 
Throne Speech but what they did earlier today in this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, when Members of the Opposition said we have a 
crisis on the farm. We have yet another perfect storm in 
agriculture, compounded not only by low commodity prices but 
also by what was for most of the province pretty bad harvest 
weather. We have a poor quality crop in much of the province. 
We have crop that’s still out in the field. And it is a perfect 
storm that’s facing Saskatchewan farm families today. 
 
And the Minister of Agriculture had a little tour around some of 
the areas hardest hit, Mr. Speaker. And his response to this 
crisis was this: there’s CAIS and crop insurance. That was his 
position — not any indication at all that he would take this case 
to Ottawa immediately, that he would let Ottawa know that we 
simply cannot sustain agriculture in the province. And farm 
families are at risk unless the federal government understands 
that these farmers, these families can’t compete with 
international treasuries around the world. 
 
And the minister had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to at that 
point — instead of saying, well we’ve got CAIS and we’ve got 
crop insurance — to say they’re not working, and Ottawa better 
pay attention, and I’m going to go make the case to Ottawa and 
stand there until someone listens to the plight of Saskatchewan 
farm families who are trying to fight international treasuries. 
And would he do that, Mr. Speaker? No. He sat on his hands, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what? His work is also evident in the Throne 
Speech because agriculture is hardly here except for the 
government to say, oh by the way, we’re going to fund a 
program that we signed on to and said we would fund in the 
first place. That’s the sum and the total of this government’s 
commitment to agriculture. It demonstrates that they’re out of 
touch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s another example. Here’s another example. 
We know at this time that this NDP government refuses to 
index, to protect against inflation, the food allowance for people 
who most need the food allowance in the province. But you 
know what? You know what they’ve got enough money for? 
They’ve got enough money to increase their own advertising 
budget for their own political gains by 30 per cent. 
 
They’ll say no to the most vulnerable in our society, people 
who can’t afford to buy groceries. They say no to them on the 
simple prospect of indexing their food allowance to protect it 
against inflation. But they’ve got 30 per cent more for 
advertising. And for the Premier’s communication budget — 
for his spin doctors — he’s got 60 per cent more money for 
that. He doesn’t have a couple of percentage points to help 
protect those families who need to access the food allowance, 
but he’s got a lot of money to spend on getting re-election . . . 
tax dollars that he will try to spend for his own political 
re-election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when Saskatchewan highways are 
crumbling — and if you took a drive around Saskatchewan this 
summer, you would understand that they’re crumbling in the 
province of Saskatchewan — our infrastructure deficit is 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

growing under this NDP government. 
 
At a time when it’s harder and harder for farmers, for tourists, 
for business to travel the highways of the province of 
Saskatchewan because they’re in increasingly poor shape — at 
a time like that, how does that affect the NDP cabinet? Well it 
doesn’t affect them at all, Mr. Speaker, because cabinet air 
travel is up 30 per cent. They’ve got lots of money to take care 
of themselves, to fly around the province and arguably get 
involved in politics. But they simply have lost touch with 
Saskatchewan people who are saying, we need highways. It’s a 
basic service of government that we ask for. We need 
highways. We can’t build the kind of economy that we need to 
— and we can in Saskatchewan — without basic infrastructure. 
It’s another example of how this NDP government has lost 
touch. 
 
They are out of touch with Saskatchewan people when it comes 
to property tax. They have promised over and over and over 
again to do something about property tax. The Premier stood in 
front of SARM delegates and said the status quo wasn’t 
acceptable. 
 
They commissioned the Boughen report. Boughen reported and 
said, well you could lower the property tax; you might have to 
increase the PST. So what did the NDP government do? Well 
they cherry-picked that report; the worst part of the report. They 
increased the PST and did nothing with any significance on 
property tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re out of touch because if you go across Saskatchewan, if 
you talk to the people in rural Saskatchewan on the farm and in 
the cities, you’re going to hear from them that one of the 
number one issues is property tax. They have said it over and 
over and over again. And a government that was in touch and in 
tune would have acted. They wouldn’t have just given words. 
They would have acted, but our government hasn’t. This NDP 
government has failed, and they’re out of touch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government that often likes to tout Tommy 
Douglas and the fact that this province was the birthplace of 
medicare — and they’ll do it in speeches in communities where 
seniors are on the longest health-care waiting lists in the 
country — that demonstrates that this government is out of 
touch. They have absolutely lost touch. And just the repeat of 
previous announcements in health care that are in this Throne 
Speech underscore that fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the challenge of addictions, 
alcohol and drug addictions in the province of Saskatchewan, 
we also see how this NDP government is out of touch because 
you know what, Mr. Speaker, they seem to be able to practice 
some politics with regards to providing much needed addictions 
treatment, but there’s no action, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 
people around the province are calling project hope, project 
hype because, Mr. Speaker, there are no beds forthcoming. Not 
for years will there be beds. And this particular government has 
been dragged, kicking and screaming, to deal with this issue. 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, and the people of the province 
believe that were it not for the efforts of members on this side 
of the House, were it not for the fact that this government was 
shamed by moms and dads who wanted a government that 
would act, there would be no action at all. 

[15:30] 
 
You know, not long ago the Premier received an award for 
project hope for addictions. You know what, Mr. Speaker? I 
know I make mistakes certainly in my life and there are 
judgments that I wish I could have back. But I would like to 
believe of myself that were the situation reversed, were that 
situation reversed and I was given an award that frankly I didn’t 
earn — that I didn’t earn — that as soon as I found out about 
that award and that recognition I would contact the member for 
Kelvington and the member for Big Muddy and the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest and said all of you should come along 
with me to accept this award because that’s how this issue got 
on the radar screen and any action we have in the province is 
because of those members on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because when we first raised that first issue . . . 
Well they’re heckling. The member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow wants to enter the debate and I hope she will 
because she sits right beside the Minister of Learning who when 
first faced the prospect of what we were saying with respect to 
crystal meth, he said well this isn’t any . . . this drug isn’t any 
more important than any other drug and it doesn’t call for any 
particular specific action. That’s what he said; that’s what he 
said. Well we’ll get the quote for him. We’ll get the quote for 
him. That’s what that member said. 
 
Now a government is out of touch, a government is out of touch 
with the people of the province when it acts on a compelling 
and serious issue for only political reasons. And I’m telling you 
today, Mr. Speaker, that there can be no other conclusion that 
that was the motivation of this government on that issue, Mr. 
Speaker. It demonstrates the fact that they’re out of touch. 
 
There is a culture of entitlement on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a tired, old government that’s been around for 
four terms. And we’re talking a little bit about a culture of 
entitlement in this country in terms of what’s happening with 
the federal Liberal government. Sadly we don’t have to look to 
Ottawa to see it. We can look across those benches opposite and 
we can see a government that happily increases its 
communications budget, happily increases its air travel budget 
around a province and around the world by 30 per cent. We can 
look across the way, Mr. Speaker, and see a government that 
sees fit to say no to indexing the food allowance and yes to a 
brand new airport terminal for cabinet ministers and the Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a culture of entitlement, Mr. Speaker. And you know the 
cost of that kind of leadership? The cost of that kind of 
leadership is the future of this province. The cost of that kind of 
leadership, that culture of entitlement, that lack of vision for a 
growing economy, we’re paying for it with respect to the future 
of our province. Because you know what’s happened here 
lately, Mr. Speaker, in a period of economic growth as the 
minister says we have now in Saskatchewan, in a period where 
the Premier says we’re on an economic roll, in a period where 
the Premier says we’re in a boom, do you know what’s 
happened in Saskatchewan? We’ve lost 6,200 jobs — 6,200 
fewer opportunities to keep young people here, 6,200 fewer 
opportunities to keep future entrepreneurs in the province of 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

Saskatchewan. 
 
In that period of NDP growth we have lost population. We have 
lost population. While Manitoba of all . . . Manitoba has grown 
by 7,700. Maybe this current government is happy to lose to the 
province of Manitoba. We are not. We think we should be 
leading this country and certainly that province to the east of us, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just ask members to not holler across the 
floor here. It’s getting difficult to hear the debate. And right 
now the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the 
Opposition, has the floor, and I’d invite him to continue with 
his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s the cost of this kind of leadership. That’s 
the cost of a complete lack of economic leadership in this 
Throne Speech, of any understanding that in addition to just 
redistributing the wealth, the government has to set the business 
climate so that somebody can go out and actually create the 
wealth in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what, we simply are not going to get that kind of 
leadership that we need in this province. We’re not going to get 
that kind of vision for our economy. None of that will happen 
for the province of Saskatchewan until this government is 
defeated, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And replaced by men and women who have at 
least . . . who have a plan for growing the economy, who 
understand how to get an economy growing, who understand 
that you can’t compete with the private sector at every turn and 
expect the private sector or the co-operative sector to continue 
to invest and create jobs. Who understand that you’ve got to 
lower barriers to growth so there can be investment. Who 
understand that labour legislation in our province, while being 
fair to both employer and employee, must be competitive with 
other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. Who understand that a growth 
agenda means significant investment, long-term investment in 
post-secondary and in the infrastructure of the province. 
 
The good news is this, Mr. Speaker, we’re only two seats away, 
two seats away from that kind of leadership in the Legislative 
Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. I’d particularly ask the 
member from Yorkton to come to order. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I have the good fortune 
of travelling around this province and also to travel to other 
provinces. I’ve travelled to provinces like Alberta and other 
places in Canada. And everywhere I go I meet with young 
people in those provinces. In fact the last year I got a chance to 
speak to a luncheon of all expatriates. I got a chance to speak to 
all young expatriates of the province of Saskatchewan. They 
were all under 30. 

So before I spoke, I went around the room. Before I spoke, I 
went around the room and I asked each young person there, I 
said if there was an opportunity back home in Saskatchewan, 
would you come home? Because I think a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan think well once we lose them, they’re gone 
forever. You know what, Mr. Speaker? A very conservative 
estimate of that crowd would be about two-thirds of them, fully 
two-thirds of them said to me, if there was an opportunity back 
home, we would come home because we want to be in 
Saskatchewan, but there’s simply not the opportunity there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s why we need to change the government. That’s why we 
need more than recycled ideas and plans that haven’t worked 
for Saskatchewan for 60 years. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why I’m going to move the following amendment: 
 

That all of the words be removed after the word “that” and 
that the following words be substituted: 
 
That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
the Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative 
and its failure to address the issues that are most important 
to Saskatchewan people as demonstrated by ignoring the 
crisis in agriculture, the inability to set spending priorities 
consistent with the province’s needs, the failure to grow 
the economy and create economic prosperity, by not 
delivering much-needed services and leaving many people 
behind, by forcing others to move out of the province for 
health care, and by forcing people to pursue their careers 
and dreams elsewhere because they cannot find jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to move this amendment today, 
seconded by the member for Kindersley, and proud that we are 
now one day closer to a brand new government in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It has been moved by the 
member for Swift Current, seconded by the member for 
Kindersley: 

 
That all of the words be removed after the word “that” and 
the following words be substituted: 
 
That this government no longer enjoys the confidence of 
the Assembly because of its lack of vision and initiative 
and its failure to address the issues that are most important 
to Saskatchewan people as demonstrated by ignoring the 
crisis in agriculture, the inability to set spending priorities 
consistent with the province’s needs, the failure to grow 
the economy and create economic prosperity, by not 
delivering much-needed services leaving many people 
behind, by forcing others to move out of the province for 
health care, and by forcing people to pursue their careers 
and dreams elsewhere because they cannot find jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
reviewing the Speech from the Throne, I wanted to first note the 
one highlight I did agree with. It occurred on page 9 and that 
was the renaming of Highway 2 from Moose Jaw to Prince 
Albert to be named Veterans’ Memorial Highway. In the Year 
of the Veteran I think it was fitting that such a movement was 
made. And this morning or rather earlier this afternoon we 
heard from the member of Athabasca and the work that’s been 
done to finally recognize our Aboriginal veterans which were 
for so long overlooked. And sadly that is a part in Canada’s 
history that is frankly shameful. I’m just glad that we can be 
legislators in a day where we can correct those wrongs from the 
past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — To highlight that one sentence from the 
Speech from the Throne on page 9, that was the good part. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne was very 
disappointing. The reality in Saskatchewan is that people do not 
feel better off. They feel depressed. They feel scared. They feel 
that with all the money that is coming into this province, money 
which may be as high as 1.5 extra billion dollars, that this is not 
going to be spent to better their lives; that it’s not going to be 
spent to better the lives of their children. 
 
Sadly the statistics on the children living in this province in 
poverty are appalling and they’re not getting better. I don’t 
believe, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is for 
lack of care from members that sit on the other side. I don’t 
believe that. I know some of those men and women which were 
duly elected opposite and they do care about these issues. But 
sadly they haven’t been able to deliver solutions. And I don’t 
believe that this is only in social services. I believe that this 
comes time and time again, repeats itself, in the direction that 
this government has failed to provide for the long term for this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it talks about the children of the centennial. This is 
in the Speech from the Throne. And the question put forth — so 
where are those children going to be? How well off are they 
going to be? Is no child going to be left behind, or rather will 
they all be left behind? I don’t see that this is the answer to the 
future that the people of our province want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that was blatantly absent in the Speech from 
the Throne, very disturbing, had to do with our Aboriginal 
population. Many, many children do live in poverty, and it 
seemed absent in here. This is a problem that cannot be ignored, 
and yet there don’t seem to be solutions coming forth from this 
government. When only 24 out of 100 adults, Aboriginals, in 
this province have full employment, that is not an acceptable 
situation. It’s not acceptable for anyone in this Legislative 
Assembly. But worse than that, there’s no discussion on that in 
the Speech from the Throne. And this is our future. This is the 
lack of vision which is occurring. 
 
One of the very telling tales of this Speech from the Throne 
occurs on page 11, and I’d like to quote this because it very 
much caught my attention: 
 

In the future, Saskatchewan communities will be larger 

and more cosmopolitan . . . 
 
I don’t know how the people from my hometown of Eatonia are 
necessarily feeling about that statement. A few years ago the 
Lions group got together. We built a new swimming pool, 
mostly for the kids in the community. They went around; they 
raised money. It was a community initiative. We were proud of 
it. The pool won’t open this year. It’s not because we don’t 
have any kids left, though that’s a problem as well. It’s the cost 
of energy. The cost to provide this service is gone. Just two 
weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, that same community voted not to 
have the curling rink this year. I don’t think that they’re 
necessarily going to take comfort from the fact that 
Saskatchewan communities are going to be larger and more 
cosmopolitan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has systemically tried to pit 
citizens in this province against one another — urban against 
rural, labour against business, poor against less poor because 
the rich largely have had to leave. They’ve had to find their 
opportunities elsewhere, and there’s nothing in this Speech 
from the Throne that is going to change that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s another thing that is completely absent here. The reality 
from the committees that we’ve had state that there is a looming 
unfunded pension liability in this province to the point of $4 
billion. 
 
[15:45] 
 
We know that 60 per cent of the public service workers, men 
and women that have given their careers and their lives to the 
service of this province, are set to retire. And we also know that 
their pensions aren’t indexed, that they’re not necessarily 
covered. And the Provincial Auditor has said the money is not 
really there. 
 
How are they going to feel, Mr. Speaker, if down the road we 
have a situation where there are less employees working for the 
government, paying into that pension, and we have an 
unforeseen economic situation which occurs. And it’s horrific 
to think about this, but we’ve had a 9/11 now. We may have 
another. What is that going to do to these individuals who are 
going to be seniors? What is it going to do, Mr. Speaker, at the 
same time that they’re going to require more health care? What 
is going to happen, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This is completely unaddressed — and more than that, it’s 
completely unacceptable. These are two of the largest issues 
facing our province and it is unaddressed and unacceptable 
because there is a clear lack of leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen time and time again a complete 
failure in agriculture policy. The province of Quebec 
administers its own CAIS program. I am a producer. I’m a 
producer, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell you our farms are using 
the highest technology in the world. Next spring in my field 
when I let go of the steering wheel, GPS [Global Positioning 
System] will drive my tractor 2 miles within an inch of where 
the seed should be planted. I have an independent board of 
directors for my company. I use the best advice I can get in the 
world and I come from a 100-year-old farm. 
 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

I’ve had very many opportunities, and I’m having trouble 
making it. If I’m having trouble making it, Mr. Speaker, there is 
no way, there is no way that our producers can go through and 
make it. We are going to see a complete disaster in agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what has this minister done? This minister is a complete 
failure. They failed to address this issue. They don’t understand, 
Mr. Speaker. I asked a question. I said, what is the Department 
of Agriculture doing to investigate what’s going to happen with 
the commodity prices when Brazil completes its infrastructure? 
 
They don’t understand. They don’t understand that this is a 
world market. In 2007, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Brazil, 
the country of Brazil will produce more food than the United 
States of America. Commodity prices are not on their way up. 
And what is the answer that came out of this Speech from the 
Throne? We’re going to take 10 per cent of the agricultural land 
and plant trees? Is this the ploy, Mr. Speaker, to have captain 
SPUDCO come back into the cabinet to invest money into 
Weyerhaeuser and now have the trees fixing our agriculture 
problem? 
 
It’s absurd, Mr. Speaker. It is absurd. They don’t understand. 
And when you lose the base of where your society is coming 
from we cannot go forth, Mr. Speaker, continuing to be hewers 
of wood and drawers of water. 
 
This is a government that strongly supports the Canadian Wheat 
Board. Mr. Speaker, I’m not against the Canadian Wheat Board 
per se but I’d like to tell you my experience over the past five 
years because I’m predominantly a durum farmer. And in 
growing durum wheat I’m forced at the end of the day, I count 
up the bushels in the bin, and I have to make a contract out to 
the Canadian Wheat Board. And I’m obliged, if they call that, 
to deliver that grain, and if I don’t there’s a penalty. But sadly, 
sadly, Mr. Speaker, the board is not obliged to sell that grain. 
So we have a situation wherein in the last five years only 70 per 
cent of my crop has been marketed. Our margins in farming on 
good farms are 4 or 5 per cent. 
 
We have the member from Elphinstone enlightening — 
enlightening — the Assembly with his knowledge of 
agriculture, his extensive knowledge of the business 
community. We have the member from Elphinstone who 
obviously has a deep understanding of the commodity markets. 
He’s had great experience, Mr. Speaker. He’s had vast 
experience outside of the political arena discussing how 
business works, how mortgages work, how credit lines work, 
Mr. Speaker. We know that there’s no doubt whatsoever, at 
being my peer in age, that his experience is vast in this. And it 
continues. It’s quite evident in this Speech from the Throne the 
input he had on agriculture here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is that what happens with regards to the 
wheat board is when they fail to sell the crop there’s a carryover 
and the carryover, Mr. Speaker, they put forth the PROs [pool 
return outlook] for next year. And durum wheat can be seeded 
very cheaply. You can put it in the ground and it will grow but 
it won’t deliver the protein that you need, which means that 
when farmers have to tighten their belts and they’re looking at 
their input costs in the spring, they go to a cheaper commodity 
to plan, which further floods the market, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a pile of grain just south of my farm that one of the 
neighbours had this year, 120,000 bushels of durum in one pile. 
I drive back and forth on the horrific highways —also 
mentioned in this Speech from the Throne but somewhat 
removed from reality, Mr. Speaker — that see that there is piles 
of grain all the way, all the way, Mr. Speaker, to Regina, all the 
way to Rosetown. I have spoken with Mr. Ritter, chairman of 
the wheat board. I’ve known him my entire life. There’s going 
to be trouble selling that grain. And that’s not going to improve 
the farm situation. 
 
And I would go as far to say that this fails to bother the member 
from Elphinstone. You know, I think that Elphinstone happens 
to have some of the social problems which I earlier addressed. I 
can say sincerely, those problems do bother me. And I find it 
very cynical and cold the New Democratic Party can shut their 
eyes on rural Saskatchewan, turn their backs, and do it again 
and again. Amalgamate school divisions to pit town against 
town. Health care — there’s more people working in it but 
fewer nurses. 
 
My grandmother, in a small town, she’s on a waiting list. Many 
of them are. And it makes them beg the question, would I be 
better off in Saskatoon? Would I be better off in Medicine Hat? 
Would I be better off in Kelowna? And these are questions that 
real families in Saskatchewan have had to face for over 10 
years, and it’s not changing. And it won’t change. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, a situation in SARM today which was 
very reminiscent of SARM last year, SARM the year before 
that. They came forth, and they put this quote up. It was put 
forth by a premier of Saskatchewan: 
 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 
as we get new [resources] . . . of revenue to take the place 
of the revenue now realized from that tax. When we 
develop new sources of revenue sufficient to supplant the 
revenue now raised from the tax, we shall do away with 
the tax because we consider it regressive legislation. 
 

Said the premier, Tommy Douglas, August 31, 1944. 
 
I’m not surprised that for 60 years there was a fraudulent ideal 
put forth about the nature of what kind of place this province 
should be. It’s been carried forth by the New Democratic Party 
for much too long. 
 
Young people have left because they wanted to have all the 
opportunities in the world. And it shouldn’t be the question of 
the lowest common denominator. But when your philosophical 
position on the way things should be run starts with a scarcity 
mentality . . . And I would posit that this comes right back to 
the 1930s when things were very tough, right? It wasn’t 
believed that someone else is richer because they made more 
wealth; it was because they took something that was mine. This 
is something I’ve spoke about before in this House. 
 
We don’t need to determine how to cut up the pie in smaller and 
different sections. We just need to make a bigger pie, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

Mr. Dearborn: — Everyone, everyone should benefit from the 
vast wealth that exists in this province. We should not have the 
highest per capita number of children in the sex trade in North 
America. We should feel shame, frankly, as all legislators, that 
we have been sitting here for a number of years and legislation 
has passed but the situation hasn’t necessarily changed. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t know, from what came forth in this 
speech from the Crown, how that is going to be addressed. 
 
There are children living in poverty. This is not an acceptable 
ideal for Canadians. It is something that we do not feel is 
acceptable. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, the men and women of this 
Assembly on both sides of the House agree with that. What we 
disagree with is how we are going to change it. And one side of 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the government side, doesn’t know 
how to change it. I believe that they would like to. I believe that 
they have tried things. But I believe that they have failed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the children of the centennial, the children of the 
centennial, Mr. Speaker, cannot afford that failure. My children 
can’t afford it and nor can anyone else’s. We have a duty to do 
better, and we can do better. It’s been very sad, Mr. Speaker, 
that there hasn’t been the nature of co-operation. And this is 
what members of my constituency find so appalling. We have a 
group in west central Saskatchewan, the west central 
governmental organization which I think is a model for 
municipal associations to work in co-operation. The RMs, the 
towns, representatives from the school boards, the health 
districts, they all get together. They have a transportation 
committee and they talk about, what are our problems? What 
are our problems in Saskatchewan? What are our problems in 
our communities and how can we work together to fix that? 
That is the basis of who the people of Saskatchewan are. 
 
And yet we see today — it was raised in question period — that 
the federal government is keeping back $800 million in 
equalization that we can’t get co-operation to go forth and say, 
this is right for Saskatchewan, Mr. Prime Minister; pony up. We 
don’t get that level of co-operation. Why is it, Mr. Speaker? Is it 
because we live in a society that doesn’t care about these things 
or is it simply because we have a political party representing the 
government entrenched in a dogma, a belief that is outdated, is 
simply growing more and more arrogant at the cost of those that 
can least afford it? That is the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some notes here, Mr. Speaker, on the 
failure of the NDP government. And sadly it does not give me 
joy to read these. We have Saskatchewan’s population not 
growing. We’ve said this time and again. I think the only thing 
that we should be cognizant of here, Mr. Speaker, is that there 
has to be a reason. We’ve said time and again what that reason 
is, what we believe that reason to be. 
 
Between 1992 and 2003, Saskatchewan lost 60,000 people to 
out-migration. Forty thousand of those people who left 
Saskatchewan during that period were between the ages of 15 
and 29 years of age. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, from having 
young children, these are the people that will stroke our 
economy because kids need diapers and coats and on and on 
and on. 
 
Fifty-eight per cent of the people who leave are going to 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t envy Alberta. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that Saskatchewan has all the potential to outstrip it. 
 
We do not have . . . and you cannot have when you come from 
a socialist background, you cannot have . . . it will not come 
from a communist background, Mr. Speaker. You just will not 
have the situation for excellence. It is not part of your 
vocabulary. 
 
[16:00] 
 
If you are in a situation, Mr. Speaker, where you ask, let us be 
the best, it will not come when you start from the lowest 
common denominator. When you’re asking, how do I pull down 
the individual that’s ahead of me so that we are equal, it’s the 
wrong approach, Mr. Speaker. The world over has learned this. 
And we continue to fall behind, to fall behind, and to fall 
behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, returning to that quote from the Speech from the 
Throne: 
 

In the future, Saskatchewan communities will be larger 
and more cosmopolitan . . . 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we had a situation in Tramping Lake. 
That’s one of the communities in the constituency of Kindersley 
up in the northeast corner. And the reality was that it came time 
to amalgamate a school division and close that school. There’s 
nothing left there now. The town is dying, and it’s not right. 
 
We have a situation in this province where we have children 
living in poverty. In the country that has nearly half the arable 
land in the Dominion of Canada . . . We are the best country in 
the world to live in. But it is never mentioned specifically from 
this Premier that we should be the best province to live in. And 
therein lies the entire failure of what has come forth from the 
New Democratic Party in the last 60 years. 
 
It would be the proper thing, Mr. Speaker, to applaud our 
accomplishments and our achievements. We had a centennial 
celebration this summer, throughout the year. I’m given to 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that there was in the neighbourhood 
of $350 million spent on that celebration. And I know that I had 
a little bit of a start there from the member from Moose Jaw, so 
I may have exaggerated that figure somewhat — somewhat. 
With that, I apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that I have left the member from Moose 
Jaw short of words means that either I’m really on to something 
or he missed a committee meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — The point, Mr. Speaker — there were 
millions of dollars spent celebrating our province this summer. 
Sadly, from what I’ve been able to determine, in the riding of 
Kindersley, there weren’t millions of dollars spent. There were 
tens of thousands of dollars spent. But that didn’t really make 
individuals in that part of the community feel as though they 
were part of the province that they care about, that their 
ancestors came to 100 years ago, that many of them have 
worked building those communities, who sent their sons and 
daughters overseas to fight for this country. They didn’t feel 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

included. There weren’t the ceremonies that were held in other 
places, and it was sad. 
 
I had an opportunity to speak to some of the centenarians. And 
when we went to present these medals — their children, also 
sometimes very aged themselves, coming from out of province, 
coming from Saskatoon, coming from out of the riding, a small 
part of Saskatchewan in that celebration — you recognized the 
morbidity of it. There was a death there too. It was a death that I 
don’t think is what the legislators in this Assembly have really 
intended upon, but we’ve been down the wrong road much too 
long. And it’s not beyond repair, but it’s quickly approaching. 
 
We’ve worried that there’s a great deal of money coming forth 
that it’ll be spent properly, but we don’t see that, Mr. Speaker. 
We see just today a rebate program, the second aspect of 
SaskEnergy. We called for a rebate, Mr. Speaker. We have the 
third largest reserves of natural gas in the country. The province 
is bringing in royalties from this. All of us would like to see it 
spent wisely. But we were presented with $36 million to be 
spent over two Crowns and two departments and six application 
processes. 
 
It fails to meet the litmus test of common sense. And that’s 
what frustrates citizens of Saskatchewan more than anything. 
When, Mr. Speaker, when a government fails to provide to its 
citizens the basics, it causes apathy. And this is a true enemy of 
democracy. It’s an enemy of the democratic process. And it’s 
one that under this government is increasing because many 
people feel helpless. 
 
What can we do? Where are we going to go forward? How are 
we going to fix these problems? How are we going to fix the 
problems, the unfunded pension liability, when we don’t even 
speak about it? How are we going to fix the problems of the fact 
that only 24 out of 100 adult Aboriginals have full-time 
employment? How are we going to fix the problem of children 
being abused in the sex trade? How are we going to fix the 
problem of 44,000 children living in poverty in this province, 
and we don’t even speak about it? This is a clear lack of 
leadership. It’s a lack of leadership that I find tiring. It’s a lack 
of leadership that I find deplorable. 
 
We want the changes, but we’re unable from this government to 
provide the plan of how that’s going to happen. We have found 
that his government currently is slow to take up on new ideas. 
We saw this with the crystal meth. We saw the Member from 
Regina South mock a real problem. Why? Why would he do 
this, Mr. Speaker? I know him as an intelligent individual. He is 
a clever man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that members opposite and the member 
that took on the commission is a compassionate individual. I 
have no doubt about that. But why would it start that when we 
brought forth an issue it could be ignored until it was 
advantageous politically to graft onto it? 
 
I want to bring up a situation, Mr. Speaker, that occurred last 
year here or rather in the spring session. There was a 
grandmother came to me in my office in Unity and said my 
granddaughter is slipping between the cracks. She has a drug 
problem. It may be crystal meth. We haven’t seen her for 
months. But she’s younger than 18. She’s over 16, and Social 

Services won’t intervene. And she came here and she met with 
the minister. And the minister to her credit brought this 
individual out and got her into treatment. And I applaud the 
minister for that, and I know that the minister has the intent in 
her heart to do the right thing. And in this case they did it, but it 
took a great deal, and I’m glad that they did it. 
 
I phoned just about three weeks ago to do a follow-up, see how 
this young lady was doing because I knew that her birthday had 
come in August. What had happened — from the grandmother 
when she started crying — was she had been taken from a drug 
home. We don’t know what her source of income had been 
since the time she was sixteen to seventeen and a half but we 
can only speculate because she didn’t have a job. But she was 
taken from this for lack of a better word, crack house, and, you 
know, her family, the minister, Social Services got her into 
treatment and into help. And she enjoyed the counsellors and 
she enjoyed . . . She was straightening out. But then her 18th 
birthday came and the day of her 18th birthday members of 
Social Services drove to the very house that they had 
apprehended her from and asked them, are you prepared to take 
her back? And they said yes we are and she left on the bus the 
next day, and those grandparents have not heard from her since. 
 
The reality, Mr. Speaker, is not the intent . . . this minister to 
have this young person ruin their life. I know that. But it is an 
example of the competence of this government and it is an 
example of how responsibility is not taken. Nobody gets 
everything right, Mr. Speaker. If anybody has any doubts about 
that they can check The Globe and Mail from last spring. I’m in 
there. But the reality is you have to in leadership take 
responsibility when you’re wrong, and I don’t see that this is a 
government — in the short three and a half years that I’ve been 
here — has done it . . . with the exception of the one newly 
returned cabinet minister which is a baffling position in and of 
itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne will not achieve what 
we want for the province of Saskatchewan. It won’t achieve 
what the people of Saskatchewan want for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Maybe more ironic than all of this, it won’t 
achieve what many of the members on the other side of the 
House want for the province of Saskatchewan because it’s 
announcements of things that have already been announced and 
not delivered. It’s a lack of vision. It’s holding on to a dogma 
that has had its time. It’s passed. We do have a responsibility to 
the children of the centennial, and this government cannot and 
will not be able to deliver that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to speak against the motion raised by 
the Premier and in favour of the amendment, and I thank you 
for your time and patience this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy for the opportunity to stand up and 
speak in response to a Throne Speech which is clearly 
visionary, which has in it a very clear picture of where we will 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

be moving in the next decade, Mr. Speaker, and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we looked at the situation that we are in 
today and we saw the wonderful celebrations that have 
happened all across this province over the summer, we saw 
people who took a pride, a great pride and a joy in their 
province. We saw people celebrating the vision that had 
brought us to this place in 2005. Mr. Speaker, we heard from 
many, many people across this province what a great place it is 
to live. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there were people who came back here from 
other places around the world and who celebrated their home, a 
place which they loved. And so many of them, Mr. Speaker, 
talked about what a wonderful place it was. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we celebrated with them their heritage. And, Mr. Speaker, as we 
celebrated that heritage we talked about the future. We dreamed 
about a future for the children of 2005, Mr. Speaker. And that 
vision is a vision of a prosperous province — a province that 
continues not only to provide leadership in this nation but 
leadership in the world in terms of programs that care for 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m telling you, listening to those last two 
speeches, I have never in my life heard such hollow, negative 
hype. In my life I have never heard it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, if those people spoke at any celebration in this 
province, if that last member spoke at a celebration in the 
Kindersley area, Mr. Speaker, he could drive them all into deep 
depression. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am telling you the people of this province do 
have vision. This government has vision, and we are building 
for a positive future. The people across the way from us in this 
House seem to be ensnared in a dark, gloomy vision of who 
knows what. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re going no where, and 
they have no ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen from them only, heard from them 
only negative rhetoric. Mr. Speaker, in the meantime we have 
been meeting with people all around this province. We have 
been putting together a vision, and we have been putting 
together a vision that will have action attached to it, and it will 
be implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We began this year, this centennial year, with an economic 
summit where we gathered with leaders from all across this 
province, and we talked about the kind of things that we needed 
to build upon our already successful areas and define those 
areas that were not as successful and to build and strengthen 
those, Mr. Speaker. And out of that we have a Saskatchewan 
action plan that is going to build a prosperous future in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen already evidence of the kind of 
decision making that this government can do that can help build 
a strong and a positive future. We have seen changes in the last 
few years that have lowered the income tax rate significantly in 
this province. We have seen changes in the royalty structure 
that has really enabled much more development in the oil and 
gas industry, and we have seen the rewards of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
We have seen also changes in relationship to mining and the 
mining industry is growing in this province, Mr. Speaker. We 
have seen so much success in the manufacturing industry. How 
could one be depressed when we know that we have some of 
the best manufacturers in this world? 
 
I had the privilege of going to the SIMA show, the largest 
agricultural manufacturing show in the world in France . . . 
pardon me, the largest in France and one of the largest in the 
world, Mr. Speaker, and our manufacturers from this province 
were so successful there, people from all around the world 
coming to see their equipment and to buy their equipment. One 
of those manufacturers, Mr. Speaker, was not even able to get 
his equipment there, but word of mouth, word of mouth was so 
strong that people came and bought that equipment unseen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is about people who are innovative, people who dream for 
a positive future and work for a positive future. That is the 
inheritance that I know as Saskatchewan and that’s the 
inheritance that I want to give to my children. Mr. Speaker, we 
will be successful in fulfilling our dreams in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve been working now as 
Minister of Agriculture, it’ll be two years in February — that 
this has probably been one of the most difficult periods in 
agriculture in the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. The 
dirty thirties were very, very difficult, but the impact that this 
province has felt in agriculture have been huge, and it is a 
testimony to the tenacity of Saskatchewan farmers that many of 
them have been able to carry on through these difficult times. 
 
Let’s list them. Let’s look at the impact of BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] — a huge impact — closing the 
border to our largest market, Mr. Speaker, and that had impact 
all the way through the industry. Did we give up? Did we turn 
negative? No, not for a minute, Mr. Speaker. We worked with 
all levels of government. We worked with the foreign 
governments in many countries trying to build other markets, 
Mr. Speaker. We put over $80 million into programming, 
joining with the federal government to try and make sure that 
this industry would be shored up and would be able to make it 
through this difficult period of time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the border is open. A lot of extensive work, 
but this border is open and we have something to celebrate. 
Prices are back up. And, Mr. Speaker, we also are seeing some 
changes in the livestock industry in this province which are 
very essential to a prosperous future for Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that work has been done by joint work of 
members of this government, of this department, Mr. Speaker 
— of Agriculture and Food — and with industry players and 
farmers and cattle ranchers across this province and across this 
country. It’s been working together that has brought us strength 
and success. That is our history, and that is our experience 
through this BSE crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you that what it has also done is it has led to 
some new commitments about what we will be doing in this 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

province in livestock. I don’t think there’s a person that has 
been engaged in the livestock industry in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, who is not totally committed to building and 
strengthening our feeding and finishing, our slaughter and 
processing industry right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are fed up with sending animals across the borders, whether 
it’s to Alberta or whether it’s to the United States or whether 
it’s to Ontario. We are fed up with sending animals there to be 
fed and finished, sending the feed across to finish them, and 
then sending young people across to do the jobs of slaughter 
and processing and the jobs around the feedlots, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are changing that. We are taking very concrete, positive 
steps to change that. And the people of this province, the 
producers of this province have worked together with us to help 
that happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, talk about the commitment of this 
government and the innovation to move us towards success — 
$37.3 million. A strategic investment in the meat processing 
industry that really will have ripple effects throughout the 
industry and will help build a positive livestock industry, from 
cow-calf operations right through to selling the processed 
products in the widest markets possible around the world. Mr. 
Speaker, that has taken commitment, that has taken working 
together of all the people involved in this industry. Mr. Speaker, 
I celebrate that. That’s positive. That’s a good thing that is 
happening in Saskatchewan in agriculture. 
 
But let me step back and talk about some of the other things that 
have made this such a very difficult few years in this industry 
which is such a ground . . . base for our whole economy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our dollar has increased in value compared to the 
US [United States] dollar. And we have been exporters of . . . 
75 per cent of what we produce here has been exported. And 
anybody that knows economics knows that when that dollar 
goes up, it makes it much more difficult to export those 
products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that commodity prices have gone down, 
gone down significantly. Add that to the increasing dollar, 
you’ve got a greater problem, Mr. Speaker. And not only have 
commodity prices gone down, but we have seen greater 
competition throughout the world. 
 
As the member opposite alluded to, there has been huge 
increase in production in Brazil. There are other countries that 
are coming on stream that are using technologies — some of 
those which have been developed here — and are producing 
more than they have ever produced. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we recognize, we recognize that there is not 
the same kind of future in those commodities that there has 
been in the past. There is not the same kind of strength there. 
And we are changing the way we are doing things again, Mr. 
Speaker, because we recognize that fact. We know that we need 
to do more value-add here, Mr. Speaker. And we are trying 
working with others to develop those plans which will give us 
more valued-added industry in Saskatchewan. 
 

We will see a shift from having so much land just simply 
growing the grain and oilseeds that it has grown in the past. We 
will see a shift, and that shift will mean that there will be more 
high-quality feeds grown in this province. And that shift will 
mean that we are growing energy crops so that we can have 
biodiesel, so that we can have ethanol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are visionary projects which are under way, 
and we are working with the people of this province to build a 
prosperous future for Saskatchewan. Why? Because we love 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and we want to see those children 
— those children of 2005 as we alluded to in the speech — 
having a full, wonderful, and prosperous future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, despite all of those 
troubles in agriculture, people have persevered. But let me add, 
the troubles are greater. We have faced two extremely bad years 
for many of the people of this province. Last year in some 
corners of the province people got the best crops that they ever 
had. But, Mr. Speaker, last year many people had great dreams 
because they had beautiful crops coming along and they were 
completely devastated by a huge frost. Mr. Speaker, they were 
not abandoned. Mr. Speaker, this government in a time of 
challenges came forward and fully funded the CAIS program in 
both of those years. Mr. Speaker, that really does make a 
difference. 
 
But not only did we fully fund the program, Mr. Speaker, 
recognizing the problems that people are facing and the 
immensity of these problems, we pushed the federal 
government to make changes to make sure that cash would flow 
to be there for producers. We pushed them for a cash payment 
last spring because there were many people who were suffering, 
and thank goodness at that time the federal government came 
through with a billion dollar payment. 
 
But I want to provide an illustration of just how challenging it is 
to really support this industry in the province. Of that billion 
dollars, $280 million came to Saskatchewan, $280 million. And 
that $280 million was dispersed amongst farmers around this 
province. And I spoke to farmers over the summer, some who 
had received $4,000, some $10,000. Mr. Speaker, most of them 
when they spoke about what they got said, we really 
appreciated it but you know it didn’t change a thing. It helped 
me pay some bills; it helped fill my fuel tanks. It didn’t quite 
fill my fuel tanks. But you know what, Mr. Speaker, they did 
appreciate it because it provided a bit of temporary relief. But 
the key there is what they said when they said it didn’t change 
anything. 
 
We need change, Mr. Speaker, and we are working for change 
in this agriculture sector. Mr. Speaker, when we look at the long 
term which we need to be able to plan on, we need the support 
of a federal government because the farmers in this province 
and the farmers in Canada are trying to compete against the 
national treasuries of the United States and the European Union. 
Mr. Speaker, the huge subsidies that are provided by the US and 
by the European Union impact hugely on the ability of our 
farmers to compete. And so we have continually called upon 
our federal government to provide not just the little surplus bit 
that they can put out from time to time, but to make consistent 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

programs that will work for the provinces and work for the 
people of this province. 
 
We have called upon them to make changes to the CAIS 
program and, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province know 
that we have taken leadership in trying to make sure that we got 
the CAIS deposits taken off — we did, Mr. Speaker — and that 
freed up another $147 million for the farmers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we took leadership. And we will continue to push 
for changes in the structure of CAIS so that when margins drop 
below 50 per cent, that the federal government will cover the 
cost. And, Mr. Speaker, as we have worked at designing a 
program like this, we have managed to put together a 
unanimous position by all the ministers of Agriculture across 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan does take leadership because we do 
have vision. And that vision isn’t just for this province, Mr. 
Speaker, but it is for a successful Canada because a successful 
Canada also means a successful Saskatchewan. 
 
And I tell you this federal government has been little help in 
moving us in that direction. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I can 
tell you that over the last decade, this federal government by 
their decisions has taken almost $2 billion a year out of this 
economy, this agricultural economy. And I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, they have got to come to the table. They have got to 
come to the table and provide the supports that will give us a 
good base for building so that we will never, never have to take 
any federal dollars in equalization again. Because we can do it. 
We can build the manufacturing sector. We can build the 
agriculture sector. We can build the mining sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look across this country, we see a vast 
injustice. We see a federal government that does one thing out 
in the East Coast, providing benefit out there. And we come to 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and there’s not a lot of people and 
they’re not expecting to get many votes in that federal Liberal 
Party out of Saskatchewan, and they leave us hanging, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we need that federal Liberal government 
to come to the table for this province as they have come to the 
table for some of the other provinces, Mr. Speaker. There needs 
to be some thoughtful consideration of the impacts. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been paying through this CAIS program 
10 times, 10 times the provincial per capita average. Mr. 
Speaker, in a Confederation like we have this should not 
happen. It should not happen. The federal government should 
be working to build plans that provide a level across this nation 
that allows us all to move forward and build for a prosperous 
Canada and, in our case, to build for a prosperous 
Saskatchewan. They must come to the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberal government has been negligent 
here as they have been negligent in their responsibilities in 
Ottawa, and they’d better come to the table. Mr. Speaker, this 
Confederation is in danger because of their negligence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have so much to live for in this province. We 
have so many innovative, strong people here. We have watched 

people take a hold of elements of this agriculture industry and 
build successfully. We have seen some of those people win 
award after award for the innovative work that they have done 
to build this industry. Mr. Speaker, we have worked with those 
people and we will continue to work with those people. 
 
I want to talk about one of the other successes that we have, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s alluded to in the Speech from the Throne, and 
it’s connected with in terms of our Asia office for Industry and 
Resources. Mr. Speaker, that is the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership. I can’t say enough good about the work that 
STEP has done to make international connections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a trading province, we have benefited so 
greatly from the work of STEP — the connections that they 
make with people in other nations, the way that they help 
Saskatchewan businesses make those connections and move 
forward. Mr. Speaker, innovative thinking by this government 
years back when they first came up with the idea of STEP. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to say, we have benefited greatly by 
some of the personnel that have worked in STEP. Recently, 
most recently, John Treleaven, who has just left the main job 
with STEP was a tremendous asset in helping build this 
province. And we have much to be thankful for, for the gifts 
that he provided and the leadership that he provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the vision of STEP was not just to help the 
manufacturers of today but it was also to mentor young people 
in this province. They brought young people into STEP and 
they helped them understand how vital international trade is. 
 
And somebody from the other side says, how’s that working 
out? I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to some of those 
young people that have gone through there and they are so, so 
enthusiastic about this province. Mr. Speaker, they see the 
potential here like the people on the other side of this House 
could never see it. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because they’re positive 
and they’re hopeful, Mr. Speaker, and they are realistic. They 
look at what there is here and they see a future. And they were 
mentored by people who have that same kind of positive vision. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what we need. That’s what we’ve built and 
we will continue to build upon it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our manufacturers have reached out throughout 
the world successfully because of their work and because of the 
work of the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership and the 
work of this government, Mr. Speaker. And I celebrate that. I 
celebrate that, and I’m thankful for the commitment to the 
ongoing work that we hear in this Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that I really appreciate this 
leader, our Premier, is that he has made very clear from the very 
beginning of his work as leader — from earlier than that — that 
we must have solid economic development in this province. But 
as he has made that very clear, he has also made very clear that 
we cannot, must not from a moral perspective, have that 
development without having a corresponding social 
development. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the people 
of this government are committed to making sure that that 
social development does not leave anyone behind, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have made that clear in the vision of this Throne 
Speech. 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

We have program developed, Mr. Speaker, that will reach out 
and enable the poorest people of this province to have strength 
and be able to move forward, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is happening. We have plans here. 
 
We’ve got a new ministry, Mr. Speaker, that is going to be 
working on issues of healthy living. And I can tell you the work 
that this person has done, along with our Premier, in putting 
together a plan of hope, a plan that will help families who are 
dealing with the horrors of addiction is second to none in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. Second to none. And it will effectively 
help meet the needs of those people, Mr. Speaker, and it will 
help rescue some of those young people who are caught in the 
addictions. 
 
And I am thankful for the vision that has brought us to this 
point, Mr. Speaker, and I am thankful for a Throne Speech that 
brings this forward. And yes, Mr. Speaker, I will say that I am 
thankful as well for the people on the other side of the House 
who also spoke about this and who also called for attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I am thankful for that. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when we find that there is willingness to work together 
to do something positive, that’s worth celebrating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been many times as we’ve moved 
forward that we have had words from the Sask Party that they 
would be with us. If we just did such and such, they would be 
with us, Mr. Speaker. What I’m sorry to say is that those are 
most often hollow words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they said if we fully funded CAIS, they would be 
there with us trying to get the federal government to make some 
changes. But, Mr. Speaker, it was hollow words. They have not 
been there. We have fully funded CAIS each year of the 
program. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s in the record in Hansard. This 
is not any kind of, any kind of makeup, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in fully funding CAIS, Mr. Speaker, these folks said 
they would be there to help make a difference in the programs, 
and they’re not there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to also say their leader on the other 
side, you know, he was talking about the reality of making 
policies and things like that, Mr. Speaker. Well he said, you 
know, there’s some areas that we just, you know, we can’t 
make policies for now. You know, we’re not government, and 
we can’t make policy on. One of those areas, Mr. Speaker, is 
agriculture. They can’t make policies. They can’t take a stand. 
All they can do is complain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well in the meantime we are making policy, and we are moving 
forward, Mr. Speaker. And we are moving forward to have a 
positive future for the farmers of Saskatchewan, and we will 
continue to do that. We will fund research and development. 
We will fully fund the CAIS program. We will work 
continuously to make changes to that program so that it will be 
just, not only here but across the nation, Mr. Speaker. We work 
for, we believe in, we have vision of a prosperous 
Saskatchewan where no one is left behind. And we have that 
vision, Mr. Speaker, because we love this province that we have 
inherited. Thank you very much. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I really want to get into the debate on the Throne Speech. 
But first off I’m compelled to make a few words about the last 
rant that I heard from the Minister of Agriculture. He talked 
about hollow words. Well for 20-some-odd minutes all I heard 
was hollow words. I read the Throne Speech, and all I saw was 
hollow words. And he has the audacity to stand up and say from 
this side of the House, there’s hollow words. I would suggest he 
look in a mirror once or twice. 
 
The Ag minister also talked at the start of his speech, and he 
talked about the visitors that came back to Saskatchewan during 
the centennial year which was great. And he talked about them 
saying what a wonderful province this is. I totally agree. The 
problem is, why did they leave in the first place? Did he explain 
that? Did he have any ideas why people would leave this 
glorious province of ours? 
 
It is because of NDP socialist policies for the biggest part of the 
last 60 years and Tommy Douglas’s whole socialist structure 
that he established back in the ’40s. That is why people are 
leaving the province and why they have left the province. 
 
Why does one think the oil companies left this province? Can 
anybody on that side of the House answer that? Why do people 
leave? Because they don’t have jobs. Why don’t they have 
jobs? Because of the taxation problems, the socialistic structure 
that these people over there have created. 
 
The minister wanted to talk about CAIS. Let’s talk about CAIS. 
If you listen to him, you’d almost think he was doing a good 
job. Somebody else has to get up and really say what’s going 
on. CAIS for an example, hey we funded CAIS. Well at the last 
second. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We have people in this 
province right today that still have not settled their 2003 CAIS 
account. And yet the Minister of Agriculture got up and said 
how wonderful this is and put money in the pockets of 
Saskatchewan people and farmers. Well some of them don’t 
even have 2003 CAIS settled. Now can the minister stand up 
and say that is a good idea? 
 
We even have an individual that got a huge cheque from the 
CAIS program that totalled 8 cents. That won’t even buy the 
package of gum that Dingwall bought through taxpayers’ 
money. They talk about ideas on that side of the House. I’m 
going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, if they have an idea on that side 
of the House, now it might be their first. 
 
They get up, they get up and listen to their own rhetoric so often 
— they listen to one another talk the rhetoric — that I actually 
sometimes think they believe what they’re saying. But 
fortunately the people of Saskatchewan do not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on the Speech from the Throne, I’d 
like to talk just briefly about my constituency. And we talk 
about people, we talk about people leaving this province. I now 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

have the largest constituency outside of the high North. Why is 
that? Because people have left my area, that has left the area 
because of policies by this NDP government over the last 
number of years that have stifled growth in this province. 
Businesses are leaving the province. Thus, people are leaving 
the province. 
 
Again the Minister of Agriculture talks about such things as the 
people leaving, or they’re coming back to visit. Well the reason 
they’re leaving is because of a lack of jobs. Now if we had such 
things as off-farm jobs for some of these people, when 
commodity prices are down and farmers are struggling, 
wouldn’t it be nice if they had a job? 
 
And I’m just going to touch base on the cattle industry that the 
minister seems so proud of. We have put so many dollars into 
the cattle industry. Well I listened to the minister recently on 
TV, and he was talking about the money put into slaughter 
facilities in this province. I agree we need slaughter facilities in 
this province. I have said that. We have said that for ages. We 
need to increase our slaughter facilities. 
 
But the interesting part of it, Mr. Speaker, was that the minister 
took words that I used back as far back as 1997, and I’ve used 
in this House every Throne Speech and probably every budget 
since, is our cattle industry in this province. And I also heard 
the Deputy Premier use these same words. But it’s how they 
used it. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture after his announcement about the 
slaughter facility, he says, we ship 750,000 head of cattle a year 
to Alberta. We ship our barley to Alberta. We ship our grain to 
Alberta. And this is going to stop that problem. Well he should 
give his head a shake. We are shipping cattle to Alberta to be 
fed. That’s why we ship the barley to Alberta to be fed. And the 
kids go to Alberta to feed the Saskatchewan barley to 
Saskatchewan cattle. Building a slaughterhouse facility is not 
going to stop that exodus of three key resources that we have. 
 
What has he done and what has that government done to stop 
that exodus? Is there anything in this Throne Speech that would 
change that? I would suggest not. So once again here we have a 
province shipping out some of our most valuable resources. 
 
And I would suggest if the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Premier were very serious about keeping people in this province 
. . . One little thing, why don’t we keep those cattle here? Look 
at the jobs they would provide — 750,000 head of cattle 
provided in feedlots in this province. What is there in here that 
even suggests anything that would stop that exodus of those 
resources? Is there anything in here? No. But the Minister of 
Agriculture can get up and boast, boast about how good he is 
doing as Minister of Agriculture. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about, we talk about a plan, a vision. 
There’s no plan or vision. We talk about losing 6,000 jobs in 
this last year. What kind of a vision is that? What kind of vision 
do we have from an NDP government that says we lose 6,000 
jobs, that’s a glitch in the monthly stats or something? 
 
The fact is the rest of the country is growing. There’s more 

jobs. There’s people moving in. And here we are in good old 
socialist Saskatchewan. We’re losing jobs, and we’re losing 
people. And yet they sit and say that’s a good thing because 
there’s more left for the rest of us, quote from the current 
Minister of Highways. 
 
Speaking of highways, I’d like to just touch base on highways. I 
had the opportunity recently to discuss a new venture that’s 
going in, in my constituency. And I know the Premier and the 
Minister of Industry and Resources has received numerous 
letters. And at one of the presentations, there was talk about the 
requirement for infrastructure, strange word for the people on 
that side of the House — infrastructure — because we in rural 
Saskatchewan understand the deterioration of infrastructure and 
how it’s hurting the economy of rural Saskatchewan. Again 
rhetoric from there, no action. 
 
Well it so happened at one of these meetings that there was a 
representative from the Department of Highways there, and we 
got into a little bit of discussion about how we needed roads for 
this new venture. We need a highway. What a novel idea to put 
a highway in so we could have a business down there. We don’t 
know where it’s going with the government. 
 
But in that discussion, the person from the Department of 
Highways had suggested to me, he said you got a great highway 
here. Highway 13 is just a great highway. And I said, do you 
want to go for a drive on it with me? Do you really want to go 
for a drive? He said well this highway is great. And I said, well 
I’ll tell you; have you ever been over around Ponteix? Well 
that’s different. Excuse me. You say it’s got a great highway 
but not around Ponteix. And he said the problem with Ponteix is 
we’re rebuilding that but due to weather conditions in the 
summer of 2005, the highway is behind schedule — due to 
weather conditions in the summer of 2005. 
 
Again those people over there will believe that. That was the 
driest area in the province. Now what kind of weather 
conditions precluded them from working on the highway? Was 
it too sunny? Was it too dry? What were the weather conditions 
that stopped them from working? I have no idea. 
 
Now I suggested to the same individual, well we can maybe 
take 15 or 20 miles of a road that is . . . basically the other day it 
was impassable. But I said, now you just said how Highway 13 
was so great; let’s go from Cadillac to Shaunavon. He said, oh 
that’s different. Well again, Mr. Speaker, it’s either a good road 
or it’s not a good road. And he just told me it was such a good 
road. 
 
Well I would invite all members from that side, rather than fly, 
to drive that road. It is absolutely, absolutely terrible. And I 
would invite the new Minister of Highways back to his home 
area and drive the road. And maybe, and maybe there will be a 
little action on that road. 
 
And the person I was talking to is also very, very keen on 
letting me know that Highway 43 South — which is not in my 
constituency any more but it used to be — and he said well I’ll 
have you know we spent a whole pile of money on a bridge on 
Highway 43 South. He said, have you been down there lately? 
And I said, not for about three months. So I purposely went the 
next day and drove it. And you know, they redid the bridge and 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2005 

there’s about 2 miles of highway that’s decent. But how do you 
get to it? You’ve got to drive another 20 kilometres or 20 miles 
of terrible road to get to this nice 2 kilometres of road. 
 
It’s absolutely appalling. And yet this is a government that says, 
we’re doing everything we can for rural Saskatchewan. We’re 
doing everything we can for the economy. This is hurting the 
economy. How can anybody go in there and start up a business 
when the roads are like that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about health care and there are stories of 
health care that we’ve raised, health care waiting lists. We have 
members on the other side of the House that still believe — and 
they will stand up and they will talk about it — that we’ve got 
the best health care system in the world. Well I will suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, that people that have been on waiting lists for two 
years would debate that or argue that or flat out and tell us that 
we do not have the best health care in this country. 
 
And then we’ll talk about people that have been waiting for 
serious operations. We’ve talked about in this House people 
waiting for cancer surgery. And what we get from that side of 
the House is, well we’re reducing the waiting list. Going from 
2.3 years to 2 years they think is acceptable. I do not. I do not 
think that’s acceptable and I would like any member on that 
side of the House to stand up and tell me that waiting two years 
for surgery is acceptable. And I would like them to do that if 
they’re so proud of how our health care system is working 
today. 
 
And I want to touch base, Mr. Speaker, on a situation in my 
constituency. And it kind of reflects the whole attitude of the 
NDP government. I have a lady that has been trying to get into 
a long-term care home. And her family is pushing to get her 
into her hometown long-term care home. And it’s a battle. Here 
is one of our seniors, one of our seniors that pioneered, 
pioneered this province, helped build the care home — her 
family helped build the care home — now she can’t get into it. 
 
And one’ll say right off the bat, well there’s no beds. I’m sorry 
but there’s been beds available and I wrote to the minister and 
he says, it’s not my problem; it’s the health district. The 
individual wrote to the Premier. He says, not my problem; I’ll 
give it to the Health minister. The Health minister shunts it off 
to the health district. Health district says, it’s not my problem;, 
it’s the Health minister. And it’s a vicious circle. 
 
And I met with the CEO [chief executive officer] of the health 
district and basically there’s a line been drawn in the sand and 
this lady will probably not get into that home. That is sad that 
we treat our seniors that way. Sad that we have no compassion. 
Her family support structure is in her hometown but will they 
place her in there? No. 
 
We talk about, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve talked about this before, 
how this province has under the NDP think it’s done so well. 
And I want to relate my story about that. When my 
grandparents settled in this country, in this province, circa 1915, 
both sets of grandparents, you know where I live? There was no 
railroad. There was no roads. There’s no hospital and there’s no 
school. They had to pretty much rough it. 
 
Now we went through an era of progression. And I retired back 

to that same area in 1994, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll tell you what 
has happened and this is under a socialist regime of this 
province. And I want to tell everyone what happened. The 
hospital is closed, thanks to the NDP government. The school is 
closed, thanks to the NDP government. The railroad is pulled. 
Can’t blame it totally on the NDP government. The fact is the 
railroad is pulled and the roads . . . I’m almost willing to believe 
that when my grandparents took the buggy from Moose Jaw 
south, their . . . probably roads were as good then as they are 
now. And this is considered progress by the socialists? I would, 
I would totally argue against that. I do not think that is progress 
at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to touch base a little bit on this concept 
of culture of entitlement. And I think it’s running rampant on 
that side of the House. We see it, we see it in the federal side of 
the House, but I think it is on that side of House — a culture of 
entitlement. And I think what epitomizes that the most to me is 
the $1 million being spent on a terminal for exec air air 
terminal. $1 million for what? The previous terminal, the 
terminal beside it, was fine for the Queen. It was fine for the 
Prime Minister of this country, but it’s not good for the Premier 
and his cabinet. Talk about a culture of entitlement, Mr. 
Speaker — that reeks of a culture of entitlement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke to a group of grade 12 students not that 
long ago. And I spent quite a bit of time with them. And at the 
end of their multi questions and I spent . . . it was here in the 
Legislative Building and I spent, oh an hour and a half or so 
with them, and they had a lot of good questions. And at the end 
of their questions they were getting ready to leave and I said, 
okay gang, I have a couple of questions for you. Out of the 35 
students in grade 12, how many of you are planning to stay in 
the province of Saskatchewan following high school, trade 
school, post-secondary, whatever? This is sad, Mr. Speaker, 
because three people put up their hand. Three out of thirty-five 
put up their hand. They had no intentions of staying in this 
province. 
 
So I threw another question to them and I said, this is sad, this 
is very, very sad. What would it take for you to stay in 
Saskatchewan? Unanimously they said a good job, an upward 
mobility job. And when I said, would you stay with a good job 
and an upward mobility job, it went from three people wanting 
to stay to thirty-three people wanting to stay. Does that not tell 
those people over there something? They talk about a plan and a 
vision. There’s no plan and there’s no vision. It’s rhetoric. Why 
isn’t something being done to keep those young people in this 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as time is drawing close I think I can relate why 
this province is in the situation it is under a socialist 
government. We heard the Premier . . . and I heard some of his 
colleagues on that side of the House and they’re very, very 
happy about this story of the canoe trip this past summer up in 
the Cumberland House area. And boats were coming in, as I 
understand the story, and at the back of the pack a couple of 
boats had overturned in the water. And the Premier really likes 
this story and so did the other members I heard tell it. They 
said, when these boats turned over in the water, two canoes that 
were near them went over, helped them get their canoe upright, 
got them together as a four ship, held canoes side by side, and 
crossed the finish line together. And the Premier said, that is the 



November 8, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

spirit of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we can identify with the spirit of Saskatchewan in helping. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the spirit of Saskatchewan is not to finish 
last. It is under their plan because even the Premier said, that’s 
the spirit of Saskatchewan; we’ll band together and finish last. I 
don’t agree with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as time is drawing close I think I will end my 
comments at this time. And I will be supporting the amendment 
and will not be supporting the motion. And, Mr. Speaker, at this 
time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River that debate be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore I would like to move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Brkich ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Weekes ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Kerpan ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Bakken Lackey..............................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Harpauer .......................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Bakken Lackey............................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman......................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Borgerson ....................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Morin ...........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Year of the Veteran 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres Awareness Week 
  Eagles ...........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 National Aboriginal Veterans Day 
  Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Saskatchewan War Memorial 
  Borgerson ....................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 National Diabetes Awareness Month 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Saskatchewan’s Geo-Memorial Project 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................13 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Federal-Provincial Energy Accord Negotiations 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................14 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................14 
 Employment Figures 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  Cline .............................................................................................................................................................................................16 
 New Cabinet Ministers 
  Heppner .......................................................................................................................................................................................17 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................17 
 Education Property Tax 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................18 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................18 
 Agricultural Policies 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................18 
  Wartman......................................................................................................................................................................................18 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Energy Share Plan Unveiled 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................19 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................19 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................20 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Junor ............................................................................................................................................................................................20 
  Harper .........................................................................................................................................................................................................25 



 

  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................27 
  Dearborn......................................................................................................................................................................................31 
  Wartman......................................................................................................................................................................................34 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................38 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


