
















































Hansard: November 25, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 13A  FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 403 
 November 25, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents of the 
Cypress Hills area. Same topic, Mr. Speaker, different highway. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
21 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these several pages of petitions are signed by 
constituents, as I indicated, from Cypress Hills, but from 
communities like Swift Current, Medicine Hat. We’ve got 
Maple Creek, Tompkins, Schuler, and we even have a visitor 
from Bichester, United Kingdom, who thought it was important 
enough to sign. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, Humboldt, 
Lake Lenore, Annaheim, Muenster, and Middle Lake. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of 600 children under 
six years of age and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituency regarding a much needed elementary 
school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 

 

The petitioners today reside on Perehudoff Crescent, Budz 
Terrace, Morrison Court, and Sears Cove in northeast 
Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with the 
citizens opposed to the closure of the SaskPower office in 
Davidson. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the SaskPower office in 
Davidson remains open at its current level of customer 
service and availability to all SaskPower customers from 
the Davidson and surrounding service areas. 
 
In duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens who would like their SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] licensing office reinstated. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to reinstate the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance licensing agency in Handel. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Handel, Kelfield, and Landis. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 
present another petition on the deplorable conditions of 
Highway 368. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make the necessary repairs to 
Highway 368 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it is signed by the good people of Muenster and 
Annaheim. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

and received: sessional paper no. 30 and addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 2, 7, 12, 
22, and 26. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is a real pleasure for me today to be able to introduce to you 
and to members of this House through you, a guest from 
Rockglen area. His name is Shay Keller. Shay is accompanied 
by his dad who is in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. His dad, Les 
Keller. Shay is 16. He’s in grade 11 at the Rockglen school. His 
parents are Les and Erin Keller. He has two sisters, Raelynn and 
Rheanne. Shay and his family live in the hills southwest of 
Rockglen near the Canada-US [United States] border. 
 
Shay enjoys cowboying, rodeoing, and doing western drawings. 
Shay is an active participant in the High School Rodeo 
Association and the Little Britches Rodeo Association. 
 
Shay had the honour of being the first Canadian to win the 
National High School Rodeo Association art contest. His entry 
last term won the contest and graced the cover of the 2005 
souvenir programs at this year’s National High School Finals 
Rodeo at Gillette, Wyoming. Prints of each rodeo event drawn 
by Shay were given as prizes for the Saskatchewan high school 
rodeo finals for 2005. 
 
Shay also won first place in his age group in the Shurniak Art 
Gallery art contest during the gallery’s grand opening at 
Assiniboia in July of this year. His exhibition at the Shurniak 
Art Gallery runs November 5 to 25. We hope many will take it 
in. But those who get an opportunity to go to Agribition, I think, 
will be amazed at the talent that this young man has when you 
see his prints there in the Agribition display. 
 
I’d like all members to join in welcoming Shay and his dad, 
Les, here to the gallery today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d like to 
welcome Shay and congratulate Shay too on his fine artistic 
talents. And as constituents of mine down in the Rockglen area, 
I’m very, very pleased to see them here in their Legislative 
Assembly today and the work of Shay being exhibited in the 
Assiniboia art gallery. And I would invite anybody and 
everybody to visit the Shurniak Art Gallery in Assiniboia. It’s a 
tremendous facility and to have Shay’s work presented there, I 
think, is quite an honour. 
 
So again I would ask all members to please welcome my 
constituents to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the House 28 members of the grade 10 Riverview Collegiate 
class from Moose Jaw. Also one of the students is sitting behind 
the bar on the floor, Hannah. 
 
But it’s always a pleasure to have constituents come to the 
legislature, have a tour of the building, and for us as MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] to be able to welcome 
them and have a meeting with them after to answer questions 
that they may have. 
 
I’m glad to see a number of classes have been here also from 
Riverview Collegiate — best high school in Moose Jaw without 
a doubt — right in the middle of South Hill. I’m a little bit 
biased here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Hannah was also telling us that she’s the 
Whip for her caucus when they did their mock parliament or 
session in class to get ready for their trip. And I asked her if she 
did it by choice, that she volunteered for this job, and she said 
no it just happened to be where she was sitting and she got 
chosen. So her and the Government Whip were kind of 
comparing stories and stories of woe as to looking after all of 
their colleagues. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hope all members would join me in 
welcoming the class to their legislature and I look forward to 
meeting with them soon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I want to draw the members’ attention to three 
guests to our gallery who are usually sitting in the IT 
[Information Technology] area of the Legislative Assembly 
services office. And these people are Marc Langman, Jeremy 
Phillips, and Darcy Hislop. 
 
Now Marc Langman is spending his last day with us here after 
three years of employment with the Legislative Assembly. He’s 
off to the Alberta Assembly in Edmonton. But a new person 
coming in as well I want to welcome is Darcy Hislop, who is 
our new chief technologist here with the IT department. And of 
course with them, Jeremy is our standby who we all depend on 
to keep our computers in proper running order in this building. 
 
So I would like all members to welcome Darcy Hislop and also 
say a farewell with best wishes to Marc Langman. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Violence 
Against Women 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — In December 1999 the UN [United Nations] 
General Assembly adopted a resolution declaring November 25 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 
Women. 
 
November 25 was chosen because it is the anniversary of the 
deaths of three Mirabal sisters who were murdered by the 
Dominican Republic dictator Rafael Trujillo for their vocal and 
ongoing opposition to his regime. 
 
Since that time the sisters have become a symbol both of the 
victimization of women and of popular and feminist resistance 
to oppression. 
 
Mr. Speaker, historically violence and the threat of violence are 
fundamental mechanisms in attempts to force women into 
subordinate positions. Violent acts against women take place in 
our city, our province, and our country every day. Mr. Speaker, 
Charlotte Bunch is the founder and executive director of the 
Centre for Women’s Global Leadership. Her words on this 
subject are worth repeating, and I quote: 
 

The issue is changing the perception — so deep-seated it is 
often unconscious — that women are fundamentally of 
less value than men. It is only when women and girls gain 
their place as strong and equal members of society that 
violence against them will be viewed as a shocking 
aberration rather than an invisible norm. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today is a day to remember that all of us has a role 
in changing perceptions and ensuring that the time when 
violence against women is an aberration comes sooner and not 
later. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
November 25 each year we observe the International Day for 
the Elimination of Violence Against Women. Mr. Speaker, the 
statistics are staggering. According to the United Nations, at 
least one out of every three women around the world has been 
beaten, coerced into sex, or otherwise abused in her lifetime, 
with the abuser usually someone known to her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is shameful that violence against women 
remains prevalent in our society and even sanctioned in many 
countries around the world. It is also shameful that 
Saskatchewan has the highest violent crime rate in Canada, a 
rate which is double the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many years ago this Premier dreamed, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . of a province where women and children and men can 
live and walk in their communities and walk on the 
campuses of our province without fear, without fear of 
violence. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is time this government stopped dreaming and 
start acting to reverse this deplorable record of violence. Thank 
you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Promoting Addictions Awareness 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow marks the end of National Addictions Awareness 
Week in Canada. Since 1981 communities throughout Canada 
have been coordinating events to promote addictions awareness. 
In Saskatchewan countless individuals and community-based 
organizations work hard every day to raise awareness about the 
danger of addictions. 
 
I am proud to say that members on this side of the House have 
also worked hard to raise awareness about the addictions crisis 
in Saskatchewan, both here in this Chamber and in the 
presentations we’ve been able to make in schools and in 
communities. Members of the opposition have had the privilege 
to speak to many students and parents about the danger of 
addictions, especially crystal meth. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Party was approached 
more than two years ago by worried parents and concerned 
police officers about the dangers of crystal meth, we took action 
to raise awareness and urged this government to also take 
action. It is unfortunate that once again this government was 
quick to take credit for reacting to a problem but slow to take 
action to provide CBOs [community-based organization] and 
addiction workers with resources and treatment beds necessary 
to tackle the addiction crisis in our province. 
 
Addictions Awareness Week is an important reminder that 
those suffering from addictions and their families need action, 
not words, from their government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week, along with other members of the Assembly, I had the 
pleasure of attending the second annual Lieutenant Governor’s 
Awards here in Regina. These awards, Mr. Speaker, recognize 
the outstanding contributions of individuals, groups, and 
organizations to the arts in Saskatchewan. There were 22 
nominations in all, Mr. Speaker, from many art genres and our 
Lieutenant Governor presented awards to the following 
individuals. 
 
The 30 Below or Youth Award went to Holly Luhning, a 
Regina poet. Visual artist Edward Poitras of Lestock received 
the Innovation Award. And I would like to acknowledge two 
nominees from my constituency, Denise and Rod Simair. 
 
The Leadership Award was presented to Richard Spafford, an 
arts advocate and collector from Regina. And the Lifetime 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

Achievement Award was presented posthumously to the 
well-known sculptor and Saskatoon resident, Bill Epp. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the nominees and the award 
winners but I also want to make special mention of a 
performance that evening called “Bringin’ Culture and Color to 
the Core” by an Aboriginal youth group that used song, poetry, 
and hip-hop music to speak of their lives and of our future. I 
commend director Mark Deiter and performers Lindsay Knight, 
Danny Fernandez, Heather Abbey, and Raine Morin for their 
creative performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I convey our thanks to everyone at the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board for organizing such a successful and 
well-attended celebration of the arts in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Rama Declared Home of Rider Mascot 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, November 12, 2005, the small community of Rama, 
Saskatchewan was officially proclaimed the home of Cousin 
Leonard, a mascot for the Saskatchewan Roughriders. A large 
number of fans came out for the unveiling of the sign on 
property adjacent to Highway No. 5 at the entrance to the 
village of Rama. 
 
The person inside the gopher suit for nearly 10 years has been 
Joseph Genoway, formerly of Rama and now a resident of 
Regina. Gainer the Gopher’s cousin, Leonard, has been 
introduced for years as being from parts unknown. But through 
the efforts of Joseph Genoway, Roughriders president Jim 
Hopson, and public relations director Steve Mazurak, approval 
was given by the Saskatchewan Roughriders to declare Rama 
the home of Cousin Leonard. 
 
My colleague, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, along with 
most of the corporate sponsors, were on hand for the unveiling. 
Speeches and a short program, involving both a silent auction 
and a live auction, helped generate significant dollars for the 
Rama Recreation Board. Congratulations to all the sponsors for 
donating over $2,000 to develop and erect the sign and make 
the event a tremendous success. 
 
I want to recognize the Rama Village Council, Mayor Darrell 
Dutchak, councillors Jeff Hunter and Darryl McLeod for being 
the driving force behind this project. And especially, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to congratulate Cousin Leonard, a.k.a. [also 
known as] Joseph Genoway, for your dedication and spirit for 
the last 10 years and all the best in the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Agribition Provides Many Opportunities 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this past week, Saskatchewan has 
been hosting the Canadian Western Agribition, one of the 
premier agricultural shows in the world and an event that plays 
a large role in raising Saskatchewan’s profile in terms of the 
agricultural industry internationally. 
 
More than 40 different countries are registered at Agribition’s 
International Business Centre this year. The centre provides 
business services and a meeting place for hundreds of 
international buyers and exporters of Canadian livestock 
genetics and agricultural products and services and technology, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what Agribition is all about, making 
connections with many countries from around the world and 
forging relationships that will help grow and diversify 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry and our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to welcome the provincial and 
territorial ministers of Agriculture to Regina and Agribition this 
week who, along with Saskatchewan’s Minister of Agriculture, 
will be meeting to discuss a variety of issues including 
preparedness for avian influenza, internal trade, traceability and 
age verification, WTO [World Trade Organization] 
negotiations, and long-term planning for the Canadian 
agriculture industry — and of course affordability and changes 
to the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very proud to share with them the 
excitement of Agribition and the very best in Saskatchewan 
hospitality. My congratulations and thanks to the board, 
management, and staff of the Canadian Western Agribition and 
to the many volunteers who have once again made this a 
world-class event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Centennial Project -- From Prairie to Pine 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
January 28, 2005, From Prairie to Pine - Piano Solos By 
Saskatchewan Composers was launched. This is a centennial 
project created by the Saskatchewan Registered Music 
Teachers’ Association. It is a publication containing 25 
compositions from composers across Saskatchewan, five of 
whom are student composers. 
 
I am proud to mention that From Prairie to Pine has a strong 
connection to the Biggar constituency. The coordinator of the 
publication, Peggy L’Hoir, who belongs to the west central 
branch of the SRMTA [Saskatchewan Registered Music 
Teachers’ Association] and is currently the vice-president of the 
Canadian Federation of Music Teachers’ Association, is from 
my hometown of Biggar. As well two of the student entries 
come from a couple of very talented young composers who, I 
might add, are also talented musicians and writers that also 
reside in Biggar — Ms. Kristina Barclay and Ms. Michelle 
Meszaros. 
 
I’d like to congratulate all those involved in the creation, 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

publication, and distribution of this fine collection of piano 
music that reflects Saskatchewan’s diverse musical landscape, 
as well the dedication of the teachers who have kept music 
growing in our province. I would also like to congratulate all 
those composers that submitted entries to be considered for the 
publication in this book. Special congratulations to Peggy, 
Kristina, and Michelle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would encourage members of this Assembly to 
seek a copy of this tribute to the talents of Saskatchewan’s 
piano teachers and composers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Surgical Care Wait-List 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the last few weeks we’ve been raising concerns about the 
surgical care wait-list accuracy, this wait-list that the minister 
seems to boast about any chance he gets. 
 
Despite what the minister has to say about the wait-list 
improving, that’s not what patients are telling us. In fact 
patients are getting very angry around this province about the 
government continually boasting about shorter wait times, 
surgery wait times, when that is not at all what they’re 
experiencing, for example, Jean Reynolds who was told to wait 
eight months when the registry said she should receive that 
surgery in three to four weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and every time we raise this, the minister will 
stand up and discredit patients, saying they haven’t gone 
through the proper hoops. He’ll blame doctors who are working 
at 110 and 20 per cent capacity. He’ll discredit me. He’ll try and 
discredit our research staff, our limited research staff, Mr. 
Speaker. He will never face the facts. The facts are that his 
registry is inaccurate in what people are facing in the province 
today. 
 
Will he stand up and give us the real truth of what the wait 
times are in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working very hard to 
make sure that we provide the best care possible for our people 
in Saskatchewan. The member opposite tries on an almost daily 
basis to provide information which isn’t accurate. He knows it 
himself. He has many people that he knows that work within 
the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we have been spending specific dollars 
in our budget to deal with reduction of the wait-list. We set out 
the facts that we were going to deal with some of the people we 
knew now from our registry were waiting too long. We have 
$8.9 million which we have been allocating to target patients, 

6.5 million of that towards actual providing the service to those 
people who have been waiting too long, 2.4 million for 
equipment and tools to make sure we can get that job done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working in a very focused way to make 
sure that we deal and provide the best service for our 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he goes again and says 
that our information is inaccurate. What is inaccurate about Jean 
Reynolds who was told to wait eight months? There’s nothing 
inaccurate about that. What is inaccurate is his wait-list saying 
it should be three to four weeks. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s other 
people that look at the wait-lists, such as the Health Council of 
Canada. And they’ve had a look at our wait-lists. And they say 
the only way wait-lists will be accurate is if they’re reliable and 
unbiased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Average wait times don’t tell us anything because they don’t 
reveal some of the cases that fall outside of the typical case. 
Many cases end up being overlooked. Many of these cases end 
up right here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t take into 
consideration cases that have been cancelled or overlooked or 
rebooked. The Surgical Care Network doesn’t look at that, Mr. 
Speaker. It also combines all surgery cases which skews the 
numbers. It takes cases that are done, emergency cases done 
within 24 hours, which skews all the numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister stand up and finally admit — kind of like their 
poll on the raise the flag for energy, new energy deal, how 
bogus those numbers were — aren’t his wait-lists just about as 
bogus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minster of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m very pleased that that member of 
Saskatchewan’s Conservative Party has looked at the 
information provided by the Health Quality Council of Canada 
because that particular agency, the Health Quality Council of 
Canada, is something that we in Saskatchewan promoted very 
strongly as part of what we should do nationally, because it was 
based on our action plan here in Saskatchewan and our Health 
Quality Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they have done is looked at the wait-lists 
across the country and identified the problems. Mr. Speaker, if 
that member would look more carefully at that particular paper 
he’s just referencing, he would also see that the learnings from 
what we’ve done in Saskatchewan are what’s informed the 
academics who are writing that paper. Mr. Speaker, 
everybody’s looking at what we’re doing here because we’re 
leading the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, they’re leading the way. 
They’re leading the way for some of the longest waits in 
Canada. That’s what this government is leading because the 
Health Council of Canada goes on to say about wait times in 
this province, he said the only way that they can be accurately 
gauged is if . . . the wait intervals should be defined as the time 
from initial referral to completion of procedure — from initial 
referral to completion of procedure. That’s when you get a true 
reflection. That’s not what our surgical care wait-list does. 
 
It doesn’t deal with the issues of patients that wait months to 
see specialists, for patients that wait months to get diagnostic 
tests, and once that is done then they wait months to get 
surgery, Mr. Speaker. That is what’s happening in this province. 
 
It’s typical NDP [New Democratic Party] speak. They talk three 
to four weeks for actual surgery when it’s six to eight months. 
They talk three or four weeks when it’s actually eight months, 
Mr. Speaker. When will the minister actually come up with the 
real goods of how long it takes for people from referral to end 
of procedure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members opposite, the Saskatchewan Conservatives, don’t like 
it when you actually have facts to work with. Mr. Speaker, we 
have been working hard to get the information so that we could 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, order, order. 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been working very 
hard to make sure that we have the actual information. In 
Saskatchewan we are the only province that has information 
about all of the surgeries that are required to be done, and we 
are taking that information to make sure that we use the budget 
dollars that we have to specifically target them where they can 
make a difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not a simple task because there’s so many 
parts to that. It’s equipment. It’s staff. It’s about how you 
manage the flow of the patients through there. We’re going to 
continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. On a national basis, the 
academics are using information they have obtained in 
Saskatchewan to write the policy about where we should go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Availability of Bone Density Diagnostic Services 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Surgical wait 
times are one thing, but diagnostic wait times are another. This 

month is Osteoporosis Awareness Month. Osteoporosis is a 
disease that affects mainly women. One out of four women over 
50 can be stricken by this disease. And what it is is when the 
increased bone density . . . decreases bone density, which can 
increase in fractures of hips and wrists and issues like that. 
 
But women in northern Saskatchewan for the last number of 
years have been going to Lloydminster to receive bone density 
scans. Until recently, these bone density scans were covered by 
the provincial government. But just recently, women have been 
going for the same bone density scan and realize now that the 
government is not covering these scans. 
 
Can the minister tell me why the government is no longer 
covering bone density scans in Lloydminster? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we have in our 
province is a process whereby if people require certain 
procedures outside of the province and it’s not in an emergency 
situation, we have a prior approval process. Mr. Speaker, that 
includes the bone density tests. It also includes some other 
diagnostic tests. That’s been a long-standing policy. 
 
There is a bone density testing service in the Alberta side, in 
Lloydminster, that has had some patients go to that one. Those 
ones aren’t covered unless they receive prior approval, like 
residents of all parts of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, women are furious that the 
NDP has cut the funding for the Lloydminster program. 
Mildred Reinhart from Lashburn went to Lloydminster to get 
bone density testing. This year she found out that it was not 
covered in Lloydminster, that she’d have to go to Saskatoon. 
 
When inquiring about the same scan in Saskatoon, it was going 
to take 18 months to two years to get this scan. She opted to go 
to Lloydminster and had to pay out of her pocket. When she 
went to Lloydminster, she only had to wait two weeks for that 
bone density scan, Mr. Speaker. This what she had to say in the 
letter. She writes: 
 

This is definitely not what Medicare is supposed to be. 
You . . . [can] call it . . . [medicare], but I think it’s more 
like Health-careless. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what she describes this government’s health 
care system as: health-careless. Mr. Speaker, why is the 
minister forcing women to wait up to two years for a bone 
density scan when it could be done two weeks in Lloydminster? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working to make sure 
that we can provide services as are identified by the physicians 
and others within the province. We know that on some of the 
diagnostic procedures, that we have them set up in a way that 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

will deal with the urgency and the priority. 
 
This particular issue around all of the diagnostic procedures is 
exactly the issue that Dr. Peter Glynn and the diagnostic 
imaging committee have been working on since last January, 
and it’s around what are the . . . what’s the accessibility? How 
do you assess urgency? And how do you assess priorities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these kinds of procedures can end up costing 
many, many dollars for the health care system. We have to 
make sure that we’re providing the basic services across the 
province, and we have to be monitoring very carefully when 
individual entrepreneurs will set up bone density systems 
outside the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also received a 
letter from Joan Beisel of Livelong. And she wrote how 
ridiculous this government policy is. The government is now 
forcing women to either pay to get a bone density scan done in 
two weeks or wait two years. That is unacceptable. Many of the 
women are on medication for bone-loss prevention and need to 
know if the medication is working. They can’t wait two years 
for a bone density scan. These scans are needed and are needed 
when? In a timely manner. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why will the government risk women around this 
province, regarding fractures, when . . . And he’s forcing them 
to pay to get the services they need. These two women are now 
forced to pay for bone density scans which are covered by this 
province and have been covered by this province. The 
government is forcing them now to wait two years. That’s 
unacceptable. Why are they doing it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are making sure that 
people have access to these services in an appropriate way 
within our province. When people require to go outside of the 
province, there is an appropriate procedure to follow to get 
approval to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now, if the estimates are approved this week, 
we’ll be spending just over $3 billion in this year on our health 
care system. We allocate that money very carefully. We try to 
make sure that we can provide — especially — emergency, 
urgent services, and we try to make sure that we have many of 
the other services as raised by the member. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s all about making choices, using the 
dollars that we have. And we will continue to be very careful to 
try to provide services as best we can within the resources that 
we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Wood 
River. 
 

Property Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, how much longer can that revolutionary, socialist 
government ignore the public? The people of Saskatchewan are 
screaming at this government for property tax relief, and as 
usual there’s no action from that side. They dither and dither 
hoping the problem will go away. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
going away; it’s getting bigger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister of high property taxes, why are 
they ignoring the public’s demand for property tax relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I appreciate the question. It gives me an opportunity to 
again remind the opposition that we continue to work on this 
issue. The language of doing nothing of course, Mr. Speaker, 
means nothing. 
 
We have provided, over two years, $110 million — 55 million 
in the current year, 55 million in the coming year. Mr. Speaker, 
$110 million are significant dollars. And in the process of while 
that short-term program is in place, Mr. Speaker, we are 
working on a long-term sustainable program that will provide, 
Mr. Speaker, property tax relief for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we hear that 
continuously from that side of the House — that they’re 
working on it — but there’s never any results. 
 
Yesterday the member from Massey Place went on and on 
about how this government is doing the right thing because they 
accept recommendations of the many commissions they put in 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Vicq commission put forward a 
recommendation back in 1999 — 1999 — to lower property 
tax. And there’s the Boughen Commission which again told that 
government to lower property tax. And finally, Mr. Speaker, we 
have Jack Vicq again yesterday telling everyone how 
Saskatchewan is burdened down with property tax. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s three commissions telling the government that 
property tax is too high — and the member had said that they 
would accept the recommendations — since 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister accept the recommendations of 
the commissions and lower property taxes now? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again the member from Saskatchewan’s Conservative Party 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

opposite doesn’t quote entirely what’s in the reports or what the 
people of Saskatchewan have said. These selective quotes that 
the member opposite and his colleagues use continually, Mr. 
Speaker, are not fair to the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Vicq yesterday indicated that it was outside his purview to 
deal with the issue of property tax. Mr. Boughen prior to that 
had indicated that dealing with the property tax issue would 
require taxation on restaurant meals, Mr. Speaker, something 
the opposition has said over and over again they don’t support, 
but they keep saying to implement it. Mr. Speaker, you can’t 
have your cake and eat it too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, that member of the 
revolutionary, socialist party is dealing totally and solely in 
rhetoric on a continuing basis. I’d like to quote what the 
Premier said back in 1987. And he said, quote, “. . . is there any 
wonder that a tax revolt is brewing in this province?” 

 
The old is new again, Mr. Speaker. Nothing changes. That 
government’s inaction has brought about a revolt. We have 
three commissions — three commissions — telling that 
government to lower property taxes. The public is screaming. 
To the minister of high property tax: when will the minister 
remove the tax noose from the necks of Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
amusing the member of Saskatchewan’s Conservative Party 
opposite continuing to raise these things. The member will 
know that Mr. Vicq’s first report asked the government to deal 
with significant personal property tax reform. 
 
This government acted, acted quickly, and as a result 
Saskatchewan people today are paying $1,000 per family less 
than they were in the years in which that government, Mr. 
Speaker, or that party was in government in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, we acted quickly. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, on the property tax issue, this 
government has had many meetings with representatives of the 
municipal associations, the school board associations, and other 
representative organizations across the province. Mr. Speaker, 
members of the representative associations have provided this 
government with some constructive criticism and constructive 
activities that we should engage in. The members opposite have 
not provided one single constructive idea to this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 

SaskEnergy’s Investment in Derivatives 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
Responsible for SaskEnergy. Many people have been under the 
impression that SaskEnergy has been losing money selling 
natural gas this year, and it turns out that that’s not accurate. 
 
According to SaskEnergy’s third quarter financial reports, 
SaskEnergy actually made money on gas sales through the first 
three quarters of 2005. SaskEnergy was charging consumers 
$6.97 a gigajoule and the cost of that gas for the first nine 
months was $6.66. 
 
However SaskEnergy did lose money, a lot of money, gambling 
on financial derivatives. These losses were built into the cost of 
gas sold, and consumers will end up paying for the money on 
these gambling losses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much did SaskEnergy lose in the financial 
derivatives market, and why where these losses never 
mentioned in SaskEnergy’s rate hike application? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The member raises an interesting issue that was 
reported in the media. I don’t think question period would allow 
me the kind of time . . . I think we need at minimum about two 
hours to go through all of the details of the question that the 
member raises. 
 
Suffice it to say, suffice it to say that SaskEnergy experienced 
at a certain point in its fiscal year, at the end of the third quarter, 
a paper loss not unlike a paper loss that has been experienced 
by other gas companies in Western Canada. They have also . . . 
I think EnCana reported also at the same time a significant 
paper loss. But because gas prices have come down, it’s my 
understanding that paper loss at the end of the third quarter is 
now not a loss at all. 
 
And so what we’re dealing with here is paper loss, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for that 
answer. I know that the citizens of Saskatchewan are going to 
wonder how much paper $46 million actually makes up. 
 
These losses were rolled into the cost of gas sold, taking 
SaskEnergy from net profit to a net loss on its gas sales. Could 
the minister please explain how SaskEnergy lost $46 million 
gambling on financial derivatives, and what impact did this 
have on the SaskEnergy rates? 
 
And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, why was this never 
disclosed during the rate review process? 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskEnergy Incorporated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I think all of 
SaskEnergy’s financial activities are made available at the rate 
review process. Let me just say that the rate review process will 
know that SaskEnergy uses financial instruments, like other gas 
companies, to hedge the purchase price of natural gas as part of 
its natural gas purchasing program. 
 
For accounting purposes, certain financial instruments used in 
the hedging program are required to be recorded at their market 
value. Any change in market value — and depending on where 
you calculate that, in this case at the end of the third quarter — 
can show certain results. But if you go another month, and with 
the reduction in gas prices since that, there will be no loss, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
minister for his response and outlining that there are 
instruments used by SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what Warren Buffett had to say about 
financial derivatives: 
 

We view them as time bombs . . . derivatives are financial 
weapons of mass destruction, carrying dangers that, while 
now latent, are potentially lethal. 
 

Here’s what Dwain Lingenfelter had to say about financial 
derivatives at the time of the Channel Lake debacle: Channel 
Lake was authorized to engage in trading transactions. However 
the authorization specifically forbade Channel Lake entering 
into transactions involving “. . . options, derivatives, and similar 
instruments.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, derivatives are highly volatile financial 
instruments. Warren Buffett doesn’t like them. Dwain 
Lingenfelter, when he was minister of CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan], had deep concerns about them. 
Why did the NDP lose $46 million gambling on financial 
derivatives, and why did they support this policy? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister responsible 
for SaskEnergy. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what was 
recorded as a $46 million loss at the end of the third quarter for 
SaskEnergy is now not a loss given the nature of the accounting 
rules that SaskEnergy and other companies have to follow. That 
is the fact of the matter. 
 
Can I say one other thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is that 
consistently over the years SaskEnergy has been able to deliver 

natural gas to the people of Saskatchewan at a rate that is either 
the lowest in the country or the second lowest in the country. 
Performance speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
minister for that answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister could answer how much 
we’re currently exposed to for the fourth quarter of the 2005. 
As we went forth in the rate review process, the $45 million or 
$46 million in losses did not come forward. How much are the 
taxpayers of this province on the hook for at the end of the 
fiscal year, Mr. Speaker? They got it wrong before. This 
government has supported that $46 million in losses which are 
now magically not losses. 
 
Would the government explain what the liability and how much 
liquidity is out there in this market so that possible losses in the 
fourth quarter are made aware for the public? Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Given the question that we’ve just 
had, can I be allowed a couple of hours to deal with this issue 
here? Or will you cut me off after a minute, Mr. Speaker? 
 
He’s asked for me, first of all, Mr. Speaker, he’s asking me . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. Order 
please. The Minister for SaskEnergy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the member is now 
asking me to speculate as to what the situation will be at the end 
of the fourth quarter — at the end of the year. Well for his 
information, we’ve got a month to go before the end of the 
fiscal year. We will then be in a position, again given the 
accounting rules we have, to tell you what the situation is with 
respect to these financial instruments. 
 
I would also say, Mr. Speaker, that we have a very good record 
in Saskatchewan of Crown . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. 
 
I invite the minister to complete his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Unlike the practices of the 1980s, 
this government has a very good record of ensuring that Crown 
corporations appear before the committees of the Legislative 
Assembly to answer any and all questions put to it by the 
members opposite so that the people of Saskatchewan will 
know, will always know, what the state of affairs is of their 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and order questions 549 through 553 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 549 to 553 inclusive have been 
ordered. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Emergency Farm Aid Program 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is somewhat of a positive day I think for farmers in 
Saskatchewan and really, for that matter, all of rural 
Saskatchewan. The federal government has finally paid 
attention to the plight of farmers in Saskatchewan and that’s 
why the motion that we put forward today, I think is very timely 
and it really deals with what the farmers need in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to read the motion so that everyone out there will 
really realize what the debate is about and what we’re talking 
about, Mr. Speaker. And the motion states: 
 

That the provincial government contribute to the federal 
emergency farm aid program since Saskatchewan has a 
larger portion of producers than other provinces with 
nearly half of the arable land in Canada and will be a 
major beneficiary of this program. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have been asking for help for farmers 
this fall for probably the last two to three months seeing that 
this harvest was probably one of the poorest quality crops 
we’ve taken off for a long time. In fact the last two crops have 
been very low quality. The price of the grain that we’re taking 
off this fall is very low, at a time when input costs have 
completely skyrocketed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think after much lobbying Mr. Goodale, we wrote to Mr. 
Goodale, we wrote to Mr. Andy Mitchell, who I believe is in 
town today, to tell them just the plight of Saskatchewan farmers 
and the need out there. The stress levels are so high. And after a 
month or two or three of lobbying the federal government they 
actually came to the table. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that 
without no support from this provincial government to tell the 
federal government just what the situation was on the family 
farm. 
 
The federal government has agreed to put about $750 million 
into the grain and oilseed side of agriculture across the country. 
And at first report it was about $250 million going into 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Now the last report is that probably about 290, $292 million 
will be going into the grain and oilseed side of our farmers in 
Saskatchewan. And this will certainly be appreciated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I guess what we’re asking today that would really top that up 
properly, is that the provincial government would see fit being 
that they do have also a surplus in the province of 
Saskatchewan — a windfall of oil and gas revenues, possibly to 
the tune of $1 billion this year, Mr. Speaker — that they could 
possibly find some money from the provincial coffers to assist 
with this aid package, to really make a difference out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not only talking farmers this time 
when we’re talking rural Saskatchewan and the economy of 
Saskatchewan, but we’re talking businesses of all kinds across 
the province. We know for sure that businesses in rural 
Saskatchewan are starting to hurt, have been hurting for the last 
while, probably since harvest, Mr. Speaker. Many of the 
businesses whether it’s car dealerships, machinery dealerships, 
businesses of all kinds that rely on the farm sector to provide 
them with a cash income have said that things are slowing down 
dramatically, are really coming to a standstill out there, and that 
this money would be greatly received by not just the farmers 
but businesses of all kinds. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about the money that the 
federal government has seen fit to put in there — although 
maybe not nearly what we had hoped for — we would hope that 
this money could be paid in a timely fashion. I believe it was 
last year they had a program out . . . or the year before they had 
a program out where within about two weeks they got that 
money into circulation; got that money into the farmers’ hands 
in Saskatchewan. And we certainly hope that that’s what will 
happen this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the first reports, we heard that this money may not flow 
until next spring. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly not 
satisfactory and will not help the farmers this fall. In fact many 
of the farmers have inputs to pay for right now. Taxes are due 
right now. Many of the inputs that farmers have had to put in to 
take this crop off are due right now. And there’s just no cash 
out there. 
 
No grain is moving. Very little grain is moving. And when you 
can move it, Mr. Speaker, it’s very low priced. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the problem being that if these farmers could wait a 
while to market some of this grain, the prices may improve and 
return a few more dollars to the farmer, where if he has to sell it 
now he’s going to take a terrible beating. 
 
Now I find it odd that the provincial Agriculture minister, and 
for that matter the Premier, are not much more sympathetic to 
the cause we’re talking about today. My colleagues and I, I 
think, are somewhat shocked, having heard and saw quotes of 
what the Premier and the Agriculture minister have made in the 
past. And I’d like to read you some of these quotes. And 
hopefully the Premier will take heed to what he has said in the 
past, remember what he has said in the past. And if it was true 
then, and if he really meant these comments then, I would think 
that he would maybe think twice and maybe put some money 
into this program. 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

I’d like to make the first quote that the Premier has made on 
April 6, 1988, Mr. Speaker. And the present Premier’s quote 
says: 
 

Mr. Speaker, maybe these members opposite have 
forgotten, or perhaps they never knew, [or] perhaps they 
never knew what it’s like to farm with old machinery, and 
just to go from repair to repair to repair. Perhaps they’ve 
forgotten, perhaps they’ve never known what it’s like to 
have to find work off [the] farm, any kind of work, just to 
hold the farm together. 
 

Well those facts are true today, Mr. Speaker, in many cases. In 
fact the high majority of cases, both the husband and wife have 
to work off the farm, turn around and bring those cheques back 
just to keep the family farm running, and there’s something 
wrong with that picture, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier agreed 
with this, agreed with the need for help at that time, April 6, 
1988. I have no idea why he would change his mind now. 
 
Another quote from the Premier, March 27, 1990, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We to this day do not have a long-term income stability 
program for the family farms. I mean, it is a shame that 
here we are, again a month from seeding, and we’re still in 
the process of negotiating . . . short-term ad hoc program. 
 

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re 
dealing with today. 
 

As desperately as that is needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 
desperately as that program is needed in Saskatchewan 
today, what we need sincerely to address the problems are 
long-term, stable programs. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, according to the Premier that was true 
March 27, 1990, and it’s no more different then than it is today. 
We are so in need of a long-term, stable program. And having 
this government saw fit that in 1992 to cancel the GRIP [gross 
revenue insurance program] program — the last resemblance of 
any kind of a stable program — and was supposed to be 
replaced by that government and has never been replaced, that 
there’s a need for help from both levels of government. 
 
Farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker, are the last ones to want 
to have to ask for help from government. But in the absence of 
long-term, stable programs — as the Premier stated in 1990, 
and he agreed with those comments then — farmers need help 
to get from point A to point B once again, and that’s getting 
through this fall, getting their bills paid, and finding a way to be 
able to put a crop in next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many things happening out in rural 
Saskatchewan right now. We have many farmers that have 
rented land and their own land and are anticipating giving up 
the rented land because they just cannot see how they can make 
a dollar on any acre of land out there. And to pay cash rent for 
land out there just doesn’t make sense to them. 
 
Now where this is going to hurt down the road, Mr. Speaker, is 
that as farmers give up acres and acres of rented land, it’s going 
to drive the prices down for land rental. It’s going to hurt the 
whole economy of the agriculture industry out there. Because 

once you break the trend of where prices are steadily hanging 
there, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden the whole agriculture 
economy starts to break down. And we’re seeing that happen 
this fall probably more than we ever have before. 
 
One more comment I want to read, Mr. Speaker, before I carry 
on here, from the Premier, and this comment was on March 27, 
1990: 
 

We’re going . . . to have a group of men and women with 
the vision and the commitment to that vision that can 
provide a long-term mechanism for intergenerational 
transfer, and a long-term mechanism to provide income 
stability, [which we’re talking today, Mr. Speaker] and a 
long-term commitment to the health of this land for 
generations yet unborn. The word in Saskatchewan is that 
the emperor, the current emperor, [and I believe he was 
talking about the premier at that time] has no clothes. He’s 
exposed for the lack of long-term, significant agricultural 
policy. 
 

[11:00] 
 
And something that we’re certainly lacking today. If the 
premier at that time thought we had no policy, we certainly 
don’t have one now, and I would hope that he would pay 
attention to that. 
 
We’ve had . . . And he goes on to say: 
 

We’ve had too much of agricultural politics and too little 
of substantive agriculture policy. And, Mr. Speaker, [he’s 
talking about the Throne Speech at that time] . . . does 
nothing . . . to change that. 
 

Well we’ve just gone through a Throne Speech, and once again 
it certainly has nothing to change that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing I think is concerning me too is a comment that I want 
to read into the record that’s made by our present Ag minister. 
And this was a quote from Hansard, November 7, 2004, and 
it’s from the current Ag minister, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Mr. Speaker, [the quote goes to say] if we were to put 
those hundreds of millions of dollars that are drawn up in 
the CAIS program, and those hundreds of millions of 
dollars that really are a product of an inequitable system 
that puts Saskatchewan paying five or six times the 
provincial per capital average, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
akin to throwing those dollars away and not investing 
them in the future of agriculture. 
 

Now that’s a quote from this present-day Agriculture minister. 
What he’s saying is if we put money into agriculture, it’s like 
throwing it into a black hole. And I think we’ve heard that 
comment from that Agriculture minister over and over and 
over. And what that Agriculture minister does not seem to get 
for one minute is when you put money into agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s federal dollars coming in as we see 
coming in now, it’s an investment into the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The federal government right now is in the process of putting 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

$290 million in for Saskatchewan farmers. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would have hoped, and I think many would have hoped, that at 
a time when there’s a federal election looming and the federal 
government seems fit to throw millions of dollars around, in 
fact billions of dollars around in pre-election goodies, they 
could have saw fit to put a lot more — maybe even double that 
— in for our Saskatchewan farmers. But having said that, we 
are grateful for the $290 million. 
 
And for the Agriculture minister in Saskatchewan to say that if 
they put money to assist a program like this it’s akin to 
throwing it in a black hole, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, we have 
that. 
 
The Agriculture minister is chirping . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melville-Saltcoats. Order 
please. Order. Member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister hollers from his chair that I have no integrity. Well 
I think that that minister should maybe take a look and take a 
drive out in rural Saskatchewan and find out what actual 
farmers think of that government and that minister when you 
get out there. 
 
That minister can go down to Agribition, Mr. Speaker, put a 
cowboy hat on and get a little dung on his boots, but it doesn’t 
make him a friend of farmers. You ask any farmer down at 
Agribition and they don’t have time for that minister because 
that minister has made comments like, if you put money into 
agriculture, put money in for the farmers of Saskatchewan, it’s 
like throwing it away and throwing it in a black hole. And that’s 
about the farthest thing from the truth. 
 
That minister would do good to walk down to Agribition, forget 
the cowboy hat, and listen to what farmers really have to say, to 
listen to just how bad it is on the family farm. 
 
Don’t go down for a photo op to make himself feel real good; 
go down and find out what’s actually happening in agriculture. 
 
Find out now that the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] 
is over and cattle prices have improved, Mr. Speaker, find out 
how much better that the cattle producers in this province 
actually feel. 
 
And then he can go over to the grain side, Mr. Speaker, and he 
can talk to the grain producers. And the grain producers are 
feeling exactly like the cattle producers were about two years 
ago or a year ago when the BSE had the borders closed. Grain 
and oilseed producers in this province are hurting and hurting 
badly. And they need an investment from both levels of 
government. 
 
And that includes this NDP government, the same NDP 
government that cancelled that last program that might have 
handled the problem that we have out here, Ms. Deputy 
Speaker. So, Ms. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the Agriculture 
minister should pay attention. And I’ll be looking forward to his 
comments later on for the reasons why him and his government 
don’t see fit that they should put anything into this. 

We’re looking at a $290 million injection into our farm 
families. If that government saw fit to put their 40 per cent 
share up front, or even a 20 per cent share, but if they put the 40 
per cent share up, it could be another $100 million. Can you 
imagine, Mr. Deputy Chair, just how much difference that 
would make to farm families out there trying to pay bills, trying 
to find a way to farm for another year? 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the minister knows exactly 
what we’re saying on this side is accurate, but wants to run with 
the NDP banner that says, we’re not going to help agriculture; 
we’re only going to spend money where we feel it will get us 
votes. 
 
And that’s a shame and that should be an embarrassment to this 
government when agriculture and farmers helped build this 
province. We’re celebrating our 100th birthday this year. And 
farmers, agriculture producers, rural Saskatchewan played a 
very large part in where we are today with this province and 
that we’re able to celebrate 100 years. And we have a provincial 
government that has totally wrote off rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So the motion we’re moving today: 
 

That the provincial government contribute to the federal 
emergency farm aid program since Saskatchewan has a 
larger portion of producers than other provinces with 
nearly half the arable land in Canada, and will be a major 
beneficiary of this program. 

 
I so move, Ms. Deputy Speaker, and seconded by the member 
for Thunder Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Thunder Creek. Well first, first we’ll do the motion. Sorry. 
 
The motion before the Assembly is moved by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats and seconded by the member from Thunder 
Creek: 
 

That the provincial government contribute to the federal 
emergency farm aid program since Saskatchewan has the 
larger portion of producers than other provinces with 
nearly half the arable land in Canada and will be a major 
beneficiary of this program. 

 
I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour to second the motion presented by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the agriculture industry is in a sad 
state indeed. Costs have increased lately at a record pace at the 
same time as the livestock industry is just recovering from the 
BSE disaster and crop prices are at an all-time low in terms of 
inflation, adjusted dollars, or real purchasing power. 
 
Costs in agriculture have always increased faster than the rate of 
inflation but recently the escalation of costs has eclipsed 
anything ever seen in the past. Meanwhile, Madam Deputy 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

Speaker, grain and oilseeds prices have fallen 27 and 26 per 
cent respectively from this time last year. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that is from already depressed levels. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the real price of wheat has been in 
decline from about $400 a tonne in 1992-93 dollars in the early 
1950s, to under $200 a tonne or half of that amount in 2003. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in 2003 and 2004 Saskatchewan led 
the nation in farm bankruptcies. Although very few of those 
forced out of the industry actually declare bankruptcy, these 
statistics do serve to show that this province is in worse shape 
than any other part of Canada when it comes to hardship on our 
farms. 
 
In real terms, Madam Deputy Speaker, farm liabilities have 
increased over 40 per cent since 1981, while farm capital values 
have remained almost static since the late 1980s. This, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, tends to erode producers’ equity in their 
operations by that combined amount. 
 
Energy prices meanwhile have skyrocketed, with the price of 
diesel being at record levels. As a result producers have seen 
their operating fuel bills increase by thousands of dollars. At the 
same time, Madam Deputy Speaker, and as a result of high 
natural gas prices, the price of fertilizer has spiked to over $500 
a tonne. 
 
At minimum application rates, Madam Deputy Speaker — to 
put that in perspective — of about 60 pounds of actual nitrogen 
per acre for wheat, barley, oats, and about 80 pounds of actual 
nitrogen per acre for canola, Saskatchewan producers are now 
paying $13.80 per acre for actual nitrogen on wheat, oats, and 
barley, and $18.40 an acre on canola. Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
remind you that this covers only nitrogen with no regard to the 
costs of phosphate, potassium, and sulphur, the other three 
nutrients that producers routinely add to their cropping 
practices. And the cost of those elements have also increased 
dramatically although at lower rates lately than nitrogen. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, with the increased costs of fuel and 
fertilizer alone, farm input costs have increased by $12,400 for 
a small farm, 1000-acre farm, Madam Deputy Speaker. And 
you can extrapolate those numbers into larger farms. 
 
The recent dramatic increase in the price of steel translates into 
further costs for farm hardware and equipment, and the cost of 
herbicides and pesticides just continues to rise. 
 
Saskatchewan producers are facing their third straight year of 
negative farm income — minus $53,850, Madam Speaker, in 
realized net income in 2004, and minus $85,652 in 2003. 
 
Mr. Wartman, our Agriculture minister . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I ask all members to refer to other 
members of the Assembly by their constituency. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Madam Deputy Speaker, that was a slip of the 
tongue and I apologize. 
 
The Agriculture minister: 
 

. . . this week . . . ruled out any immediate . . . bailout and 
says existing farm support programs will meet the “basic 
needs” of producers hit by recent rains. 

 
This is from the Leader-Post, September 15, 2005. 
 
“If producers are in this much financial difficulty with these 
programs in effect already, what’s going to change?” That is a 
direct quote from the Minister of Agriculture, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and it outlines his negative attitude towards helping 
agriculture. 
 
Saskatchewan producers, Madam Deputy Speaker, are receiving 
average CAIS payments lower than the CAIS payments 
producers in Manitoba are receiving. Saskatchewan also has the 
highest number of CAIS claims in federally administered 
provinces which don’t include Alberta or Ontario. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the federal Department of Agriculture 
is requesting another $273 million to cover CAIS payments for 
Canadian producers, and Alberta has just announced that it is 
investing an additional $224 million into CAIS as they have 
found the program to be inadequate. 
 
The federal government has just paid out 755 million in ad hoc 
farm assistance payments program; 292 million of this will go 
toward Saskatchewan grain and oilseeds producers. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, they clearly recognize the emergent situation 
in this province. 
 
The federal government — even though the Liberals are 
spending for an election, and there’s no question about that — 
at least realizes that there is a farm income crisis in Canada and 
particularly in this province. With commodity prices hitting 
their lowest values in decades, producers have slim to negative 
reference margins and crop insurance is only covering a 
percentage of these already low prices. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, producers who phone the Minister of 
Agriculture’s office are being told that they have to put their 
concerns in writing to get a call back or they don’t receive any 
attention at all to their concerns. 
 
When this government can’t stop talking about a green and 
prosperous economy, producers currently receive absolutely no 
financial benefit for the variety of ecological goods that they 
produce for Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan producers 
supply society with clean water through filtration by potholes 
on their land, provide clean air by sequestering CO2 and nitrous 
oxide and other air pollutants. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the statistics show that if 50 per cent 
of Saskatchewan producers indulged in no-till practices, 12.9 
million tonnes of CO2 would be removed from the atmosphere. 
And I don’t have the numbers in front of me, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, but from my experience around Saskatchewan, I 
suggest that more than 50 per cent of Saskatchewan land is 
already farmed in that manner. 
 
Agricultural land provides habitat for deer, waterfowl, coyotes, 
and numerous other prairie animals. Prairie potholes are 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

responsible for the production of 70 per cent of North 
America’s waterfowl and still Saskatchewan producers see no 
benefit from this so-called green and prosperous economy. Out 
of this government, we have seen no meaningful proactive 
policy. Apparently agriculture will not be receiving any benefit 
from our green and prosperous economy. 
 
The state of Minnesota, for instance, has enabled producers to 
own ethanol plants, thus giving producers money through 
selling their grain to the ethanol plant they own and then also 
making money after selling the ethanol. This has taken 8,000 
producers in that state off production assistance. However in 
this province, the government tries to hold this part of the value 
chain instead of allowing producers to take part in it. They do 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker, through imaginary projects like 
the ethanol plant at Belle Plaine which never will come to 
fruition, Madam Deputy Speaker, because there never was a 
deal with this government although they said there was. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the greatest injustices that 
farmers in this province face is the high property taxes on 
agricultural land. We pay the highest property taxes in this 
country, Madam Deputy Speaker, on farm land by a long shot 
and therefore probably the highest property taxes in the 
continent. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government’s inattention to 
agriculture and the lack of any policy direction or vision is the 
main reason that Saskatchewan producers are hit even harder 
than producers in other parts of this country. They have refused 
to take part in the formation of the AIDA [agricultural income 
disaster assistance], CFIP [Canadian farm income program], 
and CAIS programs even though they were invited to by the 
federal government. And this government is responsible for 
scrapping the GRIP program. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in view of the fact that there are no 
meaningful attention to agriculture, I’m pleased to second the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would 
like to make some remarks and following these remarks, I will 
move the following amendment to the motion. The amendment 
will read, will say: 
 

That all the words after the word “government” be deleted 
and the following be substituted thereto: 
 
continue to contribute to farm aid programs through sound 
strategic investments in agriculture; and 
 
that this Assembly thank the federal government for the 
emergency trade injury funding of November 23, 2005 for 
grains and oilseeds; and further 
 
that this Assembly call upon the federal government to 
recognize the special needs of Saskatchewan because it 
has a larger proportion of producers than other provinces 

with nearly half the arable land in Canada; and further 
 
that the 60/40 formula is unfair to Saskatchewan producers 
and taxpayers; and further 
 
that this government and the official opposition work to 
ensure that the federal government continues to provide 
trade injury support which is solely the responsibility of 
the federal government. 

 
I will move that following my remarks. 
 
Madam Speaker, we have had this year, as has been referred to, 
unprecedented difficulties in agriculture. This is not the first 
year. There have been a series of years that are very difficult. 
And most of the reasons for the problems are far beyond the 
control of the producers. 
 
Madam Speaker, as we look at agriculture in Saskatchewan, we 
see tremendous possibility. And there are sectors and there are 
areas that do well, and we want to make sure that all of 
agriculture is adequately supported. 
 
Now in this House this morning, I want to say that there were 
partial quotes, made by members opposite, taken out of context, 
Madam Speaker. And I just think that this ongoing personal 
attack must indicate that we are having some positive affect 
with farmers in agricultures or they would not be going into the 
personal attack, cutting and pasting, and putting very distorted 
attacks out to the public. 
 
Because, Madam Speaker, in regard to the statement that was 
referred to, it was very clearly . . . that we were saying it was 
federal government responsibility. And if the federal 
government is to going to fund their responsibility, for us to pay 
for it would be akin to throwing money away. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, we believe fully that the farmers of this 
province, the producers of this province, need adequate support 
in the face of some of those issues. Some of those issues, 
Madam Speaker, are the huge subsidies that are being paid by 
the Americans which distort the market terribly; some of them 
are with regard to the EU [European Union] subsidies. And they 
leave our producers here at an incredible disadvantage. And 
according to the constitution of this land, the federal 
government is responsible for trade injury. 
 
Madam Speaker, all of the Agriculture ministers across this 
province, who are meeting today, have indicated very, very 
clearly that we believe the federal government must take a 
larger portion of the support for agriculture. We have said very 
clearly, unanimously, that the federal government must put a 
trade injury component into CAIS and revise CAIS so that 
affordability issues are dealt with. 
 
We’re dealing, in this province, with a federal treasury of the 
US. We’re trying to enable our producers to compete with that, 
and we need the support of our federal government. 
 
One of the problems that has happened, Madam Speaker, is that 
the federal government of Canada has continued with ad hoc 
payments and not really made the kind of investments that will 
help us build a strong and stable agricultural economy. We can 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

say clearly that because of the pain that many farmers are 
feeling, that we do appreciate the monies which have come 
forward. We see this as trade injury. We appreciate it, but it is a 
federal responsibility. 
 
With our responsibility we are investing money. We’ve 
invested new money in the meat strategy. We are investing in 
the programs that will provide long-term support for 
agriculture. And at the same time we are working with groups 
across the province and across the nation to try and build an 
agriculture policy framework that actually will provide the 
strength and the support for our agriculture industry. Short-term 
fixes really don’t make a substantial difference. 
 
As I travelled the province this summer and spoke to farmers, 
listened to what they had to say, they too were thankful for the 
funding that came in the spring, as they will be thankful for the 
funding that has come now. But they said consistently it made 
little difference. It helped me pay bills; it helped fill my fuel 
tanks. But, you know, it didn’t change anything. 
 
And what the Agriculture ministers from across this country, 
and myself included in this, what we are working for is to build 
a system in agriculture, a system of supports and a development 
plan that will provide long-term strength. And we have 
unanimously called on the federal government to provide more 
support to enable us to do that. 
 
Madam Speaker, I don’t think there’s a provincial minister who 
hasn’t indicated that this kind of support won’t make a 
difference. I want to quote from GX Radio, where Alberta’s 
Agriculture minister says: 
 

There’s better ways to help farmers than the $755 million 
in aid announced by the federal government yesterday. 

 
Doug Horner says it appears to be a hasty political move by the 
Liberals before the election call. 
 
Their consultation was negligible here. And as again a 
unanimous group of provincial ministers, we had agreement 
from the federal government that they would not be doing these 
kind of ad hoc payments without consultation, and that they 
would never again invite, encourage, intimate in any way that 
the provincial government should be contributing to their ad 
hoc payments. 
 
And you know what? I thank the federal minister for having the 
integrity and the strength and the courage to stand up against 
many of his colleagues and to not include those things in his 
announcement. Madam Speaker, he recognizes, as I’m afraid 
the conservative Sask Party across the way does not, that this 
government has been working to try and provide a solid 
foundation for agriculture in Saskatchewan, that we have been 
making significant strategic investments that will help build that 
foundation. Madam Speaker, this federal government must 
come to work with us to build a better agriculture policy 
framework that will provide long-term stability. 
 
When we met yesterday with the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture, one of the things that becomes clear is that there is 
consistency across the nation that this needs to happen. We are 
in full agreement. We are working to try and provide that 

stability. We know the pain that there is in the grains and 
oilseeds sector. 
 
Madam Speaker, any intimation that the Conservatives opposite 
here might make — that we don’t care, that we’re not willing to 
invest — is absolutely wrong. And if they really want to help 
Saskatchewan farmers, instead of just taking cheap political 
shots, instead of distorting quotes by taking small pieces of 
them, publishing them in papers across the province, if they 
would get their act together and work with us to try and get 
support from the federal government, we might actually be able 
to make a difference for those farmers who they claim to care 
for. But all they try and do, Madam Speaker, is drive a small 
“p” political wedge between us and them. And that’s 
wrong-headed, and it will not provide any help for 
Saskatchewan’s farmers. If they care, they will work with us to 
build a long-term strategy and cut their cheap political theatrics. 
 
Madam Speaker, we want to build a solid agriculture industry in 
Canada, in Saskatchewan. We are engaged in the WTO talks, 
Madam Speaker. We have worked with producers from across 
this province, with producer groups, to put together a strong, 
strong Saskatchewan and Canadian position to take to the 
WTO. Why? Because it is at that level we can deal with the 
subsidies that are causing so much pain to farmers in this land. 
 
It’s not about a quick payout. It’s about long-term, thoughtful 
planning. It’s about changing the world situation, changing 
those markets so that the prices that farmers get for their 
product are good, solid prices that will cover the costs of their 
inputs. That’s the changes that we’re working for. We are 
committed to making those changes and are wrestling with the 
other nations, standing with our federal government, standing 
with our other provincial partners, and standing with industry to 
make those changes. It’s not about cheap, short-term payout. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to move the amendment, the 
amendment which reads again: 
 

continue to contribute to farm aid programs through 
sound, strategic investments in agriculture: and 
 
that this Assembly thank the federal government for the 
emergency trade injury funding of November 23, 2005 for 
grains and oilseeds; and further 
 
that this Assembly call upon the federal government to 
recognize the special needs of Saskatchewan because it 
has a larger portion of producers than other provinces with 
nearly half the arable land in Canada; and further 
 
that the 60/40 formula is unfair to Saskatchewan producers 
and taxpayers; and further 
 
that this government and the official opposition work to 
ensure that the federal government continues to provide 
trade injury support which is solely the responsibility of 
the federal government. 
 

I move, seconded by the member from Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. It has been moved by the 
Minister of Agriculture, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley, and seconded by the Deputy Premier, the member for 
Yorkton. The amendment before the Assembly — could we 
take the amendment as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. I’m very pleased this morning to enter into the 
debate. On the conclusion of my comments I will be not 
supporting the motion of the member opposite from Saltcoats 
but will, Madam Deputy Speaker, be supporting the amendment 
as put forward by the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
I want to say first to the House, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
for those on the opposite benches, our newest conservative 
Saskatchewan Party, are talking about how it is, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that somehow we have now an agricultural policy in 
Canada that’s sort of sprung out of nothing. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that our national agricultural policy that we have today 
was developed by a team of Canadian agricultural ministers, 
both federal and provincial. They’ve been working on this 
policy, Madam Deputy Speaker, for the better part of five years. 
 
And I hear the member from Saltcoats saying, what do we 
have? Well we can agree collectively in Canada today that the 
kinds of programs that we have in place today are not satisfying 
or meeting the kinds of needs that are necessary to address the 
kinds of crisis that exist in agriculture. Nobody, nobody debates 
that. 
 
But for the members opposite from our newest conservative 
Saskatchewan Party who say to us that somehow the 
Saskatchewan administration or the Saskatchewan taxpayer or 
that the Saskatchewan government should be picking up the 
lion’s share — which is the 40 per cent — in a policy, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, which should be changed in Canada, is unfair 
to Saskatchewan producers. And it’s unfair to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
I hear on a regular basis, as does the Minister of Agriculture on 
this side of the House and our members, about how the 
members opposite stand in their place and are critical of the 
existing programs. And I don’t suggest for a minute that there 
doesn’t need to be changes. But why don’t they stand in their 
places for at least on one occasion and suggest what the new 
agricultural Canadian farm policy should look like, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Not on one occasion have we heard, have we heard the member 
from Saltcoats who’s the critic, who’s the critic of Agriculture, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, for the province, stand up and say . . . 
other than his old affinity to GRIP, his old affinity to GRIP. The 
GRIP program disappeared in Canada, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
by all provinces years ago. 

And there have been additional public programs for farmers and 
agriculture producers that have come along since then in the 
form of NISA [Net Income Stabilization Account] and in the 
form of AIDA, of which the members opposite also participated 
in having a debate about, and which Canadian producers said 
didn’t work. Canadian producers said it didn’t work and wanted 
yet another agricultural policy of which is why we have today, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the CAIS program and the crop 
insurance program which is universally accepted by all 
provinces, not just Saskatchewan, which is universally accepted 
by all provinces. 
 
But the biggest issue, Madam Deputy Speaker, is not what the 
member from Thunder Creek said. The highest injustice today 
to agricultural producers, and being a farmer myself, is that the 
fact that the property tax is an issue, which it is in rural 
Saskatchewan — that’s not the highest injustice that we have as 
producers in Canada. The highest injustice we have in Canada, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, is that we’re getting an unfair return 
for what we produce in this province and in this country. That’s 
the highest injustice that we have today as agriculture 
producers. 
 
That’s what we need to be tying our attention to, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And on this side of the House we have 
continued to argue that the formula of 60/40 is not appropriate. 
It’s not appropriate for Saskatchewan producers or for Canadian 
producers. 
 
Well the member from Saltcoats says he agrees with me. And 
then why — if he agrees with me, if the member from Saltcoats 
and the Agriculture critic agrees with me — why wouldn’t he 
have in his motion today anywhere the language of 60/40? Why 
wouldn’t he have in his language the motion of 60/40? Instead 
his motion reads that Saskatchewan taxpayers should be picking 
up the larger share or their lion’s share and putting more money 
into subsidizing a agricultural farm policy and program of 
which should be paid for by Canadians. 
 
Why would he say that in his motion where he calls on 
Saskatchewan taxpayers to pick up yet another 40 per cent of 
responsibility that should be sitting with the national 
government and the people of Canada? Why would you put that 
kind of a resolution in front of us? And I’ll tell you why he put 
that kind of a resolution in front of us. Because the 
Saskatchewan Conservative policy has not changed from the 
late ’90s and onwards. 
 
Because when we had the member from Rosetown who was the 
leader of the opposition, who was the leader of the opposition, 
he said that what we should be doing is we should be changing 
the formula from 60/40. And as I said on other debates and on 
other occasions, he wasn’t home for 10 minutes and he said we 
should be putting our money in, our 40 per cent of money in. 
 
And they haven’t changed their position since then because 
that’s a national Conservative position, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. That’s a national Conservative position that there not 
be any subsidies to Canadian farmers. They don’t believe it, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And why don’t they believe it? 
Because they’re married to the same agricultural policy that the 
federal government is married to. And they’re married to the 
same agriculture farm policy, Madam Deputy Speaker, because 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

they are all of the same ilk. 
 
We’re talking today, Madam Deputy Speaker, of men and 
women today who support the Conservative agenda. They 
support the Conservative policy, Madam Deputy Speaker, and 
they don’t support the subsidies. They don’t support providing 
Canadian farmers with subsidy. 
 
That’s not the position on this side of the House. That’s not the 
position, Madam Deputy Speaker, of Saskatchewan Canadian 
farmers. And now we got, now we got chirping from the back 
row, the member from Kindersley, who’s going to be taking a 
vacation in the next little while, Madam Deputy Speaker, who’ll 
be taking a vacation. Why? Because the guy who has their farm 
policy, Madam Deputy Speaker, will be returning to the House. 
And I bet you that when the member from Kindersley returns to 
this legislature, he will also be promoting so that we don’t 
subsidize Saskatchewan farmers as the member from 
Kindersley is chirping today. 
 
And I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, we should have in this 
motion . . . And I’ll be looking forward, I’ll be looking . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I remind all hon. members . . . 
Order. I remind all hon. members they will have an opportunity 
to enter into the debate, and I will recognize the Deputy 
Premier, the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m going to be 
watching carefully when we do the vote on this issue today, 
when we do the vote, to see whether or not the members 
opposite will be standing up and voting for the amendment — 
which in fact provides a different adjustment to the formula — 
which provides that the federal government provide the larger 
amount of its funding to Saskatchewan Canadian farmers. And I 
bet you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that there won’t be one 
member on that side of the House that will stand on the 
amendment. 
 
And I know why they won’t stand on the amendment. Because 
they don’t believe that Saskatchewan Canadian farmers should 
be paying anything less than 60/40. I bet you that they will vote 
in opposition to that, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, today Saskatchewan 
taxpayers should not be picking up, Saskatchewan taxpayers 
should not be picking up the 40 per cent share. 
 
Are we pleased on this side of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that we like to see, that we like to see the federal 
government putting additional money in? Absolutely we like to 
see the federal government putting additional money in. Do we 
want to see, Madam Deputy Speaker, that there is additional 
dollars today put in from the federal government to support at a 
higher level our Saskatchewan Canadian producers? Absolutely 
we support that, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And our Minister of Agriculture has been at the federal table on 
an ongoing basis lobbying for that exact position. Our Minister 
of Agriculture, Madam Deputy Speaker, has today on record, in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada, with the agricultural ministers . . . 
our position where we should be changing the formula that we 
have today of which the federal government hasn’t moved 1 

inch on. 
 
And to have a debate in this legislature today for 75 minutes 
and have debates across the province where the members 
opposite are not, are not focusing on the kind of support that 
Saskatchewan Canadian farmers should have is shameful, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, shameful. And to have in a motion 
today that is led by the opposition, our newest Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party today, where they say that the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer should be putting a larger share of funding into this, 
into the farm agricultural package at the expense of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, is unfathomable, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And so I say to the members opposite and I say to this House 
today, the biggest injustice today to Saskatchewan producers 
and Saskatchewan farmers is the injustice of which we get in 
the formula. And we should be working collectively together on 
that side of the House, on this side of the House, and not 
pointing fingers, and not pointing fingers, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, at the work that’s been done by members on this side 
of the House to make a difference for Saskatchewan producers. 
Should not be trying to divide the producers in Canada today 
about the urban and the rural in the way in which Conservative 
politics takes its place in this province. Should not be dividing 
it, Madam Deputy Speaker, but should be working collectively 
today to achieve a policy that provides for greater financial 
support for Saskatchewan Canadian farmers based on a formula 
change. 
 
And that, Madam Deputy Speaker, is what I’ll be looking for 
when we’re bringing this discussion to conclusion and seeing 
where the members opposite stand on that debate, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, I’d like to begin by thanking the Deputy Premier for 
his remarks, specifically his prophecy of when the member 
from Kindersley returns to his seat as I’m not seeking 
re-election this time. I would like to thank him for that 
prophecy that I will be back at some point. And I’m gracious to 
you for the member from Yorkton. 
 
Madam Speaker, one of the points not being mentioned by this 
Minister of Agriculture with regards to this money coming in is 
how much it is going to save the Saskatchewan treasury 
because of this simple fact, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, 
the federal government announced assistance of $292 million to 
Sask grain and oilseeds producers. This is anticipated to reduce 
the draw on the federal CAIS program by Saskatchewan 
producers by approximately $42 million over the coming years. 
This being the case, the federal assistance of $292 million will 
reduce the Saskatchewan CAIS commitment by approximately 
$28 million, Madam Speaker. 
 
He is making money callously, Madam Speaker, on the backs 
of Saskatchewan farmers. Has he mentioned this? No. Has he 
mentioned this? 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

This is simple math, Madam Speaker. He doesn’t understand 
his own program. He wasn’t at the table when they put the 
program together. And it’s Saskatchewan farmers that continue 
to suffer because of his gross incompetence, Madam Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, this government does not care about rural 
Saskatchewan. This government does not care about 
Saskatchewan farmers. And the statements coming out of that 
minister were absolutely ridiculous, that the only thing we need 
is a long-term agreement. 
 
Madam Speaker, we have seen the results of 20 years of 
bargaining through the WTO process. It has netted nothing, 
Madam Speaker. Where has this, where has this government 
been over the last 14 years of putting together leadership on 
Canadian farm agricultural policy? It has been nowhere. Rather 
they would like to see crisis after crisis after crisis, and that’s 
what that minister’s record in particular has demonstrated, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
They said, Madam Speaker, we’re doing a good job, we’re 
getting forward. And then at the other side of the coin, they ask 
for our participation. So which is it? Are you getting the 
results? Or do you need our help to get the results and we’re the 
reason you’re not getting the results? Madam Speaker, what this 
minister put forth was ridiculous. 
 
And if you walk around Agribition, Madam Speaker, you’ll find 
that that’s what the producers think. That’s what the producers 
think, Madam Speaker, when they cannot pay their bills. They 
are thankful for the money coming from the federal Liberal 
government right now. They need that by seeding. And I think 
they’re going to be very surprised to hear that this is actually 
going to reduce the commitment of this provincial government 
by $28 million. And where has the minister been on that fact? 
 
The federal government has asked them to put more money in. 
If you ask any farmer in this province, would they like the 
provincial government to put their share in, they’re going to say 
yes. And the reason for that is, is that there is a financial crisis 
out there that’s been ongoing. 
 
Madam Speaker, one of the reasons for the financial crisis is the 
support given by this government for the monopoly of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, which has seen in the last five years 
durum sales held at 70 per cent of production. That’s a farm 
crisis in and of itself, Madam Speaker. 
 
How, in an industry where good returns return between 10 and 
15 per cent, are you supposed to even be able to pay your bills 
when 30 per cent of your product cannot be marketed due to the 
fact that there is a monopoly by the federal government strongly 
supported by that NDP Party? 
 
Madam Speaker, this is just one of the areas of incompetence 
demonstrated by that minister and that party. They do not 
understand agriculture. They do not understand the plight of 
farm families. And the little that they do understand, Madam 
minister, they are callous, would destroy farm communities, and 
they’ll go forth for what they believe at the end of the day can 
be their own political gain. 
 
They know that farmers will not be fooled. They know that 

since 1991 their support in rural Saskatchewan has gone one 
way — down, down, down. And their answer to that, Madam 
Speaker, is well if we’re not going to get support there, let’s kill 
it as quickly as we can. And that has been the direct, the direct, 
direct actions of this government. 
 
That Deputy Premier said it’s shameful. It’s shameful that we 
would call on the province of Saskatchewan to put in its 40 per 
cent. Madam Speaker, it’s shameful that the best negotiating 
that the minds on that side of this Assembly were able to come 
up with was 60/40. But that’s their bed. They made it. They lie 
in it and now they’re going to punish producers for their 
complete lack of leadership federally in designing the programs 
the Canadian agriculture requires. 
 
[11:45] 
 
I don’t believe, Madam Speaker, the CAIS disaster. And they 
think that they sign on to the program, and then at the end of the 
day say oh yes, and we’re actually, we’re going to keep out 
commitment and put our money into it. And this is somehow 
some sort of, this is some sort of victory. 
 
Madam Speaker, it would be wonderful if the federal 
government would pick up a much larger share. It would be 
wonderful, Madam Speaker, if having 48 per cent of the arable 
acres in this dominion, we had more than 3.9 per cent of the 
quota in supply management. But do we? No we don’t. Is it 
even raised by this minister? It’s questionable, Madam Speaker, 
what kind of relationship exists at all with Ottawa. The NDP are 
the central Canadian governments’ whipping boy when it 
comes to agriculture. 
 
And you know, Madam Speaker, having had the opportunity to 
work in downtown Toronto, live in Victoria, British Columbia, 
when people think of Saskatchewan and farming, it’s kind of 
our thing. There’s a reason for it. You know when fish subsidies 
have to come, they’re not expecting Saskatchewan to be leading 
the charge. They kind of leave that to the people and the 
government of Newfoundland. When it comes to agriculture, 
they ignore Saskatchewan altogether because this is a 
government that likes to ignore the farmers, it likes to ignore 
the heritage, and it likes to ignore the potential. 
 
This is a government . . . What have they done on the property 
tax issue? For 60 years they have not moved on this issue. What 
is the reason for this? It’s because at the end of the day, Madam 
Speaker, they fear farmers being independent. They fear 
independent thought. They fear the lack of control. They fear, 
they fear people building their own communities, not having 
communities built for them. At the end of the day they fear 
private property and ownership, Mr. Speaker. They fear these 
things. They fear initiative. They fear success, Madam Speaker. 
 
The lowest common denominator is the bread and butter of this 
NDP government. And they’re able to demonstrate that through 
the longest waiting lists for health care in the country. 
 
For out-migration, Madam Speaker, they’re able to show, as the 
member from Prince Albert once said, the more people that 
leave, the more that’s left for the rest of us. I wonder how his 
constituents are feeling at this point, Madam Speaker, when he 
drove an investor for the plant, Weyerhaeuser plant that’s 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

closing, right out of this province. 
 
And what did they come up with in their Speech from the 
Throne? We’re going to convert 10 per cent of the agricultural 
land in Saskatchewan to trees. This is their answer, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, we are long overdue for a good federal policy 
on agriculture, but that should be led by Saskatchewan. And 
sadly, it will not be. Instead what we’re going to see is this $292 
million put in by the federal government is going to actually 
reduce the payments to CAIS from the Saskatchewan treasury 
by approximately $28 million. 
 
And this government will be happy about that, taking money 
formerly committed to Saskatchewan farmers out of their 
pocket. They won’t replace it. And the reason is, Madam 
Speaker, the statements made by that minister were of a 
mendacious, mendacious, mendacious . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I do know that the use of the 
word has been used in the Assembly before. We’ll look at that 
carefully. But I ask the member to refrain at present from that in 
his debate. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, we have the problem that what has been presented by 
this minister in this debate is not representative of the truth and 
will hurt farm families. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First 
Nations and Métis Relations, the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
I’m pleased to join into this debate as well. Representing a rural 
riding, it’s obviously of particular interest to me. I will speak 
against the main motion but speak in favour of the amended 
motion that says that our provincial government: 
 

continue to contribute to farm aid programs through some 
strategic investments in agriculture; and 
 
that this Assembly thank the federal government for the 
emergency trade injury funding of November 23, 2005 for 
grains and oilseeds; and further 
 
that this Assembly call upon the federal government to 
recognize the special needs of Saskatchewan because it 
has a larger portion of producers than other provinces, 
with nearly half the arable land in Canada; and further, 
Madam Speaker, 
 
that the 60/40 formula is unfair to Saskatchewan producers 
and taxpayers; and further 
 
 that this government and the official opposition work to 
ensure that the federal government continues to provide 
trade injury support which, is solely the responsibility of 
the federal Saskatchewan. 

 
Madam Speaker, I want to, as I said, speak in favour of that 
amended motion and tell you that I have desperately tried to 
understand the rationale of the original motion. And I want to 

say this. Just think about this if you will. It says generally, 
Madam Speaker, that producers don’t have enough money, that 
they are in income crisis. I agree, With the exception of, largely 
of cattle producers, I agree with that notion. 
 
But here’s where the logic starts to falter, Madam Speaker. It 
says this as well. It says that those same producers who are 
short of money should be the same people who should 
contribute in a significant way, Madam Speaker, to provide that 
additional funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand when people are critical of taking 
money from one pocket and moving it to the other, taking 
money from Peter to pay Paul. Madam Speaker, what I don’t 
understand at all is to suggest a motion that suggests that you 
should take no money from one pocket and move that no money 
into another pocket and somehow those same people are better 
off, Madam Speaker. It makes no sense whatsoever. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to go on by saying the following. I say 
this. In light of the continuing difficulties plaguing the grain and 
oilseed sectors, we certainly as a government and as a province, 
I think it’s fair to say, we welcome the federal government’s 
recent announcement of $775 million aid package to Canada. 
The funding announcement certainly represents much-needed 
support to the agricultural sector and we are obviously 
particularly encouraged that the money will be distributed, I 
think, as I understand it, fairly quickly. 
 
Saskatchewan believes strongly of course that it is the 
responsibility of the national government to fund the recently 
announced aid package, as the income stresses that farmers are 
experiencing is severe. But I do say, Madam Speaker, that those 
income stresses and pressures are a direct result of natural 
causes and largely of trade injury, Madam Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, you know I want to — seeing that my time is 
fairly limited — I want to jump ahead. The member from 
Rosetown, I know when he was a federal MP [Member of 
Parliament], used to speak frequently, Madam Speaker, 
frequently used to speak about the need to eliminate subsidies, 
period. That it should be a free market. And I know he voted in 
favour of the elimination of the Crow benefit, which it’ll vary a 
bit but it’s somewhere between 4 and $500 million on an annual 
basis here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I’m wondering where that member stands now. Madam 
Speaker, he’s not in the Assembly today. But I know, Madam 
Speaker, that it would put him in an interesting predicament, 
Madam Speaker. Interesting predicament, Madam Speaker, 
because you can’t, I think, in one life speak about the need for 
no subsidies and then be part of Saskatchewan’s Conservative 
Party that now makes a motion that there should be subsidies. 
So it’s an interesting predicament. 
 
Madam Speaker, as well I think it’s clear with the lack of 
agricultural policy from those Saskatchewan Conservatives 
over there, Madam Speaker, that the reason that you see so 
much contradiction is probably the same reason they sit on the 
fence, Madam Speaker, and really have no agricultural policy at 
all. And I listened with interest as well to the member from 
Kindersley who said . . . 
 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. At the time I didn’t hear, but I 
am reminded and remind all hon. members that you are not to 
refer to members present or absent within the Assembly. And I 
ask the member to give his speech accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Madam Speaker, I apologize for that 
error. The member from Kindersley as well in his remarks, 
Madam Speaker, referred to the lack of progress at WTO. Well 
I agree with that, Madam Speaker. 
 
But what is that member suggesting? Is that member suggesting 
as the motion suggests that what should be put in place is 
simply short-term solutions? I think not, Madam Speaker. I 
think we need to continue to work at the WTO and with the 
federal government. And the federal government should be 
taking a lead on these issues that are largely trade. 
 
Madam Speaker, in addition to that, the member also says, the 
hon. member from Kindersley says that when there was issues 
— as there still are by the way — related to the fishing industry 
in Atlantic Canada, who paid for that, Madam Speaker? He says 
that it was paid for by Atlantic Canada. Madam Speaker, 
nothing could be further from the truth. That’s ridiculous. 
 
That’s where the argument started here in Saskatchewan where 
we said, look if the federal government is going to contribute to 
funds for farmers across Canada, including fishermen, Madam 
Speaker, they should also help Saskatchewan producers. They 
shouldn’t only look after people in Eastern and Atlantic Canada 
where I would argue lots of their votes are. 
 
Madam Speaker, again I say that this subsidy, this aid package 
that the federal government has put in place is hugely 
appreciated. But again, Madam Speaker, our provincial 
government contributes in a significant way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The debate portion of the motion and 
amendment has expired. I’ll now move to question and answer 
and remind members that those who participate in the debate 
will also participate in the question and answer portion. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe that the rules 
of the 75-minute debate allow all members of the legislature to 
ask questions. And therefore I would like to ask a question to 
what . . . put a question to the Minister of Agriculture who 
spoke during the debates. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member is correct. And you 
would be then asking questions of those members participating 
in the debate. I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, in today’s Leader-Post there’s an article that 
reported on a meeting that I believe the Minister of Agriculture 
attended along with industry representatives and other 
government officials, perhaps from other provinces, and reports 
that there are gaps in the current agricultural policy framework. 
And to quote what the president of the Canadian Federation of 

Agriculture, Bob Friesen, had to say, and I’m quoting, it says 
Friesen says everybody agrees that: 
 

. . . there has to be a dramatic change in long-term 
agricultural policies to ensure the sustainability of 
Canada’s agricultural industry. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, last spring, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
when I asked the Minister of Agriculture where they were on 
such things as sequestering carbon and helping the 
Saskatchewan producers zero in on that policy, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, he said he was too early. They talk about long-term 
policies, Madam Deputy Speaker, but they don’t put anything 
forward. 
 
My question is to the minister of Agriculture: what is this 
government doing and what is he putting forward in terms of 
long-term agricultural policy that will fix this problem once and 
for all? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. In direct terms regarding the carbon sequestration, we 
have made a significant advance towards the federal 
government around making sure that those who are practising 
good agricultural practices with regard to zero till will receive 
credit. 
 
But to this point, Madam Speaker, we have had a continued 
reaction from the federal government saying that, oh well, for 
those people it’s just business as usual so they wouldn’t receive 
credits. But we have continued to push on this front. And we 
think that in . . . as we pressure this we can look at Quebec and 
we can see the kind of supports that hydro and other industries 
there are getting for their business as usual, and they’ll be able 
to account for credits. 
 
And again we call for equity across this country and we will 
continue to push so that our folks get credit for their carbon 
sequestration. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Both 
sides of the House are on record numerous times that they agree 
that the federal government is responsible for trade injury. But 
where they differ is that the province has responsibilities as 
well. And this province doesn’t seem to want to recognize any 
of their responsibilities. It’s amazing to me that a number of the 
speakers in this particular debate have said again, and it’s a 
silly-bugger game that they continuously play, is every time . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the member to use 
words in the Assembly to befit the decorum of the Assembly. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Sorry, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a silly 
game that they play all the time where they stand up and say 
that any federal government is a trade injury. So my question 



November 25, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

for the minister is this: was there anything in the announcement 
from Ottawa or have the officials phoned him directly and told 
him that this payment is earmarked for trade injury? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
Absolutely not. There was nothing in any federal 
communication that indicated this was for trade injury. It is one 
of the ongoing fights that we have had, and we will continue to 
have with the federal government, that they are responsible for 
trade injury. It is an issue of trade injury that farmers are 
suffering. It is through no fault of their own that they are 
suffering, Madam Speaker, it is because of trade injury. 
 
And the federal government payment accounts for some of 
those losses — and we’re thankful for them. But you know it 
only comes — what they put in, in the spring and now — only 
comes to about half of what the trade injury is. So I appreciate 
the question. And the reality is that they have not done the full 
amount that they should to support our farmers for trade injury. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Meadow Lake, the Minister for First Nations and Métis 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
My question is for the hon. member from Kindersley. You 
know as long as we’ve been in government I remember these 
debates going on about the 60/40 split and the unfairness of it. 
And I have one question and I’m looking for a very simple yes 
or no answer. 
 
Is my recollection correct? Was the federal government in 
power at the time that this was negotiated, the federal 
Conservative government? And was the provincial government 
in power at the time when the 60/40 was negotiated, the Devine 
Conservative government, Madam Speaker? And I’m simply 
looking for a yes or a no to that question, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I’m happy to 
answer the minister’s question and I thank him for it. The 60/40 
split has been something that all members in this Assembly 
have been concerned with. It is sadly a situation that continually 
the Government of Saskatchewan hasn’t been able to produce a 
better deal for the taxpayers of this province. But that sadly, 
Madam Speaker, isn’t surprising when we see the overall lack 
of leadership and direction that’s come forth over the past 14 
years from this NDP government. 
 
With that being said, Madam Speaker, the farmers of this 
province would like, would like their government provincially 
to keep their word — when they say they’re going to put 40 per 
cent in or when they make that commitment, that they do that, 
Madam Speaker. And further, when they recognize that the 
federal government realizes the crisis — they put their money 
in — and from that point they expect this government to do the 
same. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton, 
the Minister of Ag and . . . sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. In 
our agriculture vision and plan, we often talk about how it is 
that we are going to invest publicly using public tax dollars to 
help build the agriculture economy by investing in value-added, 
by investing in primary production, where we actually take 
provincial tax dollars and we invest it in those projects. 
 
And I’ve heard, Madam Deputy Speaker, on a number of 
occasions, the member from Thunder Creek stand up and 
definitively say that he would not — in their government if they 
were — would never ever invest in public enterprise in the 
province. 
 
I want to ask the member from Saltcoats: what is the position of 
the Saskatchewan Conservative opposition in making 
investments, public investments in rural Saskatchewan 
communities, where you actually take tax dollars and invest it 
in projects across the province as we’ve done in many of your 
constituencies? What is your party’s position on that issue? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I thank the member for his question. 
And I find in one of the previous questions, Madam Speaker, 
that the Minister of Agriculture said that this is not trade injury 
money. Something he said that when it’s trade injury, that 
government is not responsible. 
 
If this is not trade injury money, then that government does 
have a responsibility to put some money into the program. And 
if they don’t like 60/40, which we agree is an unfair formula, 
put 20 per cent in. But put something in because, as my 
colleague from Kindersley mentioned before, is that this 
government is actually going to make money because there’s a 
reduced payout from the CAIS program because of this money 
that the federal government’s putting in. 
 
I find it shameful that that government would actually make 
money off a payout that should go to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and would not even put any money in, especially 
the money that they’re going to make down the road that they 
don’t have to put their share of into the CAIS program because 
the CAIS program will call for less of a payout. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina 
Dewdney on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Request leave to ask a question — to ask a 
question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Dewdney with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Mr. Yates: — No, I’m not . . . I was going to ask a question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Oh, all right. You’re entering the 
debate. Well it is . . . I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2005 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
question is to the member from Yorkton. He talked about the 
60/40 split which he thought was unfair. Well I’ll ask him, 
farmers out there right now on their land are paying a 60/40 
split right now with education tax. And they’re paying 60 per 
cent of that right now. So I will ask him if he feels that that is 
unfair. And if he does, will he rectify that right now? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Deputy Speaker, on this side of 
the House we have already made adjustments and made 
additional investments in education property tax. We’re on 
record not only saying what we’re going to do. We actually 
made the investments at 8 per cent — $55 million a year over 
the next two years — and continue to meet with SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and say 
that we’re going to do more, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But you see I want to know what the Saskatchewan 
Conservative opposition’s policy is on agriculture because I 
have here, I have here on record Mr. Boyd, who said in 2002 
that we should just be waiting for a couple of more weeks that 
we’re going to get his report. And then we have the member 
from Rosetown, Madam Deputy Speaker, saying that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The debate and questions and 
answers were very lively and I commend all members but the 
time has expired for the 75-minute debate. I recognize the 
member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
I would move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved that the 
House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Motion carried. This House does now 
stand adjourned until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:09.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................403 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................403 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................403 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................404 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................404 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................404 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................404 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................404 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................405 
 Promoting Addictions Awareness 
  Bakken Lackey..........................................................................................................................................................................405 
 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................405 
 Rama Declared Home of Rider Mascot 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................406 
 Agribition Provides Many Opportunities 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................406 
 Centennial Project -- From Prairie to Pine 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................406 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Surgical Care Wait-List 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................407 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................407 
 Availability of Bone Density Diagnostic Services 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................408 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................408 
 Property Tax Relief 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................409 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................409 
 SaskEnergy’s Investment in Derivatives 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................410 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................410 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................412 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................412 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Federal Emergency Farm Aid Program 
  Bjornerud ..........................................................................................................................................................................412, 423 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................414 
  Wartman............................................................................................................................................................................416, 422 
  Serby ..................................................................................................................................................................................418, 423 
  Dearborn............................................................................................................................................................................419, 423 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................421 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................422 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................422 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................424 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


