
















































Hansard: November 24, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 12A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 387 
 November 24, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have several 
more pages of petitions to present on behalf of constituents of 
Cypress Hills regarding the condition of Highway 321 from the 
Alberta border to the community of Liebenthal. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the immediate action and make necessary repairs to 
Highway 321 in order to address safety and economic 
concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again these three pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the community of Burstall as well as Leader 
and Patricia, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people from the Barrier Lake resort 
who are concerned about the marina at Revoy’s location. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to develop a long-term lease to 
Revoy’s Marina to include a turnabout for access to 
Revoy’s Marina, a place for boat trailers to be stored, and 
the seven seasonal camping spots be maintained, to ensure 
the safety of this area. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Tisdale and 
from Bjorkdale and Archerwill. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the safety of Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, Kamsack, 
Meacham, Kelvington; Edmonton, Alberta; Wadena, 
Grasswood, Watrous, P.A. [Prince Albert], Kelvington, 

Englefeld, Drake, Dalmeny, Langham, Clavet, and Warman. I 
so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
with citizens calling to repair and resurface highways. This 
particular highway is Highway 15. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so to as 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens all from the town of Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition from citizens concerned about possible reduction of 
health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
with regard to widening of Highway No. 5. Mr. Speaker, 
Highway No. 5 travels from Humboldt through Saskatoon 
Southeast and Saskatoon Humboldt and ends in Saskatoon. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll read from the prayer for relief. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many citizens from 
Saskatoon, Humboldt, Sturgis, Buchanan, and elsewhere 
throughout that area, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2005 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 
bring forward a petition from the people of Batoche 
constituency on the deplorable condition of Highway 368. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And it is signed by the good people of Annaheim and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: sessional paper no. 28 and addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional paper nos. 4, 7, and 
26. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce Mr. Charlie 
Baldock to you this afternoon. He’s seated in your gallery. Mr. 
Baldock has been a member of the business tax review 
committee for the past seven months. 
 
Mr. Baldock, along with chairperson Jack Vicq and Cheryl 
Shepherd, handed off their final report to me this morning. And 
the report contains key recommendations to further improve the 
business climate in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Baldock has been a tax partner for KPMG in the Regina 
office for the past 19 years. His professional experience extends 
over a wide range of areas within the financial services area in 
both the public and private sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the important research 
and analysis on Saskatchewan business tax structure that Mr. 
Baldock and the BTRC [business tax review committee] 
members have successfully completed. This was a great deal of 
work in a very short period of time. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan I would like to 
thank them for their commitment and dedication to this project. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the hon. minister in welcoming Charlie Baldock to his 
Legislative Assembly, and thank him on behalf of the official 
opposition and thank as well Mr. Jack Vicq and Cheryl 

Shepherd who I know are in Saskatoon right now. Thank them 
for the work that they’ve done on the business tax review 
commission. 
 
Thank you for providing a road map for Saskatchewan people 
on how to get business taxes in Saskatchewan competitive. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition and all Saskatchewan 
people, thank you for your hard work and thank you for not 
holding back on your recommendations. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, today we have a 
group of young people from the Canada World Youth program. 
Ten of them are from across Canada and 10 are from Ukraine. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Particularly I want to mention Andriy Atamanenko and 
DeeAnna Aubin who worked here in the legislature in the 
information services and the Office of the Speaker. 
 
On November 26 this entire group will travel to Ostroh, 
Ukraine where they will live and work for another three 
months. 
 
I also wish to note that it was one year ago that students like 
these whose zest for democracy formed the basis of the Orange 
Revolution in Ukraine, resulting in a second runoff for the 
presidential election. 
 
Canada World Youth sponsors 1,500 youth annually to 30 
countries around the world. Please welcome the Canada World 
Youth participants and supervisors to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too would like to join with you on behalf of the 
official opposition to welcome our 20 students from the Canada 
youth group here to the Legislative Assembly. I know that the 
10 students from across Canada have had an opportunity of 
course to spend some time in the province of Saskatchewan 
working at various departments along with the 10 students from 
Ukraine, as you have already mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As indicated, they’re going to be in Ukraine during the 
Christmas holiday over the course of December 25 and New 
Year’s and Ukrainian Christmas. And in discussions with them, 
I know that they’re looking forward to celebrating two 
Christmases — that is the students from Canada especially. So 
. . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too, while I’m on my feet, I would also like to 
introduce a lady sitting in your gallery from the constituency of 
Canora-Pelly, an assistant who’s helping me out get organized 
— and I know you’ll hear some jeering from my colleagues, 



November 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

Mr. Speaker. Carol Sleeva and her husband Gary farm near the 
community of Canora. I’ve known Carol for 20 years. We were 
together on the Canora School Board for nine of those years. 
And I know Carol spent additional years on that. 
 
So I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming the 
students from the Canada World Youth group and Carol Sleeva 
from the constituency of Canora-Pelly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 
Ukrainian.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too wanted to stand and welcome our young 
Ukrainian and Canadian students to our Assembly. We had 
lunch which was very exciting and a good chance to speak with 
many of the students. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I was saying was that they told me that one 
thing they did know was the number of Ukrainians that were 
living in Saskatchewan and . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
And to Andriy Atamanenko who sat and took some time to talk 
with me. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we were able to exchange emails, and it was 
also surprising at the number of relatives that they have in the 
Ukraine. So I would ask all members to welcome our visitors to 
the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is a great honour for me to be able to introduce to you and through 
you to the rest of this House today the Hon. Kevin MacAdam, 
who has joined us behind the bar. 
 
Kevin is the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries from Prince 
Edward Island, former Chair of the provincial ministers for the 
federal-provincial-territorial ministers’ meetings, and very strong 
supporter of equity for the provinces in federal-provincial 
relations. Really an excellent colleague to work with on the 
federal-provincial scene. So I’d like to ask other members to join 
me in welcoming Kevin to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

for me to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
House and welcome to her Legislative Assembly someone who I 
think is frankly a hero in the province of Saskatchewan. I’m going 
to ask Vicki Graf to just stand if she would and give us a wave, 
although she’ll probably be embarrassed to do so. 
 
Vicki’s from Humboldt, Saskatchewan, and in large measure her 
courage is the reason why the provincial government approved the 
breakthrough breast cancer drug Herceptin for funding. And so we 
want to thank her for her courage and we want to welcome her 
here to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the west gallery we have 14 grade 9 to 12 students that are off to 
play in a senior boys provincial volleyball championship. And 
they are the La Loche Lakers, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to tell 
them, while we are in the spirit of speaking languages — we have 
the Ukrainian language — I want to do a bit of Dene as well 
because this is what makes the Assembly so great. We come from 
a wide variety of backgrounds. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 
 
[13:45] 
 
I just wanted to say, Mr. Speaker, I’ve forgotten the word for 
pride in Dene so I just wanted to point out that from the 
perspective of being the Athabasca MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] I’m very proud of this team. They’re 
going off to compete in the provincial championships and what 
area they represent is Saskatoon North and that includes 
Saskatoon. They’re a very fine competitive team. 
 
With them of course is a chaperone, Keith. And here are some 
of the team members: Randy, Wallace Janvier, Manny, Myron, 
Charles, Clayton Sylvestre, Stuart Fontaine, Lawton Park, 
Jonovan Kokan, Deano Herman, Dino, Jerrod Laprise, Steven 
Tobac, Wendell Petit. And Tammy Lemaigre is also another 
chaperone. 
 
And with them, who’s a very fine coach, a fine coach and also a 
fine person and a fine teacher is Phyllis Longobardi. And they 
affectionately call her Ms. L. A fine teacher, a fine coach, a fine 
team but she’s . . . while I have the floor, Mr. Speaker, she’s 
really a mean referee when it comes to basketball and she often 
picks on me during tournaments. So I just wanted to make sure 
that you as a Speaker know that and the people of 
Saskatchewan know that. And I just wanted to expose her to 
that. 
 
But I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, and ask all members of the 
Assembly to join with me in applauding La Loche’s long trip 
here. They’ve still got another three-hour trip to compete and 
certainly from our perspective we’re very, very proud of them 
and we wish them the very best of luck. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 
 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2005 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce someone in your gallery today who is the first voice 
that many of the constituents of Humboldt hear when they 
phone my office, and that’s my constituency assistant, Susan 
Dunne. She works tirelessly in that office for all of the 
constituents of Humboldt and she does a really great job. So I’d 
like to welcome her to her Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to the House this afternoon, seated in your 
gallery and not sitting in the press gallery, are the two 
individuals — Steve Nixon who’s the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers, and Mr. Clark Pepper, who 
is on the board of directors. They’re in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association, as you 
know, make extensive, tremendous contributions to making 
sure that information across rural Saskatchewan is well 
provided. They’re here this afternoon to continue their 
discussions, as we have been over the last number of months, in 
making a stronger and better system of getting information out 
to Saskatchewan people in rural, and I want to welcome to the 
Assembly . . . and the good work that they do in making a 
difference in our province. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to join with the Deputy Premier in welcoming the people from 
the Weekly Newspapers Association. Many of us in 
Saskatchewan religiously follow the weekly newspapers in our 
local communities. They are the purveyors of news and 
information and a little bit of gossip occasionally but always are 
read with a great deal of interest. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, it’s a great pleasure that 
you’re here in your Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Heart of the Métis Awards 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, a short time ago I had the 
privilege to attend and bring greetings and award a prize — 

award an award, pardon me — on behalf of the province to the 
Métis Employment & Training of Saskatchewan Inc. second 
annual Heart of the Métis Awards in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, 
the Heart of the Métis Awards recognize the valuable 
contributions of Saskatchewan’s Métis citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Henikenne received the Challenger Award 
presented to an individual who has advanced the perception and 
appreciation of Métis arts and culture. The Volunteer Award 
went to Terry Boyer, the Employer Award to the Dumont 
Technical Institute. The Guide Award recognized the 
contributions of a staff person of a Métis organization and went 
to Karon Schmon. The Future Award, evaluated on community 
leadership qualities and academic achievement, went to 
Danielle Levesque. Cort Dogniez received the Foundation 
Award for advancing the cause of Métis people over an 
extensive period of time. 
 
The Merit Award went to Pat Letendre as a Métis woman who 
is an exemplary role model and makes significant contribution 
to the Métis and business communities. And Ian Reiman 
received the Honour Award posthumously. It is given to a 
Saskatchewan Métis person who has served in the Armed 
Forces or police forces of Canada and who epitomizes the 
honour of the Métis people and our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to congratulate the recipients of 
the Heart of the Métis Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Humboldt. 
 

Humboldt Resident Advocates for Funding for Herceptin 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great honour to rise in 
my place today to commend one of my constituents for her 
bravery, her courage, and her willingness to stand up for herself 
and for others. 
 
Vicki Graf lives in Humboldt. She is a wife, a mother of two 
sons, and she’s a fighter. Earlier this year she was diagnosed 
with an aggressive form of breast cancer. Her oncologist told 
her about a new drug called Herceptin that had overwhelmed 
scientists in recent clinical trials, a drug that could save her life. 
At that time Sask Health would not cover the cost of the drug 
which was a hefty $50,000 a year. 
 
In June Vicki made the courageous decision to come forward, 
talk publicly about her personal situation, and fight for the 
coverage of Herceptin. Talking about one’s own health is never 
an easy thing to do but Vicki came forward and explained how 
difficult it was for her to not only have to deal with the stress 
that comes with having to fight cancer, but with the additional 
stress she was facing to come up with the money to pay for the 
drug that could save her life. 
 
I am very proud to know a woman like Vicki Graf who is 
willing to stand up and fight, not only for what she needed for 
her own life but what many other women in this province will 
benefit from as well. I firmly believe Vicki’s courage and 
tenacity played a large role in forcing this government into 



November 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

funding Herceptin. 
 
Our mothers, daughters, aunts, grandmothers, and friends are 
lucky to have a person like Vicki to stand up for the women of 
this province. We all thank you, Vicki Graf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Nap Bouvier Retirement 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Our educators and the people that work in our schools should be 
commended for all the work they do for our children, and, Mr. 
Speaker, one constituent of mine has been helping to care for 
our schoolchildren for more years than most. 
 
Nap Bouvier from my hometown of Ile-a-la-Crosse worked in 
the school’s maintenance department for 46 years. In that time 
he saw countless numbers of students cross his path. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, I am one of those countless numbers of students 
that have had the honour of getting to know Nap during his 
tenure at the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division. I also know that 
the member from Saskatchewan Rivers, who taught at the 
school, knows Nap and how hard that Nap worked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on December 3 in Ile-a-la-Crosse, Nap will be 
honoured by the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division for all his hard 
work and commitment to the children of this northern 
community and the surrounding area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Nap and I have a friendly competition, and I quote 
from a higher authority in terms of our attendance at Sunday 
Mass. We often see if each other is there. And the member from 
Athabasca, attendance 146; Nap Bouvier, attendance 32. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an honour today to rise today and recognize 
Nap Bouvier for all his 46 years of commitment to northern 
children and I invite all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Nap. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 

Child Poverty 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 
16th anniversary of the unanimous all-party resolution passed in 
the House of Commons to eliminate child poverty by the year 
2000. The fact that we continue to talk about this problem is a 
clear indication that child poverty has not been eliminated. 
 
In fact, statistics indicate that child poverty has become a 
permanent fact of life for far too many people under the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan 
44,000 children live in poverty, including half of all the First 
Nations and Métis children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of getting better, child poverty is getting 
worse. The percentage of children living in poverty has 
increased since 1998 under an NDP government that is more 

interested in building airports for itself than a better future for 
children in need. It is the current Premier who, quoting Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt, said in 1991 of his government that, quote: 
 

The test of our progress will not be in how much we add to 
the abundance of those who have much, but how we meet 
the needs of those who have little. 

 
Well the facts sadly speak for themselves about this 
government’s progress. The members on this side of the House 
have repeatedly urged the government to take action to reduce 
child poverty. Today we repeat the call. 
 
We’re committed to improving the lives of children and 
families in this province. I hope the NDP eventually will be too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Prince Albert Radio Station Wins Award 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week at their national convention in Winnipeg, the Canadian 
Association of Broadcasters recognized the outstanding work of 
its members with the presentation of their Gold Ribbon Awards. 
These awards salute the accomplishments of Canada’s private 
broadcasters and recognize the best of the best in Canadian 
television, radio, and specialty and pay broadcasting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that, in this year, radio station 
CKBI in Prince Albert won a Gold Ribbon Award for 
community service. This award goes to the station that has 
made the most significant contribution to its community by 
such things as providing assistance to its audience during 
emergencies or taking unique initiatives to deal with issues of 
concern to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CKBI won the Gold Ribbon Award for a station in 
their market size for their Battlefield-Crystal Meth campaign. 
This included a series of ads about the dangers of the drug and, 
as a follow-up, a half-hour live show with a panel made up of a 
physician, the Prince Albert police chief, and an addictions 
worker from the P.A. Parkland Health District. The campaign 
resulted in significant increases in attendance to the information 
sessions about crystal meth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to particularly acknowledge the work of 
one member of the CKBI team, Eric Anderson, and I 
congratulate CKBI on receiving this award and for their 
ongoing contributions to the community. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Birthday Wishes for Leader of the Opposition 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
November 24, 1965 was an exciting day for John and Alice, a 
young Saskatchewan couple making their way to the hospital 40 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2005 

years ago. This would be a day that would change their lives 
forever. 
 
They listened to the news on the radio as they drove. Prime 
Minister Pearson talked about a brand new Canadian flag. 
Premier Ross Thatcher talked about agriculture. And the reports 
of the second anniversary of the assassination of John F. 
Kennedy were filling the airwaves. 
 
But John and Alice were thinking about something else. They 
were thinking about whether it would be a boy or a girl. They 
were wondering about what their future would be. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, on this day 40 years ago, John and Alice Wall of Swift 
Current, Saskatchewan were blessed with a son, Bradley John, 
and their lives did change forever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this change was all good. John and Alice did not 
know in 1965 that, because of their bundle of joy, their home 
would soon be filled with Elvis music and maybe a velvet 
painting or two. They may not have imagined their home being 
decorated with Tiger Woods pictures and Oakland Raider flags, 
not to mention decades of political memorabilia. What they did 
expect, Mr. Speaker, is that they would have a child that they 
could be proud of, a child that would make a contribution to 
society, and a child that would make his world a better place 
than when he found it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Bradley John, together with his wife, Tami, 
have provided a wonderful home for Megan, Colter, and Faith. 
Bradley John, you have fulfilled your parents’ expectations, and 
soon you will fulfill the expectations of many Saskatchewan 
residents that are counting on you. 
 
Welcome to the 40 club. The class of 1965 is a good one. All 
your colleagues on both sides of the House wish you the very 
best on this very special day. God bless. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Saskatchewan Encyclopedia 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To quote Dr. David 
Barnard, the former president of the University of Regina: 
 

Documenting where we have come from and where we are 
is an important foundation for allowing us to make 
informed and sensitive choices about where we would like 
to go. 

 
Dr. Barnard was speaking specifically about the recently 
released Saskatchewan encyclopedia and what a useful research 
resource it is and will continue to be for all who are interested 
in history, geography, and culture of this wonderful province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan encyclopedia is published by 
the Canadian Plains Research Center and is the latest and most 
ambitious project of this Regina-based institution that has been 
supporting social, historical, and environmental research on the 
Canadian Plains for over 30 years. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan encyclopedia has been nine 
whole years in the making. It includes some 2,200 individual 
entries as well as in-depth essays on a variety of subjects 
including Aboriginal issues, business and industry, social 
policy, health, and labour. 
 
I congratulate David Gauthier, the publisher and general 
manager of the encyclopedia; the writers; members of the 
editorial board; and everyone at the Canadian Plains Research 
Center on this really remarkable achievement. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a great read cover to cover. I encourage all to have a look at the 
Saskatchewan encyclopedia. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Final Report of the Business Tax Review Committee 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is at a crossroads. We in the province have 
unprecedented revenues. We also have a tax regime that is 
stifling job growth and new investment. We have lost jobs, and 
we have seen the departure of our young people at a time when 
we should be building our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after months of work and extensive public 
hearings, the business tax review committee has given us a clear 
road map for the future. Mr. Speaker, my question is simple. To 
the minister: will this government have the political courage to 
implement the business tax review commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve been 
consistent and the government has been very consistent in terms 
of saying that, after establishing the commission to look at 
business taxes, that we look forward to receiving their report, 
that we would incorporate that report as we do our budget 
development process for next year and plan also ahead to 
further years, and that that report would then be considered in 
that context. And that’s what I want to say at this point, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this story isn’t a story 
about numbers. It isn’t a story about tax regimes. It isn’t a story 
about the GDP [gross domestic product] or the CIT [corporate 
income tax] or the CCT [corporate capital tax] or the PST 
[provincial sales tax]. Mr. Speaker, this is a story about hope. 
This is a story about people’s dreams. It’s a story about building 
careers. It’s about keeping our young people here, Mr. Speaker. 



November 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

Today the government has been given a plan to unleash the 
creative energy of Saskatchewan people. This government has 
been given a plan. What will they do with it, Mr. Speaker? To 
the minister: will he study and delay and dither on this report 
like he has done with all the others? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this would not be the 
first report that we have received from a commission to look at 
taxes in Saskatchewan. The members opposite will recall that 
we did establish a committee to review personal taxes some 
years ago. In fact, Mr. Baldock and Mr. Vicq were two 
members of that commission. Again we received their 
recommendations. We reviewed their recommendations — 
made some changes to those recommendations — but by and 
large implemented the recommendations in our report. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to reviewing the 
recommendations that we have received in the context of our 
budget development for next year and make an announcement 
at the appropriate time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when this government fails in health care, they blame the 
patients. When that doesn’t work, they blame the doctors. When 
the Agriculture minister gets caught, he blames the media. A 
year from now, Mr. Speaker, when the Finance minister has 
failed to implement the business tax review committee’s 
recommendations, I am sure he will find a way to blame me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the resources to fix this problem. We 
have the master plan thanks to the work of this committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does this minister have the 
courage to stand up to his party’s ideologists and implement 
these recommendations? More importantly, Mr. Speaker, does 
he have the courage to stand up to the Premier who campaigned 
against these recommendations in this last election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Earlier, Mr. Speaker, the member 
spoke of crossroads. Well we’ve had other crossroads in 
Saskatchewan history, crossroads where we had one ideology 
driving this province and driving this province into ruin, driving 
this province into near bankruptcy, driving this province so that 
the people of Saskatchewan had the highest per capita debt in 
the country. 
 
Then the people said we want a new and we want a better 
government. They’ve got it. We’ve managed over these years, 
Mr. Speaker, to deal with the circumstances that were handed to 
us. We now have an opportunity to go forward, Mr. Speaker, 

and we will go forward, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that member 
can say what he wants and he will, but they should not 
underestimate our resolve and our management in these issues, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Here we go again, Mr. Speaker — 
always about the past and never about the future with this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — You think he would have learned from 
Mr. Vicq’s words this morning. Mr. Speaker, the Chair of the 
business tax review committee says it’s time to move out of this 
30-year-old tax regime to one that is consistent with global 
realities, Mr. Speaker. The Chair of the business tax review says 
we have the highest marginal tax rate not only in Canada, not 
only in North America, but in the world, Mr. Speaker. And that 
doesn’t even include their property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s policies are chasing people 
away. This government’s words, Mr. Speaker, are chasing 
people away. 
 
In the last election, the NDP rallied against corporate tax cuts. 
Now their own commission says that this has to be done. Mr. 
Speaker, will this minister have the guts to stand up and say that 
he was wrong, that his party was wrong, and that they will 
implement the Vicq commission reports today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the Vicq 
commission has done extensive research. They have provided 
us with, I believe, a well researched and substantial document. 
One of the mandates for the committee was also to look at 
proposals that would be sustainable for government, and 
obviously that is something that the government needs to 
review in the context of next year’s budget and future budgets. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we believe that this province is a 
province of great opportunity. We look forward to doing what 
we can to fulfill not just our commitments to that future but 
providing a bright future for many young people here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, here’s this Finance 
minister’s track record. Here’s what he has to say. He wasn’t 
sure, when questioned about the provincial budget, what his 
party had promised. Raise or change the PST — I hadn’t 
thought about that; I didn’t think about that. What did you 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2005 

mean; you didn’t think about it? Well we don’t know if we have 
the mandate to change it or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, it’s not a time to dither. It’s not a 
time to hesitate. Can this minister give this House today the 
assurance that he will implement this recommendation in a 
timely fashion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
remind the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that it 
was this government that commissioned this report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — It has been this government that 
has provided the leadership over the course of the last 14 years 
or so. That puts us in a position to not only commission the 
report but to seriously consider the recommendations that had 
been made by this committee as we go forward into the future, 
and not just for next year but in subsequent years, to see what 
we can do based on the recommendations of the report to grow 
the economy in Saskatchewan, provide more hope and 
opportunity for young people in Saskatchewan. That’s where 
we’ve gone for all these years, Mr. Speaker, to get us to this 
point and we want to keep going. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Migration of Youth Population 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Vicq 
commission has told this government what it should do. We 
should talk a little bit about why they should do it, Mr. Speaker, 
because under the current tax regime, under the current 
leadership provided by this government, what’s happening in 
the province of Saskatchewan? Well we’re losing jobs — over 
6,000 of them over the last year. What else is happening, Mr. 
Speaker? We continue to lose population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in June 2001 the Premier and his NDP 
government released one in a series of economic strategies. It 
was called the Partnership for Prosperity. And one of the goals 
of the so-called strategy was to achieve net youth in-migration 
by what year? By 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will someone over there on the NDP side of the 
House report progress on its goal to create net youth 
in-migration by 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Leader 
of the Opposition, who may not be aware, that under the 

leadership of this government in the last five years, we have 
completely reformed the personal income tax system in this 
province. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we want to create more 
opportunities for young people. 
 
I want to let the Leader of the Opposition know that we have 
revised the oil and gas royalties. And they refer to the Vicq 
report. I want to point out that the Vicq report acknowledges, 
Mr. Speaker, that the oil and gas sector is flourishing in 
Saskatchewan as a result of those changes. 
 
I want the Leader of the Opposition to know, Mr. Speaker, that 
the mining sector’s experiencing an exploration boom in this 
province presently which is attracting jobs — geo-analytical 
jobs, engineering jobs — in this province. And what are we 
doing, Mr. Speaker? We’re taking those actions to create jobs. 
 
What is he proposing, Mr. Speaker? That he will appoint a 
committee and ask them what to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you notice that the 
minister didn’t come anywhere near answering the question. 
The question was, has the government hit its goal of net youth 
in-migration from 2001 to 2005? And you know why he didn’t 
answer it, Mr. Speaker? It’s because he’s embarrassed, or if 
he’s not embarrassed, he should be. 
 
The answer, Mr. Speaker, is this. From July 1, 2001 to July 1, 
2005, the NDP lost 23,000 people. They drove out 23,000 
people from this province, and over half of them were under the 
age of 30. Mr. Speaker, 14,500 young people, that’s who has 
paid the price, and their families back home. That’s who has 
paid the price for the tax regime they put in place and for poor 
economic leadership from that government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today the Vicq commission’s given the NDP a road map out of 
this mess, Mr. Speaker. Will they have the courage to adopt that 
report, or will they hold to the rhetoric from the 2003 election 
where they ridiculed these kinds of tax reforms? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, while the leader of the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party has a policy that continually 
says if he was ever elected premier he would appoint a 
committee to ask them what he should do, we are taking action, 
Mr. Speaker. We have an action plan, and I want to say to the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, we have not done 
everything we set out to do . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker. 
That’s right, there’s more, Mr. Speaker, and we will deliver, 
Mr. Speaker, but I want the people of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want the Leader of the Opposition to 



November 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

know, Mr. Speaker, because he will not reveal this to the people 
of the province that between 1992 and 2004 the number of 
young people employed in the province of Saskatchewan 
increased by 9,800, Mr. Speaker. It went up, not down. And I 
want the people to know, Mr. Speaker, that the youth 
population in Saskatchewan between 1992 and 2004 increased 
by 9,000, Mr. Speaker. It’s getting larger not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister refers to 
his Action Plan on the Economy. You remember what 
observers of politics and the economy in the province had to say 
about it. They said it was disappointing and a political cop-out 
with not one single objective or goal to be included in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the figures show that the NDP continues to lose 
people in every age group. In fact since the Premier took office 
in ’01, he’s lost people in their 20s, he’s lost people in their 30s, 
he’s lost people in their 40s, 50s, and 60s. In fact the only age 
group where Saskatchewan has net in-migration under this 
Premier is people in their 90s, Mr. Speaker. Now we’re all for 
people in their 90s moving to the province of Saskatchewan but, 
Mr. Speaker, we shouldn’t have to wait nearly a century to start 
attracting people back and retaining our young people here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So does the minister have anything more specific? Does he 
have more than a plan that is a cop-out, and that is 
disappointing by independent observers, to offer the people? 
Will he act on Vicq, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the biggest cop-out in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, is the Leader of the Opposition, that when he 
releases his economic development so-called plan, his plan is 
this: I will appoint a committee and ask them what to do. And 
in contrast to that, Mr. Speaker, what this government has done 
is to reform the personal income tax system, reform the oil and 
gas royalties, reform the system of taxation for mining. 
 
[14:15] 
 
And are we going to do more? I say to those members opposite 
just stay tuned, Mr. Speaker, because we are going to do more. 
Because while they’re appointing committees to ask for advice, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re governing and taking action. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, that is what the people 
will judge: our action against their negative rhetoric. And I 
predict, Mr. Speaker, that given the choice between action and 
negative rhetoric, the people will choose and support action any 
day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition 
 

Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s changed his 
tune. Because when that economic paper was unveiled and 
welcomed by chambers of commerce and business leaders, the 
former NDP minister of Finance, Ms. MacKinnon, and even 
that minister stood up said up it was a good plan. So he’s 
obviously now changed his position or at some point maybe he 
wasn’t quite representing the facts. And more on that subject 
right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that the NDP is losing jobs and 
investment when you see how potential investors are treated in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Yesterday the minister 
responsible for the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] debacle got up in this House and 
misrepresented a letter he received from a potential investor. He 
said the investors were asking the government to scrap labour 
and environmental laws. He tabled the document. It’s simply 
not true. No where in that letter does it say anything of the sort, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will he stand in his place and apologize to this Assembly and to 
these potential investors and the people of Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and . . . Order. Order please. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, what I will do is 
explain what the leader of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party 
did on two separate occasions yesterday. That gentleman, sir, 
misrepresented what Mr. Ekstrand’s letter was. So let me read it 
to the record: 
 

We have demonstrated that our clients have the capital to 
facilitate the acquisition and demonstrated through bank 
statements and authorization approval from my client and 
can confirm that we stand ready to move forward pending 
certain pre-conditions. 
 
Firstly I must receive written assurance from SaskPower 
and the provincial government that: 
 
1. any residual electrical power produced on site from the 
materials available from normal operations: e.g. 
woodchips, sawdust, bark, waste paper residue will be sold 
to the existing power grid at current market rates charged 
industrial customers. 
 
2. there will be no charge for standby electricity with all 
electricity purchases to be invoiced at current electricity 
charges. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2005 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday that minister stood in his 
place and said that the letter he tabled on this potential 
investor’s plan or precondition was to scrap environmental laws 
and labour laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consultant says that’s not true. The letter itself 
he tabled says it’s not true, and the mayor of Prince Albert, Jim 
Stiglitz, says it’s not true. In fact he went on to say it’s nothing 
more than fear tactics meant to cloud the issue. Fear tactics and 
false accusations, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we get from that 
minister. 
 
Will he stand in his place and apologize for misrepresenting 
that letter by saying that the proponent wanted to scrap 
environmental and labour laws? That wasn’t the case. Will he 
do the right thing and apologize, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me proceed 
directly with my quote: 
 

3. the new purchaser, probably a joint-venture probably 
with the Chinese and Canadian company, will not be held 
liable for or committed to any existing labour, 
environmental or governmental agreements excepting with 
the approval of the new owner. 

 
4. the existing forestry contracts in place with 
Weyerhaeuser will remain in effect. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is exactly why . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Minister of Highways 
and Transportation, 20 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, that’s just typical of 
the opposition. When they don’t like to hear what they like to 
hear, they holler. They holler from their seats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the letter is clear. It was responded to by our 
official, Mr. Spannier, on November 2, which outlined our 
position as it relates to every one of these four points, a letter of 
which I’m going to table this afternoon. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister tabled the 
letter from Mr. Ekstrand to CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan], but he didn’t bother to table 
CIC’s response. So I would like to do that today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Larry Spannier’s letter of response is pretty clear. 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, apparently, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
didn’t even understand what his officials were corresponding 

back to the proponent. And his officials fully understood what 
the proponent was saying. Here’s a quote from the letter. Here’s 
what Mr. Spannier of CIC says in his letter back to the 
proponent: 
 

The specific terms of the collective agreement are a matter 
to be negotiated between the employer and employees . . . 
It would be up to the new owner to renegotiate these 
contracts with the union. 

 
Mr. Speaker, his officials understood that they weren’t trying to 
break any labour laws. That’s what he said yesterday in the 
House and outside. Will he apologize, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what I 
said to that member yesterday, and I asked if he favours 
scrapping the legislation under which this labour laws are. And 
does he favour scrapping the agreement between Weyerhaeuser 
and their employees? And he hasn’t yet responded, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the correspondence is clear. I say to you this. 
Weyerhaeuser is in the process of choosing who they are going 
to do business with, which is how this should be working. Mr. 
Speaker, that member can play politics with the 700 jobs or the 
people that work at the Weyerhaeuser pulp and paper operation, 
but I tell you what. He will pay dearly as he has paid in the past 
when those members tried to interfere with operations in the 
community of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to him, keep your nose out. Let us put this 
together. We’ll put a deal together with a good private sector 
investor working with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The member ought to direct all 
of his remarks through the Chair. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Corrections and Public 
Safety. 
 

Sale of Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company Equipment 

 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to respond to the question asked yesterday by 
the hon. member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
respond to the question asked yesterday. The hon. member said 
yesterday that harvesting and production equipment was sold to 
Cavendish Farms for $750,000, what the hon. member claimed 
was worth more than $3 million. The hon. member also claimed 
that this action has driven up SPUDCO losses well beyond the 



November 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

loss figures of $35 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say clearly that neither is, neither of 
these accusations are true. First . . . or accurate, Mr. Speaker, 
accurate. The sale of the equipment below the original purchase 
price has been fully accounted for when the losses of SPUDCO 
were calculated and reported by myself. There is no resulting 
increase in SPUDCO losses. 
 
Second, I can report to the House that the $3 million figure the 
opposition is using exceeds the actual original purchase price of 
all the equipment that was sold to Cavendish. Moreover SVPC 
[Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation] staff conducted a 
careful assessment of the market value of the equipment in 
consultation with retailers of potato production and harvesting 
equipment before the market value was set at $1.006 million. 
So the official opposition is using conceptual market values for 
the equipment that are not realistic. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the member indicated yesterday that 
the question was asked in written questions. I just point out to 
him that that question was not directed to me and was submitted 
and answered by government well before I was appointed to 
cabinet. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s another article in the 
P.A. [Prince Albert] Herald today. The headline — “Potential 
deal off.” Calgary-based consultant takes deal off the table after 
minister’s comments. In that article, the minister said this. He 
said, and I quote: 
 

“I don’t know what more we can do to offer him the 
support of this government.” 

 
Well let’s see. He didn’t return phone calls. He refused to deal 
proactively and aggressively on the cogeneration issue. He 
publicly insulted him. He accused the investors of wanting to 
scrap labour and environmental laws when that wasn’t the truth. 
He misrepresented the letter from investors. I don’t know what 
more he could have done, Mr. Speaker, maybe kick him in the 
shins, to make him feel welcome in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
How in the world does this government expect to grow a 
province when it puts that minister in charge of such an 
important file, important to jobs in the city of Prince Albert, 
important to the entire forest industry of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — There he goes again, Mr. Speaker, 
the master of selective quotations, no one better in this House 

than he. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this and I want to make this very 
clear. The mayor and the Leader of the Opposition have asked 
us to impose ourselves politically in the discussions and the 
negotiation process as it relates to determining a purchaser for 
the Weyerhaeuser assets. Mr. Speaker, I say they are wrong in 
calling for that. This is a deal that should be reached and 
arranged between Weyerhaeuser and who they select with 
respect to the assets. If Mr. Ekstrand can’t qualify, I can’t help 
that, sir. 
 
I can tell you this. We have been clear, and let me say this one 
more time. We will be willing and ready to negotiate 
cogeneration on the Weyerhaeuser site as it relates to electrical 
energy. I’ve said that in writing. I told that to the mayor last 
night, and I’m telling the leader of the Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Final Report of the Business Tax Review Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to 
accept the business tax review committee’s final report on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan this morning. 
 
The report was presented to me by BTRC members Professor 
Jack Vicq, Charlie Baldock and Cheryl Shepherd. It contains 
their recommendations on reforming the province’s business tax 
system. Mr. Speaker, the members of this committee have 
completed a great deal of work in a very short period of time. 
 
We appointed the business tax review committee this spring to 
see if our business tax system could be made more competitive 
in an affordable and sustainable manner. Our province is 
currently performing well economically, Mr. Speaker. Total 
employment is up over 5,000 jobs in the first 10 months of 
2005, and just recently I presented the mid-year report that 
detailed a strong financial outlook for the province. 
 
This economic and fiscal strength has permitted our 
government the means to invest substantially in our future, Mr. 
Speaker. Investments such as the $100 million in the academic 
health science centre, $60 million in northern roads, and a 
further permanent debt reduction of $76 million — Mr. 
Speaker, these investments are critical to developing our 
economy. 
 
The work completed by the business tax review committee is a 
further investment in our future. We know that we must 
continue to reform our tax system to remain competitive so that 
our present economic momentum continues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of this committee builds on the very 
successful personal income tax reform process undertaken in 
1999 that led to the largest personal income tax reduction in the 
province’s history. Those changes have left us with the 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2005 

third-lowest marginal personal tax rate in Canada. The work of 
this committee also builds on other business tax changes we 
have made over the years such as reforming the tax structure of 
the manufacturing and processing sector. Since then 
Saskatchewan has witnessed significant growth in the value of 
manufacturing and processing shipments exceeding the national 
average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will begin reviewing this report immediately. 
After listening to Mr. Vicq’s presentation this morning, it is 
evident this report contains both sound research and 
far-reaching recommendations. Clearly further improvements to 
our business tax structure can be made to encourage investment 
and growth. As this government stated in our Action Plan for 
the Economy in September, there can be no social progress 
without economic progress. It is important to continue to grow 
our economy, to encourage new investment, to create new jobs, 
and to build a solid future for Saskatchewan’s young people. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, business tax reform is one of the next steps in this 
government’s plan to grow Saskatchewan, and I want to again 
recognize the BTRC members for their participation in this 
process. Thank you for your hard work and commitment. Our 
government will carefully consider the committee’s 
recommendations as we develop next year’s budget. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the opposition critic of 
Finance, the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again would 
like to join with the minister in thanking the members of the 
Vicq commission for all the work that they have done for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Jack Vicq, Charlie Baldock, and 
Cheryl Shepherd have done an excellent job, and they haven’t 
held back, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been very direct. They’ve put 
timelines in place. And this is something that could guide this 
government into changing the way that they have done things 
over the last 15 years in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When Mr. Vicq was asked this morning about whether the 
government . . . if he has confidence in this government 
implementing his plan, he said, and I quote, “They don’t have a 
choice.” That’s the situation we are in, Mr. Speaker. Seeing our 
young people leave, seeing our job numbers go down, this 
government no longer has a choice. We can no longer be the 
highest tax regime in all of Canada and — as we learned this 
morning, Mr. Speaker — in all of the world, not even including 
property taxes. 
 
It’s time for a change, Mr. Speaker. It’s time for a change of our 
tax regime, and I hope the government takes this seriously. 
 
My concern, Mr. Speaker, and it started when I heard the 
minister speak this morning. And he said that he has to 
convince his colleagues, his cabinet colleagues and his caucus 
colleagues, on the implementation of the Vicq commission. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we hope that he is more successful than he 
was with the Boughen Commission. Yes that report that we 

heard not too long ago, that sits on a shelf somewhere. The PST 
was increased. But no, Mr. Speaker, no permanent tax relief for 
individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business tax review commission is something 
that I took very seriously and that members on this side of the 
House took very seriously. We were very proud to make the 
first presentation to the business tax review commission back in 
May in Yorkton, to join with businesses, to join with labour 
unions, to join with corporations, to join with interested parties 
across the province to give this government a plan on how to 
change the way they’ve been operating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am very pleased that the commission was listening not only to 
our presentation but to the other presentations. I have in front of 
me, Mr. Speaker, some of the highlights of what we presented 
to the Vicq commission and some of the recommendations that 
we have today. If you will, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to 
highlight some of them. 
 
In our proposal on May 9 in Yorkton, we encouraged the 
government to eliminate the corporate capital tax on general 
and resource corporations. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to say the 
Vicq commission recommendation . . . eliminate corporate 
capital tax on general and resource corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party proposal said, reverse the 
NDP decision to impose the corporate capital tax to income 
trusts. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Vicq commission agreed that 
changes have to be made, and they said transfer the corporate 
capital tax on income trust to a royalty structure. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we were very clear in articulating that the 
corporate income tax rate had to change. Saskatchewan had a 
rate of 17 . . . or does today have a rate of 17 per cent — the 
highest in the country, Mr. Speaker. What message does that 
send to people across the province, across the country, about 
our tax system in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Does it say that 
we welcome business here? I think not. That’s why we 
recommended that the corporate income tax go down from 17 
per cent to 11.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well what did the Vicq commission do today? What did they 
recommend, Mr. Speaker? They indeed were listening. The 
Vicq commission said reduce corporate income tax rate from 17 
per cent to 12 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we address some of the promises that the 
government made in the last election. The Premier, he didn’t 
tell us that he was going to increase the PST. No, he said he was 
going to increase the tax exemption for small businesses from 
300 to $400,000. And we recommended that they reduce the 
rate as well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Vicq commission has recommended that 
indeed this government keep their promise, increase small 
business tax to 400,000, and go beyond their promise to 
increase the small business exemption to 500,000 but maintain 
the rate at 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s where we differ. We 
say the rate should go down to zero. But we’re willing to accept 
the recommendations that have been put forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. We were pleased to make 



November 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

these representations, and we’re pleased that the Vicq 
commission chose to listen to them and include them in their 
plan. We recommended that the commission consider 
Saskatchewan’s current lack of balance in labour laws as a 
deterrent to new private sector investment, job creation, and 
economic growth. Here is what the Vicq commission had to 
say, Mr. Speaker: recognition that Saskatchewan’s unbalanced 
labour environment is a deterrent to private sector investment, 
job creation, and economic growth — very true words indeed, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also recommended the commission consider the negative 
impact of Saskatchewan’s high and uncompetitive property 
taxes on new private sector investment, job creation, and 
economic growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Vicq commission recognized that 
Saskatchewan’s high property taxes are a deterrent to new 
private sector economic growth, job creation. But they weren’t 
included in the mandate of the Vicq commission because the 
government opposite chose not to include that in their mandate, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve indicated earlier, the time is now to look at the Vicq 
commission, to implement it as soon as possible. And make no 
mistake, Mr. Speaker. We have the financial wherewithal in this 
province at this very moment to implement the 
recommendations of the Vicq commission. 
 
We’ve talked about, we’ve discussed the $759 million 
phony-baloney Fiscal Stabilization Fund that we have in this 
province right now. Just in that fund alone, Mr. Speaker, we 
could implement the Vicq commission’s recommendations right 
away. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, as I outlined in question period, and the 
questions that I think Saskatchewan people will be asking 
themselves: does this government, does this minister and this 
government, this Premier, this cabinet, this NDP caucus, do 
they have the political courage, Mr. Speaker, to implement the 
Vicq commission report? I would suggest that they don’t, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t . . . I would suggest that they don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Finance minister if he has the courage to 
challenge the Premier, the very Premier who campaigned 
against these types of recommendations in the election just over 
two years ago. Does this Finance minister, do the members 
opposite have the courage to challenge the Premier to reverse 
his ideas and to implement the Vicq commission? I say that 
they don’t, Mr. Speaker, but time will tell. And we look . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member bring his remarks 
to a conclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina South on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — To make a ministerial statement, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 

Labour Market Development 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to announce to the Assembly today that yesterday 
afternoon I signed an agreement on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan with the federal government to secure $109 
million over the next five years for labour market development 
in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this agreement will 
provide investments to achieve the following goals: the 
expansion and enhancement of apprenticeship, labour market 
integration of recent immigrants, improvement of literacy and 
essential skills, workplace development skills, as well as money 
to assist Aboriginal Canadians to take their rightful place in 
Saskatchewan and Canada’s economy, as well as assistance for 
others facing labour market barriers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our NDP government places a high priority on the 
issues around labour market development because a strong 
economy does need a strong workforce. Today we are fortunate 
that there are record numbers of people working in our 
province, and we are seeing tremendous growth in our oil and 
gas, manufacturing, mining, and IT [information technology] 
sectors. These sectors however need highly qualified, highly 
skilled workers to continue the momentum. 
 
There is a great deal of focus around the country today on how 
it is we can make Canada a more competitive and productive 
nation. At the same time we are increasingly attentive to the 
issue of ensuring Saskatchewan maintains its place of 
prosperity within the federation. There is no doubt that one of 
the major contributors to our economic prosperity is a skilled 
labour force that can respond to the changing labour market 
needs and ensure the productivity and quality that we need to 
maintain a competitive place within the global economy. This 
agreement will help us provide business and industry with the 
skilled workers that they need to continue to drive the economic 
growth in our province. 
 
The funding for this agreement comes as part of this year’s 
federal budget as negotiated by federal NDP leader, Jack 
Layton. We are pleased that the federal government has agreed 
to fund this, and we think it supports the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. I also want to say in particular that I want 
to thank my federal colleague, Belinda Stronach, for her 
leadership in seeing us through in terms of securing this 
agreement. 
 
This agreement does build on the strength of the Premier’s 
Action Plan for the Economy, and it supports the direction laid 
out in our recently announced training sector review. Mr. 
Speaker, it also aligns with our priorities in terms of ensuring 
all Saskatchewan people have the basic literacy and essential 
skills that they require to take full part within Saskatchewan’s 
economy. 
 
As we heard during the Premier’s centennial summit at the start 
of this year, Saskatchewan’s economy is growing at a rate that 
may soon outpace our ability to supply it with skilled labour. 
This agreement will help to ensure Saskatchewan people have 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2005 

the skills that they need to take advantage of the many 
opportunities presented by our rapidly growing economy. At 
this time of unprecedented economic growth in Saskatchewan, 
this agreement will help us ensure that our current and future 
workers across this province have access to the right training at 
the right time right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are still waiting for the federal government to 
fulfill its commitment to Saskatchewan’s university students as 
promised in that same federal budget. As you will know, that 
budget contained a commitment to reducing post-secondary 
tuition fees, which amounted to $120 million for Saskatchewan 
students, over the next five years. Included in that 120 million 
was additional support for student financial assistance. To date 
the federal government has refused to negotiate with the 
province of Saskatchewan or any province in this federation to 
make good on that promise. 
 
I want to encourage the federal government to continue with the 
path that they have shown through the Labour Market 
Development Agreement to negotiate with the provinces to 
keep their promises. 
 
I want to again thank the federal minister for her work on this 
109 million. I look forward to working with her in securing the 
next 120 million to support Saskatchewan students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
respond to the ministerial statement at this time and prior to my 
comments, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the minister for a 
copy of his statement and for giving us a chance to review the 
contents of the statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to respond to this 
recent Labour Market Partnership Agreement signed between 
the federal government and provincial governments, including 
our own as was enunciated by the minister just a few minutes 
ago. 
 
Given the importance of a well-qualified and well-trained 
workforce to our province’s economy as we go forward, there’s 
no question that $109 million in funding from the federal 
government for workplace development, for the expansion of an 
apprenticeship program, and for assistance to those 
experiencing barriers to the workplace are very welcome 
dollars. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the minister that 
labour force development is only half the equation when it 
comes to creating a vibrant and successful economy. The other 
half of the equation, Mr. Speaker, is creating a business climate 
in the province where investment is welcome, opportunity is 
encouraged, and barriers to growth and expansion have been 
removed. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard something about that 
in comments from the Minister of Finance and from the critic 
for Finance just moments prior to our own minister’s 
presentation here. 
 

The Vicq commission has presented some of the very important 
directions that will help us achieve that kind of a vibrant 
economy. But despite what the minister has said about investing 
in workers, the fact is that Saskatchewan lost 6,200 between 
October last year and October this year. Remember, those are 
workers who have left this province during an unprecedented 
oil boom. If we can’t retain workers during an oil boom in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, when will we retain them? And how can 
you invest in workers if they’re leaving the province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t have a strong economy without 
investing in workers. There’s no doubt about that. And that 
begins by retaining our young people right here by creating a 
positive economic environment. And, Mr. Speaker, that takes a 
plan. And that’s why the Saskatchewan Party has an economic 
vision for our province that will build a strong foundation for 
economic growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that plan is comprised of several different points. 
Number one, establishing a stable business climate that removes 
barriers to long-term, private-sector capital investment, 
economic growth, and job creation in both urban and rural parts 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Number two, implementing a personal and corporate tax 
structure that promotes and supports wealth creation and social 
sustainability for Saskatchewan families and businesses. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Number three, supporting the mass . . . I’m sorry, stopping the 
mass exodus of young people and families from Saskatchewan 
and retaining more of our young people after graduation. 
 
Number four, maintaining public ownership of Saskatchewan’s 
major Crown utilities, but have them focused on the provision 
of power, telecommunication services, natural gas transmission 
and distribution, and as well as insurance services to 
Saskatchewan families and businesses at the lowest possible 
cost. Get them focused on their primary objectives, encouraging 
economic development in key sectors where Saskatchewan has 
or could have a competitive advantage. 
 
Number six, working in full partnership with First Nations. 
Respecting the treaties as the foundation for development of 
economic policies that achieve the shared goal of creating 
prosperity for all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Number seven, maximizing the potential of innovation as a 
primary economic driver in the new globalized knowledge 
economy. 
 
Number eight, establish a one-stop service for businesses and 
investors interested in starting or expanding a business in 
Saskatchewan. And of course enhancing our labour market 
development through investment in post-secondary education, 
partnerships with businesses, and encouraging entrepreneurship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a plan. Unlike the minister who refers to his 
government’s inaction plan for the economy, our plan will build 
a strong foundation for growth. Building a skilled labour force 
must be a priority. 
 



November 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

We are pleased on this side of the House that the federal 
government has decided to contribute to the development of 
Saskatchewan’s workforce and hope that this government will 
take the necessary action to create opportunities for these 
workers. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just a word of caution before I conclude my 
comments today. The minister alluded to the fact that this $109 
million in funding was part of an agreement struck by the 
federal NDP Leader, Mr. Jack Layton, which was an attempt in 
the spring to prop up a desperate Liberal government. And in 
the interim months we have seen desperation turn to serious, 
serious desperation, in fact to the extent that the Liberals have 
promised $18 billion in spending in the few days running up to 
what is expected to be the collapse of the government in the 
next few days. 
 
So whether or not we ever see the $109 million promised to this 
province as part of this agreement remains to be seen, Mr. 
Speaker. And I hope we haven’t vested all of our interest on 
that particular investment in this province by the federal 
government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry 
Date Exception Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, 
The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exemption 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill No. 20, The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry 
Date Exception Act be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
order to accommodate the work of the policy field committees, 
I would move that the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 10 tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:49.] 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................387 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................388 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................388 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................388 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................388 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Wartman...................................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Wall ...........................................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................................389 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................390 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................390 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................390 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Heart of the Métis Awards 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................390 
 Humboldt Resident Advocates for Funding for Herceptin 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................390 
 Nap Bouvier Retirement 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Child Poverty 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Prince Albert Radio Station Wins Award 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Birthday Wishes for Leader of the Opposition 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................391 
 Saskatchewan Encyclopedia 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................392 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Final Report of the Business Tax Review Committee 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................392 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................392 
 Migration of Youth Population 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................394 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................394 
 Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
  Wall ....................................................................................................................................................................................395, 397 
  Lautermilch .......................................................................................................................................................................395, 397 
 Sale of Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company Equipment 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................396 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Final Report of the Business Tax Review Committee 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................397 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................398 
 Labour Market Development 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................399 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................400 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 20 — The Collective Bargaining Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................401 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


