















































Hansard: April 20, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 95A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2595 
 April 20, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The notoriously poor 
condition of Highway 32 has prompted a number of people to 
sign the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Cabri, Abbey, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Naicam, Balgonie, Shackleton, Swift Current, 
and Lancer. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I have a pleasure 
of rising on behalf of constituents who are concerned about the 
availability of support offered to people with lifelong 
disabilities in southwest Saskatchewan. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, today the petitioners are from the 
community of Waldeck just east of Swift Current and the city of 
Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the devastation that crystal meth leaves in a community. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 

 
The people that have signed this are all from the community of 
Wadena. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve a petition to 
halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions signed by 
people who are concerned that the provincial government has 
chosen to ignore the Boughen report and only adopt parts of it. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown, Stranraer, Herschel, Brock, and 
Sovereign. And I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present the petition from citizens of this province who 
are concerned about the growing problem of crystal meth. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine addiction, education, 
presentation, enforcement, and treatment. 
 
And, as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Wadena and 
Rose Valley. I so present, thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present the petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation 
of school divisions, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Midale, Halbrite, 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2005 

Macoun, Estevan, Regina, and Weyburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Moose Jaw. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 637, 640, 666, 720, and 730. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Privileges 

 
Clerk: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on Privileges 
presents the first report of the committee. 
 
Your committee met for organization and to consider its order 
of reference from the Assembly dated April 12, 2005 as 
follows: 
 

That this Assembly urge government and Crown 
corporation officials to respect the rights and privileges of 
all members of this Assembly by ensuring that official 
opposition members and their staff are allowed to attend 
any embargoed news conferences and technical briefings 
open to members of the news media; and, 
 
That this matter be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges; and, 
 
That the committee table its report in the Assembly no 
later than Wednesday, April 20, 2005. 

 
The committee elected Mr. Bjornerud as Deputy Chair. The 
Chair has been instructed to report that the committee met three 
times, on April 13, 18, and 20, but was unable to come to a 
decision on its order of reference. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Privileges is recognized. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Southeast that 
the first report of the Standing Committee on Privileges be now 
concurred in. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats and seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast that the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Privileges be now concurred in. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? The Chair recognizes the member for . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . pardon me. Thank you very much. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I am pleased to . . . I 
am prepared to second this motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I came here in November 2003 and I assumed that as an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] I would have certain 
fundamental rights and would be able to carry on my business 
as an MLA with the full co-operation of the Legislative 
Assembly and all of its members. 
 
I assumed, Mr. Speaker, that that would include such things as 
technical briefings where important background information is 
provided to the media. I would want to attend those meetings, 
or have the right to attend them, and to hear the media 
questions. 
 
As a result of a Saskatchewan Party official not being allowed 
to attend those meetings, this committee was established for the 
first time in a quarter of a century. The resolution that was sent 
down stated the fundamental right, that we had the right to 
attend that meeting. 
 
We spent a lot of time in debate and discussing what the terms 
of reference were. In simple terms, the government members 
wanted to discuss if opposition members were entitled to attend. 
The opposition members were there to discuss how they were 
able to attend. As such, Mr. Speaker, there was a hopeless 
deadlock and the committee was not able to perform any 
valuable service. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has taken the 
position that we have the right, we will continue to take that 
right, and that as long as we continue to be excluded, we feel 
that our rights are being violated. 
 
However, the government has indicated today, are prepared to 
make separate technical briefings available to opposition 
members. And we intend to attend those briefings and 
participate in those briefings. And we’ll consider at a later time 
whether we wish to exercise the rights that we believe we have 
now, have always had, and that those rights were confirmed in 
the motion that was sent to that committee. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, frankly it was something that was beyond 
the scope of that committee to even discuss the terms of 
reference. It was after a thorough debate in this House and an 
amendment by the government members. And democratic 
process would dictate that that’s what should have taken place. 
However, having said that, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to go 
on and see whether we can make something work. 



April 20, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to speak about the issue of privilege that was raised before us in 
the House and subsequently referred to the Committee on 
Privileges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government went above and beyond its call by 
putting forward, Mr. Speaker, a position that guaranteed that all 
members of this Assembly had the opportunity for a technical 
briefing prior to the media. Mr. Speaker, our parliamentary 
privilege says we should know before. And this government has 
bent over backwards to ensure where technical briefings are 
being given to the media, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this 
Assembly — all members, not just opposition members as their 
motion said, Mr. Speaker, but all members — are entitled to the 
technical briefing prior to the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that conforms with the process that’s used in the 
Parliament of Canada. It ensures the rights of all members, and 
it guarantees all legislators first-hand, first priority knowledge 
of each and every subject that a technical briefing’s been put 
forward on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that the members opposite 
had difficultly in agreeing with the government that we should 
in fact not be with the media, but before the media. We should 
have the same information before the media has it, Mr. Speaker. 
That is what our parliamentary privilege says we should have, 
and that is what this government has done. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to have in the east gallery 38 students from grade 
eight at St. Michael’s school in Weyburn. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
had the privilege to meet with most of these students last 
February when John Watson and I were at St. Michael’s school 
in Weyburn to make a presentation about crystal meth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied today by their 
teachers, Ms. Valene Wiles, and also Tessa Scrupps. And, Mr. 
Speaker, if I might, I would just like to recognize Tessa 
especially because she was awarded yesterday in Weyburn. I 
had the honour to be at a dinner in Weyburn yesterday that 

recognized women in our city, and she was awarded the 
outstanding young woman award for her great contribution to 
our community. So I’d like to recognize Tessa as well and I 
look forward to meeting with you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I look forward to meeting with them all, and 
I’d like all members to welcome the students and teachers to 
our Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
wish to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a friend sitting in the west gallery. Trevor Davies is 
here visiting from Wood River, home town of Gravelbourg. 
He’s in Regina for the day to attend some meetings and took an 
opportunity to come in to the legislature and watch the 
proceedings for the afternoon, and I would like all members to 
welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly someone 
sitting in the west gallery. He’s a very important constituent of 
the constituency of Regina Walsh Acres. He is also a Regina 
firefighter and has been educating us on the importance of their 
work and some of the other things they are looking at for the 
future as well. Welcome to the legislature, and I’d like all 
members to join me in doing so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Oh, Todd Brown — very important person by the name of Todd 
Brown. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Free Entry to Provincial Parks 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, once again this government says one thing and does 
another. The same NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
that brought you the weenie roast tax has now decided to give 
the people of Saskatchewan free entry to provincial parks on the 
Labour Day long weekend. Talk about thinking big, Mr. 
Speaker. Three whole days to celebrate the centennial versus 
the Saskatchewan Party plan, idea no. 4, for an entire summer 
of free camping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you should have heard the moaning, the wailing, 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2005 

the gnashing of teeth, when the Saskatchewan Party suggested 
waiving entry fees for the entire season as a meaningful way to 
celebrate our centennial. The Minister of the Environment 
scoffed at our plan — too late in the game. We all knew the 
centennial was coming. Early March is too late in the game, but 
somehow late April is soon enough as long as it’s an NDP idea. 
Talk about playing political games with our centennial 
celebration. 
 
This government says one thing and does another. It doesn’t 
like the idea of free park days, and then it introduces free park 
days when it thinks everyone else has forgotten where the idea 
came from. Thankfully, Mr. Speaker, anything this NDP 
government touches becomes automatically inferior. Instead of 
an entire summer of free camping at provincial parks, now we 
have — thanks to those that brought us the weenie roast tax — 
we have a free weekend. My advice to the NDP is this: if 
they’re going to plagiarize one of our ideas, at least have the 
courage to plagiarize the whole idea, not just part of it. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Business Awards 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
15th annual Sam McLeod Prince Albert Business Awards were 
held last night at the E.A. Rawlinson Centre for the Arts in 
Prince Albert, the new centre of the arts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert’s business leaders have long been 
known for leading economic development in our province. 
These awards recognize that, and they were started in 1989 to 
recognize the outstanding achievements of businessmen and 
individuals in the field of commerce, community work, and 
innovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night Thompson Signs Limited were two-time 
winners — the New Product or Service Award as well as the 
New Business Award. Mr. Speaker, as well Parkland 
Ambulance Care was the winner of the Community 
Involvement Award. The Service Industry Award went to 
Bocian Jewellers, and Leon’s Furniture was recognized for 
exceptional performance in marketing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Co-operative Association was a 
double winner as well, taking home the Investment Award, as 
well as the Business of the Year Award. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Wayne Pearson, the now retired manager, general manager of 
the Co-op, was a well deserving recipient of the Legacy Award 
for his outstanding contributions to business and the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all of my colleagues will recognize the 
innovation and the good work that is done by the Prince Albert 
business community. And as idea 101, I would want to ask all 
of my colleagues to stand up, recognize innovation and the 
good work of the business community in Prince Albert who do 
so on their own initiative. And surely the Saskatchewan Party 
won’t take credit for that as well. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Saskatoon High School Debaters to Compete Nationally 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House 
today to ask members to recognize excellence in some of our 
young people. Mr. Speaker, I am asking all members to applaud 
two Saskatoon high school students, Megan Burns and Francois 
Schira, both of Holy Cross High School. 
 
These are grade 9 students who are participating in the Holy 
Cross debating club. The club meets at least twice a week and 
practices on impromptu topics. They will be going to Halifax 
between May 4 and May 8 to participate in the Junior High 
Nationals. 
 
The debating topics in Halifax will include, is co-education 
superior to single gender classes for sex education? Is Canada’s 
relationship with the US [United States] more advantageous 
than detrimental to Canada? And has modern education 
provided a generation of illiterates? Mr. Speaker, these are very 
weighty topics. 
 
In addition these students are extremely well-rounded. They 
participate in a variety of activities including basketball, 
swimming, curling, painting, pencil sketching, flute, ukulele, 
and piano. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are well aware that today’s high school 
debaters are tomorrow’s MLAs. It is going to be the goal of the 
Saskatchewan Party to recruit these young people so that they 
can become Saskatchewan Party MLAs. 
 
I would ask all members to wish Megan and Francois well in 
the Junior High Nationals in Halifax, May 4 to May 8. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Schmirler Rink Inducted into Olympic Hall of Fame 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the greatest 
rinks in the history of Canadian women’s curling, the Sandra 
Schmirler rink, has been inducted into the Canadian Olympic 
Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Olympic Hall of Fame recognizes 
significant contributions by Canadian athletes at the Olympics. 
In 1998 the Sandra Schmirler rink captured the gold medal at 
the Winter Olympics in Japan and has the distinction of being 
the first and only Canadian women’s team to win a gold medal 
in curling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sandra Schmirler rink dominated women’s 
curling in the 1990s. This team — made up of skip, Sandra 
Schmirler, Jan Betker, Joan McCusker, Marcia Gudereit, and 
alternate, Atina Ford — won six provincial championships 



April 20, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

during the decade and then went on to win three Canadian and 
three world championships between 1993 and 1997 to set an 
unprecedented record. No women’s team composed of the same 
four members had ever won more than one world title. Mr. 
Speaker, the Sandra Schmirler rink was voted The Canadian 
Press team of the year in 1998, and a year later the team was 
inducted into the Canadian Curling Hall of Fame. Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan and Canada mourned the loss of 
skip, Sandra Schmirler, when she passed away in March 2000. 
 
I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in congratulating the 
Sandra Schmirler rink for their induction into the Canadian 
Olympic Hall of Fame, yet another in their long list of 
accomplishments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Pearl Lutzko Presented Centenarian Medallion 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan centennial motto, 100 years of heart, is well 
illustrated by the centenarians of Saskatchewan who had the 
heart and courage to help build this great province. This past 
Friday, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of presenting a 
centenarian medallion to Mrs. Pearl Lutzko at the Pioneer 
Lodge in Ituna. Mrs. Lutzko was born on February 15, 1899, 
and certainly demonstrates the strength and courage held by 
many Saskatchewan’s original settlers. She has seven children, 
29 grandchildren, 55 great-grandchildren, and 12 
great-great-grandchildren. 
 
Mrs. Lutzko illustrates the independence and resiliency, Mr. 
Speaker, and she’s passed that on to her children. Her oldest son 
Nick, who is a young 88, thought it was a nice spring day, so he 
just walked a couple of blocks over to the home to be part of the 
medallion celebration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is with certainly a great honour, Mr. Speaker, to have an 
opportunity to meet the centenarians over our province and in 
particularly people such as Mrs. Lutzko. And I would ask all 
members of this Assembly to help thank all those centenarians 
who have helped to build this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview 
 

Saskatoon Girls’ Hockey Teams Win Gold Medals 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
girls’ hockey teams from Saskatoon recently entered the April 
Ice championship in Calgary and both returned home with gold 
medals after finishing on top in their respective age categories. 
 
April Ice is a huge, all-girls hockey tournament. This year more 
than 90 teams competed from across Canada and the United 
States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Comet Whiplash entered the 

top-level peewee division and played a round robin series 
against teams from Edmonton and Calgary. In the final game, 
Saskatoon Whiplash outshot Calgary by an outstanding 73 to 26 
for a winning score of 7 to 1. Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon Whiplash 
is also the 2004-2005 Saskatchewan provincial champion in the 
female peewee double A division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another team from Saskatoon, the Comet peewee 
A’s, also entered the April Ice tournament and won all five of 
their games on their way to winning the gold medal. Earlier this 
year, the Comet peewee A’s won both the northern provincial 
championship and the peewee A’s provincial title in 
Saskatchewan. Overall, Mr. Speaker, the Comet peewee A team 
was nine wins and zero losses at both provincials and April Ice, 
and outscored their opponents by 48 to 7. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
recognizing the coaches and parents for their support and 
congratulating all the girls on their accomplishments. I’d 
particularly like to acknowledge Bailey Kohl and Amanda 
Verishine, who live in my constituency, Saskatoon Fairview. I 
wish everyone the best of luck in next year’s season. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

New Indoor Soccer Park for Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this afternoon Saskatoon city officials, volunteers, soccer teams, 
players, and fans are gathered in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs to turn the sod at the site of Saskatoon’s new 
soccer park indoor facility. 
 
The soccer facility has been in the works since April 2002. Last 
August I had the privilege of attending the sod-turning 
ceremony for the outdoor fields. These artificial surfaces are to 
be installed and ready for use in a few months. 
 
Now it’s time to get the indoor facility started. If all goes 
according to plan, community teams will be playing in the new 
building by December 1. The University Heights multi-district 
park in my constituency will also be the home of a long overdue 
public collegiate, a community centre, and a recycling depot. 
 
Project KickStart is the name of the fundraising campaign that 
has seen success with the recent Buy a Brick, Win a Bug, Mr. 
Speaker. The bug is a Volkswagen Beetle that’s decaled up like 
a soccer ball. It’s a great promotion. 
 
I can’t say enough about the huge team of volunteers who have 
been energetically raising money to build a soccer park in 
northeast Saskatoon. With private money and money coming 
from the city of Saskatoon, corporate sponsors, and other 
fundraisers to date, there is approximately only $1.1 million 
required to complete the $14 million project. 
 
Congratulations to project directors Bob Rohachuk, Hugh 
Vassos, Declan O’Reilly, and the entire team for their fine job 
in supporting team play and community sports. 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Crystal Methamphetamine 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, crystal meth is a scourge in 
our society. It’s destroying our youth, and something must be 
done about it now. This morning Mayor Pat Fiacco heard 
first-hand from families affected by crystal meth. He also 
heard from Sergeant Gerry Good. Both stressed that this drug 
is destroying Saskatchewan families. And guess what, Mr. 
Speaker? Mr. Fiacco listened. He even gave a phone number, 
777-7339, for people to get involved. 

 
The mayor proposed three resolutions aimed at stopping the 
spread of crystal meth, and he asked for letters to be written 
to the Premier and the Minister of Health to address the 
concerns. The concerns are a need for a treatment facility 
now, the need for public education — our children need to 
know about the dangers of this drug — now. And finally, 
Saskatchewan needs to restrict the access to the precursor 
ingredients used to make crystal meth. 

 
To the Premier: will he listen to Mayor Pat Fiacco and 
consider these suggestions for fighting the plague known as 
crystal methamphetamine? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear 
that crystal meth causes a great deal of destruction around 
anybody who is involved with it. We have a very 
straightforward way of dealing with this in our government, 
and it works throughout our addictions program. We have a 
program that involves prevention, treatment, education, and 
then reducing the drug supply. 
 
All of those different parts we’ve been working at very 
carefully. I’m encouraged by the mayor now coming on 
board as well as many others because I think that what we 
have to do is deal with it at many different levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are groups of professionals who work in 
this area who are working together with our Legislative 
Secretary, looking at addictions. And we’re going to be 
dealing with many, many of these issues to bolster the kind 
of treatment we already have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been 
talking about it for six years, and they haven’t done anything. 
Perhaps you should listen to a story from a family whose 
child is involved in crystal meth. 
 

We have a 17 year old child, who was a very intelligent, 
straight A, Honour Roll student, a beautiful girl, who is 
now seriously addicted to crystal meth. [She’s been] She 
has many friends who are in the same position, and some 
worse. We have been going through a battle with her for 
approximately eight months in trying to get her off this 
drug. We’ve seen our daughter go from a very beautiful 
girl to a girl acting psychotic, with sores on her face, who 
[sometimes] . . . looks just horrible, who looks like the life 
has been taken out of her and who has dropped so much 
weight she looks like a skeleton . . . Some of her friends 
have gone from bright, promising children to drug addicts 
who are violent and threatening their parents. 

 
To the minister: when will he bring in a public education 
system targeting this incredibly addictive and dangerous drug? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as part of what we’re doing 
in this province, we are including information about crystal 
meth and its effects, and along with a number of other insidious 
problems. We know even when the crystal meth experts come 
to Saskatchewan, the headline identifies that alcohol is a bigger 
problem than crystal meth in your community. But that doesn’t 
mean that we shouldn’t be spending more and more time, which 
is what we’re doing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we are looking at and as part of this 
budget — and I urge the members across to support the budget 
— relates to the retooling of the Hantelman mental health 
facility in Saskatoon. Part of that will include some short-term 
mental health detox kind of spaces. In Regina there’s a similar 
discussion, and we’re working with all the professionals to 
make sure we get the right kind of treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, families who have children 
involved with crystal meth are really tired of hearing the 
government saying they’re looking at it. They need some action 
right now.Maybe the government needs to know more about the 
effects of crystal meth. This parent writes: 
 

This drug is affecting a lot of teenagers in Western Canada 
because of the availability — it is very cheap — [it] can be 
purchased simply with allowance money — [it] costs less 
[to buy meth] than it does to go to a movie . . . Young 
adults doing this drug do not have the availability to 
function as normal adults and [to] get jobs to support 
themselves. These kids will never be productive adults 
unless some very serious action is taken immediately to 
eliminate this drug from the streets. 
 
These kids, and their parents, cannot wait for the 
bureaucratic system to take its time! Each day that goes by 



April 20, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2601 

. . . another day these kids are digging their graves deeper! 
 
Mr. Speaker, by waiting, this government is digging graves. 
Will this government commit today to spending money and 
resources to battle this plague? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we will commit to continue 
spending money and resources to deal with this scourge on our 
community. We are working together with the K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] education system and at the 
universities. We’re working together with the police and with 
justice around all of the different issues that relate to our four 
points — prevention, treatment, education, and reducing the 
drug supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our safer communities legislation has given some 
new powers to the police which have allowed us to go and 
identify places where drugs are made and distributed and deal 
with them very expeditiously. We’re continuing to make sure 
we have money available for that. I encourage the members 
opposite to support the budget so that we can go ahead with the 
kind of work that we need to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I just don’t believe the minister 
understands the seriousness of this problem today. Mr. Speaker, 
if the NDP will not listen to Mayor Pat Fiacco, and perhaps they 
are not listening to the mother who is desperately pleading for 
help for her daughter, then perhaps they’ll listen to the 
17-year-old woman who is addicted to crystal meth and is in a 
treatment facility in Alberta because there is no facility here in 
Saskatchewan. It’s costing this family $125 a day out of their 
own pocket. 
 
She recently wrote a letter to her mother, telling her how 
difficult it is to get off meth. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
This young woman is winning. She will move past this, and I 
know she will because of what she said in the last line of her 
letter to her mother. And I’d like to read it to the Speaker and to 
this government. 
 

There is [an] Adventure in my future, there’s a world 
beyond my door. 
And any dream worth dreaming is a dream worth fighting 
for. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he take up the fight with this 
young woman and create a treatment facility in Saskatchewan 
so she can build a dream? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 
identifies a very important factor in all of this, and that’s hope, 
and hope for the future. Mr. Speaker, I have dedicated my 

career in politics about building hope for the future, especially 
for young people and for children across this province. And I 
encourage the members to work with us and with the mayor and 
with the people right across this province to deal with yet 
another problem that affects future generations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Condition of Northern Roads 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the trucking industry says it’s 
frustrated with the poor condition and insufficient maintenance 
on northern roads. In a letter to the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation dated April 11, 2005, these roads were described 
as unacceptable. Mr. Speaker, why is the government failing to 
maintain northern roads? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well first of all the budget that we brought down some short 
weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, dedicates something just slightly over 
$300 million to transportation, to highways in our province, a 5 
million increase from last year. And it fulfills our commitment, 
Mr. Speaker, of $1.2 billion over four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the importance of infrastructure in 
northern Saskatchewan. Over the last number of years there 
have been significant increases in transportation budgets for 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re committed to 
continuing to deliver on those budgets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government is saying 
one thing and doing another. Northern Resource Trucking says 
it takes three hours to travel from Pinehouse to Key Lake on 
Highway No. 914. The company says it takes trucks six hours 
to make that trip — six hours, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have 
enough equipment to keep goods moving with that length of 
travel time. Mr. Speaker, why is this government allowing 
northern roads to deteriorate to such a sorry state? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for anybody who’s 
been in northern Saskatchewan, you will know that there are 
great distances between communities, huge distances. We 
recognize the importance of infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just make this observation that I have made several 
times — not that there isn’t much more that needs to be done in 
northern Saskatchewan because there’s much development 
that’s taking place there — but several years ago when I was the 
minister of Transportation last time, Mr. Speaker, four or five 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2005 

years ago, we had budgets that ranged in the vicinity in the 
northern administration district of sort of 15 to $16 million. 
We’re close to $30 million now, Mr. Speaker, a significant 
increase for northern Saskatchewan over the last few years. 
 
Is there more to do? Absolutely there’s more to do, and we will 
continue to do more in northern Saskatchewan as the northern 
part of the province continues to develop and deliver services to 
the rest of the province as well, Mr. Speaker. We’ll work with 
northerners to ensure that they have a good infrastructure 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since it’s obvious 
this minister and NDP government lacks a vision for the 
development of the North’s infrastructure and a vision for its 
future, I’d like to point out to the Minister of Highways to refer 
to the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 Ideas to Get Saskatchewan 
Ready for the Next 100 Years. I’d like him to look at item no. 
18, 88, and 98, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Two weeks ago an NRT [Northern Resources Trucking Limited 
Partnership] driver called to say that a section of the road was 
impassable. That was at midnight. Nothing was done until 10 
a.m. the next morning. The trucks waited. Customers waited. 
There have been other instances where trucks and trailer 
equipment was literally shaken apart. Mr. Speaker, does the 
Minister of Highways think this is acceptable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. You know I heard a little theme the other night: you 
can’t deny the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who sold all the highway equipment in this 
province? Who sold the highway equipment? Those 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. They run and hide, Mr. Speaker. 
They run and hide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who closed down the northern administration, all 
of the offices? Who closed that down? The Conservatives over 
on that side, Mr. Speaker. And they wonder why it’s difficult to 
deliver services into northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say again, we’ve increased budgets in northern 
Saskatchewan significantly. Do we need to do more? 
Absolutely we need to do more, and we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The vice-president of 
Northern Resources Trucking says the problem of inadequate 
maintenance of northern roads is getting worse. Trucking and 
mining companies are picking up the direct cost caused by this 

government’s neglect. These companies pay taxes and royalties. 
If the roads are not passable, the industry and the province’s 
bottom line are hurt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this minister stop putting lives, 
equipment, and the future of the northern economy at risk and 
start maintaining these roads at an acceptable standard? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Well as I’ve 
indicated, we have made a commitment of one and a half billion 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, over four years. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
committed two and a half billion over 10 years, Mr. Speaker. 
We are on track to do that, Mr. Speaker — in fact slightly ahead 
of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again as it relates to northern Saskatchewan, we 
have increased budget significantly. We will continue to work 
with northerners. We work in partnership, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
built the road, the Fort McMurray road, Mr. Speaker, on the 
Saskatchewan side, to further develop opportunities. Mr. 
Speaker, we need Alberta to come onside. 
 
Given the work that we’ve done with many of the people in the 
Athabasca region, we are optimistic that we’ll continue to 
develop roads further into the North so communities can thrive 
and benefit as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Government Funding for Litigation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the 
NDP government says one thing and does another. In the 
recently tabled SaskWater annual report, the government says 
that there is only one more SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] related lawsuit. However, as 
has been the habit of the NDP government, the words do not 
match the facts. 
 
Now it appears the taxpayers are on the hook again. The 
taxpayers are on the hook for legal expenses incurred for a 
former SaskWater Vice-Chair and NDP cabinet minister. Mr. 
Speaker, why was the SaskWater report so strangely quiet on 
these expenses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we have been very candid in this legislature for 
months now about the outstanding legal obligations with 
respect to SaskWater, to the point where I just cannot 
understand the basis for the question. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify that the matter of paying 



April 20, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

Ms. Teichrob, a former Vice-Chair of SaskWater, $7,100 is not 
directly related to a suit against SaskWater, though there is 
another suit that is connected. No, Mr. Speaker, this is a suit 
against Ms. Teichrob herself that was . . . and, Mr. Speaker, the 
legal suit was launched by Mr. Kaukinen and Mr. Fjeld, former 
presidents and vice-presidents of SaskWater, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it is common practice that Crowns and private 
businesses would indemnify their former officers, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re standing behind Ms. Teichrob, Mr. Speaker, and we 
make no apologies for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has lapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that Ms. 
Teichrob’s legal problems are entirely related to the SPUDCO 
fiasco — entirely related to the SPUDCO fiasco, a fiasco that 
doesn’t go back to the 1980s but lies on the shoulders of the 
NDP government. Mr. Speaker, there is a lawsuit mentioned in 
an annual report, and the potential liability coming with that 
case. Now we’re paying the legal fees for the intemperate 
comments of a former NDP cabinet minister. Isn’t that 
convenient, Mr. Speaker? Friends helping friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this NDP government decided to cover 
the legal costs of a former NDP cabinet minister in the 
SPUDCO case? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to repeat 
to the member opposite that it is common practice, both in the 
private sector and in the public sector, for corporations to stand 
behind executive members of their boards, Mr. Speaker, even 
when those persons no longer hold that office. Now in this case, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very clear that the suit by Mr. 
Kaukinen and Mr. Fjeld would never have been launched 
against Ms. Teichrob had it not been for her role as Vice-Chair 
of SaskWater, Mr. Speaker. I think that is very clear. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we stand behind Ms. Teichrob and make no 
apologies for assisting her with legal costs, I might say, on a 
lawsuit now that has been relatively dormant for some period of 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 
changed his mind because when he commented on this case last 
fall he said it was a personal case and he didn’t see the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan getting involved with these legal 
fees. Mr. Speaker, we’ve already lost $35 million, so I guess the 
feeling over it with the NDP is, what’s a few more dollars? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happens if this former minister is held to be 
liable? Will we have to pay the final judgment as well? Mr. 
Speaker, can this government tell taxpayers the full extent of 

our potential liability in this unresolved SPUDCO case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
SaskWater. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, beyond the $7,100 
that has been paid to offset legal expenses that Ms. Teichrob 
has already incurred, this government has made no additional 
commitments and no additional decisions one way or the other 
with respect to this matter. 
 
Now the member for Rosetown-Biggar suggests that somehow 
in December I suggested that we were not going to be making 
payment. And that’s not the case at all. I said, and I repeat 
again, I said in December that I was reviewing the matter and 
that I thought that it had some connection to her role with 
SaskWater, but that I’d not made a final decision. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have made a final decision. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been very transparent and very public, and we 
make no apologies about covering a good portion of Ms. 
Teichrob’s legal expenses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Public Sector Wage Guidelines 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, late 
last week we learned, and it was reported in the papers over the 
weekend, that the teachers have reached a tentative agreement. 
It wasn’t 0, 1, and 1; it was 2, 2, and 2. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Party is pleased that the government 
entered into fair negotiations with the teachers’ union. But now 
other unions are wondering is 0, 1, and 1 still the mandate. Can 
the government tell us: when they go back to bargaining table 
with the nurses this weekend, is it 0, 1, and 1? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would just want to say that we have said all along that 0, 1, and 
1 is certainly in keeping with trying to keep our wage line down 
in government, that we would be flexible on all matters related 
to recruitment . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they can check the Hansard, all matters related to 
recruitment and retention, matters related to health plans, and 
matters related to special circumstances in the workplace. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I feel we’ve been very consistent with that point 
of view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that answer was incredible. 
You cannot really believe a word she says because, first, 0, 1, 
and 1 has flexibility — does that mean 2, 2, and 2? So if 2, 2, 
and 2 have flexibility, does that mean 4, 4, and 4? What is the 
answer over there? We don’t have any idea. 
 
You know, Rosalee Longmoore, Rosalee Longmoore, from 
SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order over here. Order 
over here. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there seems to be no rational 
thought coming from that side. That’s what we cannot 
understand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rosalee Longmoore from SUN said that 0, 1, and 
1 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
Order. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
start again. Rosalee Longmoore from SUN said that 0, 1, and 1 
just will not recruit and retain nurses. SUN knows it, we know 
it, the general public knows it; 0, 1, and 1 will not retain nurses 
in this province. She goes on and is quoted in The StarPhoenix 
as saying that, “People are horrified with the lack of vision” . . . 
of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the government goes to the negotiating table this 
weekend with SUN, will they throw out 0, 1, and 1 and 
negotiate in fair and good faith? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fairly obvious 
from all of our past settlements with the nurses and the teachers 
that we bargain in good faith. And I would have to say to the 
members opposite, this is the same members who oppose 
increases in the minimum wage, who want to adopt a Wal-Mart 
view of labour law and of union-busting practices; the same 
group of people who have suggested that the public sector 
should go get a real job. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that we will always look 
at the real circumstances and respond to the needs at the 
particular bargaining tables. And we stand on our record in that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that little tirade just shows 
you, you can’t believe a word this government says. Mr. 
Speaker, it has absolutely no basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many are saying that 0, 1, and 1 wage mandate is 
an unfair labour practice. It circumvents a fair and collective 
bargaining process. Rosalee Longmoore agrees, and this is what 
she has to say: “It doesn’t allow unions to go and engage in free 
and collective bargaining,” Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Party believes in fair and collective bargaining, but for some 
reason the NDP don’t believe in fair and collective bargaining. 
Once again, it’s where the government’s actions do not meet 
their words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government drop this phony-baloney 0, 1, 
and 1, and bargain in fair and proper manner, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, regardless of the various 
mandates of which there is always a budgetary line that one is 
trying to achieve in collective bargaining, we have always 
bargained fairly and will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the worst 
retention rate for nurses in the country. We have the lowest 
salary range for nurses outside of Atlantic Canada. Now the 
government is going and negotiating with nurses and saying, 
it’s 0, 1, and 1, and that’s it. Or it’s 0, 1, and 1, and a little bit. 
Or is it 0, 1, and 1, and a whole bunch? Or is it 2, 2, and 2? 
 
When will the government come clean and go to the bargaining 
table and bargain in the process that is respected by union 
leaders around this province — fair and collective bargaining? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And seeing as the member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
The Chair recognizes the Minister for Community Resources. 
Order. The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And again I’ll reiterate our commitment to looking at all of the 
issues at the bargaining table and to engage in a fair process — 
as we always have — that has brought, I think, good benefits to 
the nursing profession. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 20, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 109 — The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 109, 
The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order, 
please. Thank you. 
 
The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 109, The Criminal 
Enterprise Suppression Act be introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read the second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 110 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 110, The 
Seizure of Criminal Property Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 110, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act be 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read the second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I would like to 
advise the Assembly that earlier today I tabled the annual report 
for the year 2004 of the Ombudsman. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I am extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions no. 984 through 996 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 984 through 996 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the 
meetings of the Economy Committee and the Human Services 
Committee, I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:26.] 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2595 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2595 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2595 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2595 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2595 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2595 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2596 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2596 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Privileges 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................2596 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2596 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2596 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2597 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2597 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2597 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2597 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Free Entry to Provincial Parks 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2597 
 Prince Albert Business Awards 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2598 
 Saskatoon High School Debaters to Compete Nationally 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2598 
 Schmirler Rink Inducted into Olympic Hall of Fame 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2598 
 Pearl Lutzko Presented Centenarian Medallion 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2599 
 Saskatoon Girls’ Hockey Teams Win Gold Medals 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2599 
 New Indoor Soccer Park for Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2599 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Crystal Methamphetamine 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2600 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2600 
 Condition of Northern Roads 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2601 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2601 
 Government Funding for Litigation 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2602 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2602 
 Public Sector Wage Guidelines 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2603 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2603 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 109 — The Criminal Enterprise Suppression Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2605 
 Bill No. 110 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2605 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2605 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2605 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2605 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




