

















































Hansard: May 09, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 108B  MONDAY, MAY 9, 2005, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2941 
 May 9, 2005 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The first item of business is estimates 
for the Department of Government Relations. Can the minister 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I am 
pleased today to be back in front of Committee of Finance. 
 
The officials with me today include deputy minister of 
government relations, Dr. Harvey Brooks. To my right, 
Maryellen Carlson, assistant deputy minister, municipal 
relations. Behind Maryellen is John Edwards, executive 
director, policy development. Directly behind me is Russ 
Krywulak, executive director, grants administration and 
provincial municipal relations. Next to Russ is Wanda 
Lamberti, the executive director, finance and management 
services. And directly to Wanda’s left is Paul Osborne, who is 
the assistant deputy minister, trade and international relations. 
Seated at the back of the House with Government Relations are 
Florent Bilodeau, director, Office of French-language 
Co-ordination; Doug Morcom, director of grants administration; 
and Ralph Leibel, acting executive director, community 
planning. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening 
to the minister and his officials. We want to take this 
opportunity to ask a few questions, particularly about 
intergovernmental affairs. 
 
First of all I would appreciate just a brief update from the 
minister’s department about Saskatchewan’s 
involvement/intervention in the ongoing BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] situation. This does involve other 
governments, both the federal government and the Americans, 
and I’m not looking for a long answer but just a quick update as 
to what role Saskatchewan has been playing in this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for that question. I 
think the member from Rosetown-Elrose is aware the lead 
agency on our BSE activity is Agriculture and Food. The 
Minister of Agriculture and Food works through the provincial, 
state agriculture group on the issue and basically carries the lead 
for it. 
 
Intergovernmental relations has a number of other forum areas 
where we are involved in these discussions. We provide advice 
as well to the Premier in his discussions with the federal 
officials and, most importantly, support the Premier’s activities 
with regards to the Western Governors’ Association and the 
meetings that take place there. 
 

Intergovernmental relations also has a very good relationship 
through the Midwest Legislative Conference. And it’s through 
our contacts there that we promote Saskatchewan interests. As 
well I think the member opposite is also aware that personally I 
and other members of the government, including members of 
the opposition, have travelled on several occasions now to the 
United States — Montana, North Dakota — and even today as 
we speak, we’re entertaining a guest from South Dakota. 
 
We use every opportunity we can in visiting with governors, 
state representatives, state senators, to lobby on this issue on 
our behalf. 
 
But essentially the really short answer is the specifics of the 
negotiations lie in the . . . are the responsibility of the Minister 
of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I thank the minister for the answer. We do 
recognize that many departments of government . . . I mean 
Executive Council is involved, Department of Agriculture. Also 
because there is a legal issue before the United States, I suppose 
Justice would be involved, but I could see Intergovernmental 
Affairs playing a coordinating role. 
 
Has your department at all investigated and made 
recommendations to Justice or Agriculture regarding the status 
of the pending court case in the United States? And have you 
considered seeking intervenor status at the, you know, at this 
hearing that’s going to occur in July? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the question as I 
understood it was the activities of the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs in a broader range, specifically 
leading up to or including an intervenor status with the US 
[United States] court. Again the very short answer to the 
question is that because this is primarily a national issue, in 
other words, it’s a federal government, the federal government’s 
issue, it’s the Canadian government dealing with the federal US 
government overall on opening the border, that we’ve relied 
very heavily on a relationship with the federal government, the 
federal Department of Agriculture and including the Prime 
Minister’s office, in developing our relationship with regards to 
formal status in the US. 
 
The federal government had made inquiries with regards to this 
friend of the court intervenor status and the federal government 
was turned down. Saskatchewan felt therefore no ability to, if 
the federal government had been turned down for this status, of 
attempting any intervenor status. 
 
We are aware that a number of others, including federal MPs 
[Member of Parliament] individually, have made some claim in 
this regard. We would certainly be very interested in supporting 
their activity in that regard. This is an important issue for 
Saskatchewan producers. 
 
But the Saskatchewan government to a certain extent, as I say, 
has no intervenor status that we can see, no legal basis for 
entering into this at that state court level. It was a federal court 
in the state of Montana that made this decision. 
 
The USDA [United States Department of Agriculture] does not 



2942 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

support the closure of the border; in fact they want it open. It 
appears that this matter is in front of the court and it will be 
dealt with in front of the court and the Canadian government is 
providing the US government with considerable amount of 
evidence to support our side of the argument with their side of 
the argument. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And while, Mr. 
Minister, your report is accurate, I think Canada followed the 
amicus status request to be involved in this legal case. Others 
are following the intervenor status route. 
 
My thoughts, and I think the thoughts of producers in the 
industry in Saskatchewan, is that anything we can do to put 
pressure on the Americans and help them to realize that they are 
required and there is a commitment and a need based on science 
and good government to reopen the border, that that should be 
followed. And anything that Saskatchewan can do to lend 
support is not to be taken lightly. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And I know that while this is primarily a federal initiative, we 
agree with the minister on that. Nevertheless in World Trade 
Organization talks and in many international trade issues, 
provinces have been involved either as an adjunct to the federal 
government or they make their own presentations. And I would 
just encourage the minister to spare no effort in letting the 
Americans know that this is a serious matter and that they are 
on shaky ground and Canada is on solid ground, and this issue 
needs to be resolved quickly. 
 
Just on some other trade issues, could the minister give us again 
a brief update on where we’re at with the softwood lumber 
dispute? I know some good things have been happening there. 
Also wheat and pork and again I think some good things 
happening there. I believe that there should be some money 
coming to Saskatchewan in some of these industries. Could the 
minister indicate what kind of remuneration would be received 
by the Saskatchewan players in these industries as a result of 
some recent rulings that have gone in Canada’s favour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, first with regards to 
softwood lumber, I think the member is aware and the public 
should certainly be aware that on these issues, softwood lumber 
and pork, Intergovernmental Affairs is very active on these 
files. We are involved in direct, face-to-face meetings. We are 
involved in regular conference calls with other provincial 
ministers and the federal folks in this regard. So we are very 
much active on those files. 
 
On the softwood lumber file, indeed we have made some 
significant progress, but on the other hand we haven’t seen any 
results of that progress. I think the member is fully aware 
without me enumerating all of the numerous cases that we have 
been successful at with regards to both NAFTA [North 
American Free Trade Agreement] and WTO [World Trade 
Organization]. 
 
But I think it is important to note that the next big legal case, 
challenge, comes out in June, and we are very hopeful that this 
will again spur the negotiating side of this to another level. We 
are very optimistic about softwood lumber, but at the same time 

we’re also participating with the federal government on their 
challenge to US industry in terms of retaliatory action. And in 
fact just a couple of weeks ago, retaliatory action took effect on 
American goods moving into Canada in regards to this file. 
 
On the pork case, indeed I can’t give the member specific 
numbers although we will try and bring them forward. The 
number on pork is in fact the deposits that the industry has 
made plus interest. 
 
We have every reason to believe that this will be expedited 
quickly, but on the other hand these trade irritant matters with 
the US always seem to have a life of their own. And we tend 
not to get too excited even when we win, simply because the 
US trade people always seem to have another card up their 
sleeve, which is why on the lumber file the federal government 
decided to take some retaliatory action to indicate how serious 
it is — how serious Canadians regard the whole issue. We are 
talking tens of millions of dollars on pork. And in terms of 
softwood lumber, well it’s considerable. We’re in the billion 
dollar range. Is that right . . . [inaudible] . . . Okay. In any case, 
I don’t know if that answers your question, but we’re very 
involved in both those files. The producers in Saskatchewan, 
both pork and softwood, certainly are consulted regularly in the 
moves that we’re making on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wanted to get 
that update on the record. 
 
Now I want to move to another area, and that is to do with 
equalization. As you are well aware, the federal government has 
established a panel to deal with equalization, and the provinces 
were to place two members on that panel. The provinces, 
including the province of Saskatchewan, failed to do that, and 
so the provinces aren’t represented on this panel. 
 
Can the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan why we failed 
to reach an agreement with the other provinces to put two 
members on this panel and what the consequences will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and again thank you 
very much for the question. The Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs is of course very active on the 
equalization file. We are providing advice to the Premier’s 
office. We are attending all of the meetings that are taking place 
and again, as I say, consider this to be a very important file. 
 
On the review panel, of course that is the . . . the development 
of the review panel and obviously the work that will result from 
the review panel is very important to the future of this province, 
and we spent a considerable amount of time on this panel 
development. 
 
The problem is, as the member will realize, is that of course this 
is a very complicated file, and finding the right people with the 
right knowledge base is a important and complicated matter. 
There’s only a handful of people in the country that can do this 
work. 
 
I guess in order to answer the member’s question fairly, the 
only real answer is at the end of the day the provinces — 
collectively in this instance — the provinces were unable to 
agree on a common set of panellists and that was it. We had to 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2943 

move forward. There was no consensus or agreement on the 
panel as put forward by the provinces, and as a result the 
provinces did not name the panellists. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, 
could the minister tell me which nominees the Government of 
Saskatchewan proposed for this panel who were subsequently 
rejected by the other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chair, it’s not the simplest of 
questions to answer. There are some confidentialities involved. 
 
There were names presented by a number of provinces, names 
presented by the federal government. Names were discussed; 
characteristics, skill levels, knowledge, all that was discussed. I 
would say it’s not fair to the individuals involved to name the 
panellists that were brought forward. I don’t believe the other 
provinces have done so. And I guess at the end of the day it’s 
just . . . To be fair to the 10 parties that were involved, we 
should probably not be bringing forward our list of names. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I think it’s 
unfortunate that the people of Saskatchewan are denied the 
knowledge of who was proposed because this may have some 
fairly serious ramifications for the provinces since they don’t 
have representation on this panel, and Saskatchewan’s interests 
are certainly not being presented within the panel on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just getting to the budget for intergovernmental relations, I 
notice that the budget, the estimates have increased by, oh, 
approximately three-quarters of a million dollars from 2004-05 
to 2005-06. Can you tell me what value the people of 
Saskatchewan are receiving for the additional monies being 
spent? 
 
[19:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Okay, Mr. Deputy Chair. Sorry. It took 
me a minute to . . . it took . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m sorry for the delay in getting the 
answers here. But it took me a minute to remember where part 
of the assessments were because there’s a crossover between a 
number of departments and ministerial offices. Before I get to 
the specific question about the intergovernmental budget, I do 
simply want to remind the members opposite that this 
government has been firm on its equalization position from day 
one. And the department and the office are doing everything 
that it can to represent Saskatchewan’s interest very strongly. 
 
And I think that the member opposite would know that were 
this government the only one at the table, the only one making 
any decisions about appointing people to the review panel, we 
would have had a panel sooner than we did. And we would 
have had a panel that was only representing Saskatchewan 
interests. 
 
There’s a lot of different interests at that equalization table. 
We’re just one small player in the big picture. We are doing all 
that we can to represent the strength of Saskatchewan interests. 

On the intergovernmental estimates in front of us, I want to 
indicate that actually the majority of the additional money has 
gone to support the immigration side of the estimates package. 
And the Minister of Immigration is here, and members opposite 
will have an opportunity to discuss some of the new initiatives 
under her file shortly after the questions to me are complete. 
 
But essentially we have new money under the 
intergovernmental relations file for the federally cost-shared, 
enhanced training initiative and for the implementation of an 
immigration internship pilot project and of course the additional 
seats under the nomination program. But I would ask the 
members opposite to perhaps ask for more details from the 
Minister of Immigration. 
 
We also have a few thousand dollars that’s supporting an office 
that’s been set up by the federal government to support 
provincial interests in Washington. There are a number of 
issues that the member opposite has raised earlier whereby 
provincial interests need to be represented in front of 
Washington decision makers — the softwood file, the swine 
file, the BSE file, the wheat file. So the federal government has 
created an office of provincial interests in Washington, and the 
provincial governments are each anteing up a few thousand 
dollars each in order to sustain that office. And I think that 
pretty much covers the overall cost increases in the file that the 
member is asking about. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. And, Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, obviously it seems very counterproductive for the 
funding for immigration to go through your department, the 
department you are the minister of, and yet you have a separate 
Minister Responsible for Immigration. Perhaps that explains 
why extra money is being spent and yet only about, you know, 
only a couple of hundred or maybe 200 or maybe 400, an 
extremely low number of immigrants are coming to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Perhaps you should be looking at a better structure and more 
coordination there because obviously what you are doing now is 
costing more money, and it’s not working because the number 
of immigrants coming to Saskatchewan is pitifully low 
compared to the number coming going to the province of 
Manitoba next door where it’s in the thousands rather that just a 
few hundred. 
 
Just a final question on the estimates, we have the full-time 
equivalent staff complement for Government Relations which is 
estimated at a hundred and eighty-one and a half. What would 
be the intergovernmental relations portion of that FTE 
[full-time equivalent] number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Chair, in answer to the 
question, the intergovernmental relations FTA number would 
be 25.8. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — It should be FTE, I would imagine, not 
FTA. But thank you, Mr. Minister, for that response. And just a 
final question. I think I heard, read in the media somewhere, 
that oceans and fisheries is relinquishing some of its 
responsibilities or duties or you might say interference in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 



2944 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

Can you confirm what the new status of Fisheries and Oceans 
will be in Saskatchewan if they have any status after the new 
arrangements come into being? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would ask the member to save that 
question for the Minister of the Environment. They are certainly 
the lead agency currently dealing with the federal government 
on the fishery and oceans and environment files. And although 
obviously we have a significant interest in this, this is a 
developing story. 
 
They’re on the front lines. And perhaps when they have an 
opportunity to discuss this, when you have an opportunity to 
discuss this further with the minister, you can take that 
opportunity. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well on 
intergovernmental affairs, I just have a question that I would 
like to ask the minister. And I know it borders on other 
departments but because my question relates with agreements 
with United States I think it should come under 
Intergovernmental Affairs. And what I’m concerned about is 
agreements that we have or maybe agreements we do not have 
with the United States on topics. I’m just going to list some 
topics that are of interest I think to all people in Saskatchewan: 
trade corridors for an example; the environment, water, 
transportation, and border security. Now I know the minister 
may say to ask these questions under another department but in 
fact if there are bilateral agreements I would gather that they 
should come under Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
The status of our highways from the border crossings in a lot of 
areas is absolutely deplorable. And so I’m wondering what kind 
of agreement could be set up or is set up that would deal with 
issues such as that. We all I believe understand the environment 
issues, and the United States is not a signatory to Kyoto. And if 
we’re pushing ahead with Kyoto, what kind of an agreement 
would we have or do we have or will we have with respect to 
that? 
 
We also know water is a huge, huge resource that we have and 
if we’re not going to use it, we may lose it. And I know that 
comes under Environment but again I’m looking for an 
international agreement between Saskatchewan and the United 
States. So I would like . . . and border security obviously too 
with the enhanced security that’s going on on the border, what 
kind of agreement we have from the province of Saskatchewan. 
So if the minister would answer those please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. A 
number of subjects raised by the member opposite. I think that 
it would be fair to say that Saskatchewan is active and 
interested in all fronts raised by the member opposite as well as 
others. But we have to work within and respect various 
jurisdictional circumstances and within our interdepartmental 
divisions of authority. 
 
First of all provincial jurisdiction and state jurisdiction are not 
always identical. Federal government has certain jurisdiction in 
Canada over some areas that does not coincide with federal 

jurisdiction in the US. So overall there can be some 
complications. 
 
We use border security, for example. Border security in the US 
is primarily a state jurisdiction but in Canada it’s a federal 
jurisdiction. We will be at the table with our Justice officials, 
our Public Safety officials in working with US states, but we 
have to bring federal government to the table for any discussion 
on border security issues. 
 
[19:45] 
 
On water, obviously our Department of the Environment and 
SaskWater, maybe even the watershed board, is very active on 
that file in Canada. But transboundary issues are primarily 
federal, whether it’s interprovincial waterways or international 
waterways. We do have a treaty in place. I think it’s called the 
boundary water treaty — federal jurisdiction between the 
federal governments — that we work within. 
 
On trade corridors and highways, obviously the Department of 
Highways is the lead agency here. But again we are very active, 
particularly with the northern states, in talking about what do 
we need to do to further within our own jurisdictions the 
interests that trade corridors represent. 
 
Weights and measure are primarily the most significant barriers 
to the development of trade corridors. And in fact weights and 
measures discrepancies affecting long-haul truck drivers 
probably affect the circumstances in the northern states more 
than they do so in the northern provinces, or the central 
provinces — Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba — at this 
point in time. But we’re working on those things. 
 
Again, this government is facilitating and supporting the 
Midwestern Legislative Conference here in just a month and a 
half, two months time. We will have representatives from the 
Midwest states here in Regina. Members of the opposition and 
members of government will have the opportunity within the 
confines of that conference to discuss on the agenda with 
American legislators, members of state assemblies, members of 
state senates, all of these issues. And in fact they have been on 
the agenda of MLC [Midwestern Legislative Conference] for a 
number of years where Saskatchewan has participated and will 
continue to be held at this particular conference. 
 
I also might add that on the trade corridor issue, Department of 
Highways, when we were last down in the US northern states 
— Montana and North Dakota — just a few months ago, 
established a working protocol. And in fact we will be 
entertaining in the month of June representatives again from the 
northern states to discuss weights and measures issues in 
particular on these trade corridor issues. 
 
So the member raises a number of very interesting subjects, 
each one of them subject of discussion at international 
conferences. We consider these to be important issues and we’ll 
continue to work with the members opposite as well as other 
Saskatchewan interests to further Saskatchewan interests on 
these subjects. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I thank the minister for the answer, 
but I take from your comments that the answer to my question 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2945 

is no, we do not have any agreements on these topics, provincial 
to United States. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Where there are opportunities to be doing 
some work, we’ve established some working protocols. If you 
want to call that . . . if you don’t want to call those agreements, 
I guess they’re not agreements. 
 
We have with the state of Montana, an accord. I don’t know if 
the member wants to call that an agreement or not, but we have 
an accord with the state of Montana that allows us to work on 
numerous issues, bring our officials together, bring our 
members of government — that includes members of the 
opposition — together to discuss and work on ways to facilitate 
in our best interests or our collective interests a resolution to 
some disputes. 
 
Now we’re very fortunate, especially with the northern states, 
that we don’t have considerable dispute outside of the BSE 
question. Most of what we have to deal with there are practical 
matters that we can work out with discussion and understanding 
each other’s circumstances. So I do consider the approach that 
we’re taking, with the jurisdiction that we’re allowed to have by 
constitution of our federal state, we’re making some very good 
progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to ask a few questions about SAMA [Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency]. I received an email from a 
constituent who is very concerned about his assessment. He 
received his assessment notice for the year 2005. He lives in the 
hamlet of Parry, and I’ll just read from his email: 
 

Assessment for the lots have doubled or in one case tripled 
which will mean my property taxes for living in the 
Hamlet will double this year. A couple of the lots I 
purchased for less than 50 dollars and they are [now] 
assessed at 200 to 400 dollars. 
 

And he puts in brackets: 
 

(I would gladly sell these lots at that price) 
 
We do not have any services in the town. Water for 
hygienic purposes only. No firetrucks, no snowplows . . . 
no garbage pick up, crumbling street of asphalt. Nearest 
grocery store is 20 miles away, not on a main or secondary 
highway [We have a] grid road [which] connects us to 
highway 6, [which is] 8 kilometres East. 

 
What he would like to know is how this can be justifiable in this 
hamlet when none of the conditions have changed, yet his 
assessment has doubled and tripled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chair, and I thank the member 
opposite for her question. Assessment can be as simple or as 
complicated as you want it to be. Assessment in Saskatchewan 
and North America-wide is simply a process of valuating 
property. 
 

Assessment by and large is one part of, but not the property tax 
system. Many Saskatchewan residents equate their assessment 
with their taxation, which is kind of what the letter that the 
member opposite is telling me; if assessment goes up by two 
times, property tax will go up by two times. That’s not 
necessarily the case. And I’m assuming that the resident has not 
yet received a property tax notice. Because what happens with 
assessment — which is really simply an evaluation of the value 
of the property done on a model that has been created on a 
province-wide basis by the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency, an independent, arm’s-length body with 
rural and urban municipal representatives, as well as school 
board and provincial representatives working to create 
assessment models for the province — at the end of the day, 
assessment should simply tell the resident the approximate 
value of what that property is. 
 
Municipalities then base their taxation on assessed value. 
There’s mill rate factors, there’s provincial percentages of value 
that get attached to that, and there are exemptions for property 
that municipal governments are provided. So at the end of the 
day the taxation may not have any resemblance whatsoever to 
the assessed value of the property, depending on what the 
municipal government does with the tools provided to them. 
 
But the property owner should know that if they’re not happy 
with the assessed value assigned to their property, there’s an 
appeal mechanism. That appeal mechanism is reviewed at the 
local level and it can also be reviewed at the provincial level to 
determine whether or not that evaluation was fair and 
reasonable. At the end of the day all we want is a fair and 
reasonable assessed value of property in the province so that 
municipalities and school boards can set mill rates based on a 
common denominator province-wide. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And 
certainly we do hope that the local municipalities take that into 
consideration and lower their mill rate accordingly so that the 
taxes do not go up. 
 
However when I look at this . . . And it has been stated that 
there is a plan to standardize the mill rate across the province in 
order to address the education property tax issue in the 
province. So if we have an increase in assessment and there is a 
standardized mill rate across the province, those that have the 
higher assessed property will pay more. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In addressing the question directly, 
there’s no attempt to create a standardized mill rate across the 
province, so I can’t really comment on the rest of the 
hypothetical circumstance that the member raises. But there is 
no attempt to standardize the provincial mill rate across the 
province. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
clarifying that for me. I was with the understanding from some 
of the comments that had been made by the Education minister 
that there was . . . or the Learning minister. So I’m glad to hear 
that that is not the plan to standardize across the province. 
 
However there will be a standardization of the mill rate within 
each new school division which is going to take in a large area. 
We’re going to move from rural and urban, from land that is 



2946 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

now already more highly assessed. And if we’re increasing the 
assessed land in small places like Parry, those people are going 
to pay more, and that money is going to flow out of their area, 
and it’s going to flow into a larger area. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m glad the member clarified the 
question because I think it is important that we’re talking very 
much specifics and not general in this case. 
 
There is certainly some thought of standardizing the education 
mill rate within larger school divisions. There’s no doubt about 
that. The implication could be indeed some increased costs but 
depending on what happens in a lot of other areas. 
 
The Boughen Commission which looked at education financing 
separate and apart from the rest of government, looked at 
education financing . . . and the Boughen report made some 
very specific suggestions with regards to restructuring, with 
regards to assessment, and with regards to the vast difference 
between assessments in one part of the province to another part 
and the way in which education was financed. So Boughen did 
suggest some very specific matters relating to education 
financing. And of course one of those suggestions was to shift 
costs off of the property tax. 
 
Now I think the member opposite is very much aware that this 
government, together with representatives from SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], and the 
school board are looking at ways in which we can change the 
foundation operating grant. I just wanted to say FOG 
[foundation operating grant], but in the interests of those who 
are watching who wouldn’t know what that means, the 
foundation operating grant is the way in which government has 
financed part of the education system up to this point. We’re 
reviewing that. We’re also reviewing the long-term cost on the 
property tax base. We expect both of those issues to be resolved 
within the next year so that we’re in a position for 2007 to make 
budgetary decisions. 
 
But the member is right. If nothing changes, assessments rise 
and there’s a standardized rate in a larger school division, there 
could be some shifts within the school division, and some 
people could be seeing some additional taxes if nothing 
changes. And it is our intention to provide some change to the 
system. 
 
I also want to say that the minister of Education has said 
repeatedly that any money raised in a region will stay in the 
region. It won’t be shared with other regions. So it’s very 
important to know that money raised locally should be used 
within that local environment and not shifted to some other part 
of the province. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you for that response. I guess 
the issue is that to date the Boughen report, which did 
recommend a shift of the burden off of property tax, we have 
not seen that happen. And with an increase in assessment, 
which I’ve already stated, it will do exactly the opposite of 
shifting the burden from property tax. It will increase the 
burden to property tax owners, and it will lessen the onus on the 

provincial government. 
 
And this is the great concern, especially in my area of the 
province and in other areas where there is already highly 
assessed land because of the minerals. And if more burden is 
going to be put on these industries and those dollars are shifted 
out of our area and across the broad region — which is my fear 
which will eventually be across the province — it’s going to be 
very detrimental to investment. It’s going to be very detrimental 
in enticing new business to the province and keeping what we 
have. And certainly if there is more money taken out of rural 
Saskatchewan — and I’ll just speak about in my area — if there 
is more money taken out of the rural area around Weyburn, 
there is going to be less money to spend in the city of Weyburn 
by those same people. So we all lose at this. 
 
So I would like a response to you. You know, if things stay the 
same, there is going to be less money that will have to be paid 
by the provincial government to support education because 
more money is going to be coming from property owners. So 
when can we see . . . You said that there is plans to change this. 
When will that happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chair, the members opposite have 
failed on numerous occasions to acknowledge the steps forward 
that this government is making on the education property tax 
relief file. On numerous occasions the members opposite have 
referred to the $55 million we’re putting into relief this year and 
next year as nothing, as not having any value. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think the members opposite acknowledge 
individually — but they’re not acknowledging publicly — that 
8 per cent relief on your property tax bill, education property 
tax bill this year, is 8 per cent that you otherwise would not be 
paying. That is significant relief, 8 per cent. Fifty-five million 
dollars contributed this year and next year is a significant 
contribution to the reduction of education property tax across 
the province. 
 
Now also I think we have to address this issue about the 
assessment increases versus what the tax is. Again I want to 
come back. Assessment is simply an evaluation of your 
property; that’s all it is. And what has happened this year on the 
request of rural municipalities across this province, there was a 
change in the way in which agriculture property was assessed. It 
resulted in a shift on agriculture property in assessment values 
from the west side to the east side of the province. So there are 
properties as a result of reassessment protocols requested by 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, there is an 
increase in assessment that takes us back actually to the formula 
that was in place in 1997 because in 2001 the west side under 
the old calculation received a greater percentage of assessment 
increase than the east side. 
 
We have, at the request of SARM . . . SAMA, I shouldn’t say 
we. SAMA rebuilt the assessment system and a result shifted it. 
On the west side of the province, the result of this will be that 
rural municipal and school property taxes are expected to shift 
further to commercial properties from agriculture properties. So 
the west side of the province under a shift from market base to 
production base has an advantage on the east side. There’s a 
shift to the agriculture property. 
 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2947 

All of this was well known two and a half years ago when 
SARM made the request to the SAMA board. The SAMA board 
responded to the SARM request and made the shifts. This is 
what has happened as a result of those shifts, and it’s been well 
known since the request was made. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I listened with 
close attention to your answers to the questions from my 
colleague, member from Weyburn, and dealing with the 
assessment and the large school divisions that will be put in 
place by your government. 
 
I have some concerns about perhaps some soft spots in the 
assessment system and particularly some of the problems I 
understand some of our small urbans are having, our smaller 
cities. I am told that the small urbans are spending in the area of 
$20 per parcel of property on the assessment and that area of 
their responsibility. And cities like Regina and Saskatoon are 
spending in excess of $40 per property because they understand 
that it’s important they have capacity, the large urbans have the 
capacity to do an assessment that property owners can have 
confidence in. 
 
Whereas I understand in some of the smaller urbans and 
particularly Prince Albert, I understand this year there is some 
problems with a significant increase in their value of 
commercial property. I understand that they may have lost some 
of their data to support their values and so on because they just 
don’t have the fiscal capacity to devote the dollars required to 
do the assessment in the fashion that SAMA would like to see 
and that larger urbans are doing. 
 
So what this does, Minister, is you’ve got an assessment system 
used within a city or a municipality. So if there are some 
problems with the assessment, well as far as the municipal taxes 
are concerned, the municipal levy mill rate is applied within the 
boundaries of the municipality. So even though there may be 
some problems if you’re comparing this jurisdiction to another 
one, the municipal tax portion of the property tax bill is not a 
huge problem for the property owners. 
 
But now when we go to these large school divisions where 
you’re using assessments done by SAMA in rural 
municipalities and small urbans, and then you put in a smaller 
or medium-sized city such as Moose Jaw or Prince Albert or 
Swift Current who perhaps due to lack of funding . . . I mean 
their revenue sharing was frozen, and they have great needs and 
so therefore they’re only able to put, you know, not the dollars 
that maybe are required, and their assessment base is perhaps 
not as firm as it should be. 
 
I guess that causes me concern about the overall integrity of our 
assessment system when we look at these large school 
divisions. I believe you alluded to that in one of your questions. 
My question to you is, do you have full confidence in the 
assessment for 2005? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chair, the simple answer — and I 
know that the members opposite know that I can’t give just a 
simple answer — but the simple answer is yes; I have complete 

confidence in the assessment in Saskatchewan currently. 
 
I want to stress again that assessment works at arm’s length 
from the government. The Assessment Management Agency — 
set up in 1987 actually under a different government, set up in 
1987 — was designed to ensure that we have a fair system of 
property assessment across the whole province. And what has 
happened, transpired over the years is that the system allows 
some communities to provide their own assessment services, 
and some buy the services of the Assessment Management 
Agency. 
 
But SAMA, the board has a manual and an audit system that 
applies to everybody. Whether you provide services for yourself 
within your own municipality or you purchase the services 
through SAMA, the same rules apply to everybody. The audit 
system ensures that there’s a fair application of the system 
regardless of who provides the assessment services. And the 
appeal system is in place to support and back up any questions 
that might arise after the assessment is done and the information 
is provided. 
 
Most recently there has been concern from the commercial 
sector that in fact the commercial sector was not well 
represented in the decision-making process within SAMA. I 
used one of my government appointments to put a 
representative of the commercial sector on to the SAMA board 
so that now there are two urban representatives, two rural 
representatives, two school board representatives, and a 
representative of the commercial sector all operating on the 
board to prepare program, policy, and implementation of the 
assessment system in the province. And as a result of that, I 
have complete confidence in the system to be able to move 
forward. 
 
I should add that that board is currently working on the plan for 
the 2009 assessment which is the next four-year period. I would 
suggest to all residents of Saskatchewan to be thinking about 
the 2009 and discovering how things are changing. There’s 
been pilot projects about moving to the market system. They’re 
taking a look at that as a board. And the board is also looking 
at, instead of a four-year cycle, perhaps a two-year and 
ultimately a one-year cycle. 
 
Government takes a look every year at percentages of value 
which has an impact on the tax side, and we are also doing a 
review of the — we’ve completed now — a review of the tax 
tools available to municipalities for ultimately creating the final 
tax bill for municipalities. And as I indicated earlier, we are 
reviewing the whole education financing package and 
government’s involvement in that. So I think we are a year to a 
year and a half away from putting all of this stuff together, tying 
it up nicely with a nice big ball of string, and being able to 
move forward hopefully in the interests of all Saskatchewan 
property taxpayers. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The committee asks the Minister 
Responsible for Immigration if there are any new officials that 
will be joining her. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. Joining me along with Mr. Brooks 
and Ms. Lamberti is Eric Johansen who is the director of 
immigration branch of Government Services. 



2948 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

[20:15] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Do you wish to make any statements? 
Go ahead. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. As 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, I’d like to briefly 
summarize the achievements and current priorities of the 
immigration branch of the Department of Government 
Relations. 
 
Over the last year we have negotiated a significant expansion of 
the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program, skilled workers 
category, so that it now directly covers approximately 200,000 
jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. This took place in 
January. And this is compared to our previous year’s coverage 
where approximately 10,000 jobs were covered by the 
government immigrant nominee program. 
 
We completed extensive research, assessment, and design work 
on an enhanced language training initiative for immigrants 
needing assistance in our labour market. 
 
We implemented a new graduate foreign students category 
under the SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] 
for students who’ve studied and found employment in the 
province. We’ve signed an MOU [memorandum of 
understanding] with Citizenship and Immigration, federal 
government, to allow graduating students an extra year of 
temporary employment that will help facilitate their 
immigration. They’ll now after two years have employers 
nominate them under the program. 
 
We nominated 242 people under the program and including 
family members this brings about 726 people to the province. 
And right now, including nominees and their family members, 
791 people are in the process of becoming landed immigrants in 
our province. 
 
We completed a major recruitment initiative with a 
Saskatchewan employer and an employment and training 
institution based in the Ukraine, or in Ukraine, that is bringing 
18 families to Tisdale. And this initiative holds promise of a 
very useful model for other Saskatchewan employers and 
communities. 
 
We nominated our first 23 long-haul truckers under a pilot 
project developed with the Saskatchewan Trucking Association 
that will bring 240 long-haul truckers to the province. And we 
established a minister’s business advisory group on the 
immigrant nominee program that will help promote awareness 
of our program among Saskatchewan employers, and advise 
myself and the department on how the program can more 
effectively meet the needs of employers. 
 
For 2005-06, our priorities for the upcoming year will be to 
continue to expand the program. Obviously it’s an important 
tool to support the province’s economic and labour market 
objectives. And we have a number of budget initiatives that will 
assist us in effectively settling immigrants and refugees. 
 
We have been able to fund three initiatives this year. We have 
$400,000 to deliver a cost-shared arrangement with the federal 

government for enhanced language training. This will be 
significant because the initiative will provide a client-centred 
employment intake assessment and referral services that will 
help identify immigrants’ transferable knowledge and skills. It 
also will lead to more advanced workplace-related language 
training than is currently available. And it also provides 
immigrants with the necessary Canadian work experience. 
 
As well, this program will assist individuals within the 
workplace because they will have access to mentors. Other 
services will be provided to support career opportunities such as 
specialized assessments and orientation to the Canadian labour 
market and workplace. 
 
We also have in this budget an immigration pilot internship 
program for immigrants that aren’t eligible for the ELT 
[enhanced language training] services. And services to clients 
under the project will include those available under the 
enhanced language training initiative as well as training for 
occupational accreditation or immediate employment 
opportunities. We also have an enhancement to our settlement 
agencies to help with assessment and referral services. 
 
According to Doug Elliott and the demographic trends in our 
province, we expect that we will require by 2017 an additional 
50,000 workers to replace those workers that are retiring. And 
this will only be partially offset by our increasing Aboriginal 
labour force. So we are going to require people from away in 
order to meet our labour market objectives. 
 
The key immigration actions in 2005-06 that will help us 
address some of the issues include increasing Saskatchewan 
employers’ awareness of the immigrant nominee program and 
international recruitment opportunities, including emigration 
fairs and overseas training or employment institutions. 
 
We are going to expand the immigrant nominee health 
profession category to include all skilled health occupations. 
We’re going to rearrange some of the criteria under the business 
category in order to increase the types of businesses eligible and 
to make our category more immigrant friendly. We are going to 
expand the Saskatchewan Trucking Association project for 
long-haul truckers. And in response to industry sector interest, 
we are also considering including a number of other 
semi-skilled occupations. 
 
In addition, we are working with our communities to develop 
greater community capacity to attract and settle skilled 
immigrants because we had this wonderful experience in 
Tisdale where they had a community support plan that has 
made the immigrant from Ukraine most welcome. 
 
Projecting nominations for the coming year is not an exact 
science. However we anticipate that we will fully meet the 400 
nominations in this fiscal year because we are going to expand 
the nomination category to include family members of 
immigrants that are already here. And those families will be 
able to nominate those immigrants under this category. 
 
In conclusion, immigration, we believe, can contribute to 
meeting Saskatchewan’s labour market needs, its economical 
development, and its diversity. We’ve taken some important 
steps over the past year in building our capacity to attract more 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2949 

immigrants to Saskatchewan and to effectively settle and retain 
them. We know that we have some work to do but we’re 
confident that we are going to continue our building of the 
capacity in this province to support newcomers to our province. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you to the 
minister and welcome to your officials. That was very 
interesting what your plans for the upcoming year. 
 
I had the opportunity to take part in the presentation made by 
your official a week from Thursday to the Ukrainian Canadian 
Professional Business Association out of Saskatoon, and also 
other groups like the Saskatoon culture diversity and race 
relations committee. I’ve got information from the 
Saskatchewan German Council and I’ve talked to many 
individuals. And the number one issue is first getting the 
immigrants here. 
 
And you have said, you have quoted Doug Elliott’s report 
saying we need another 50,000 workers by 2017. And we 
certainly agree that the Aboriginal youth should make up the 
big part of that and other citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
But at the rates that this program is working you’re going to fall 
far short of that goal. And I wonder. The number of nominees 
that have been coming in are just a trickle, quite frankly. Going 
back to ’98-99, five; and every year after that increasing slowly 
— 23, 20, 25 — 52 in 2003; 180 in 2004; 242 as you 
mentioned, 2004-2005. I guess I have a number of questions 
around that. Why such a low threshold for nominees to date? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you for the question. In order to 
be nominated you have to have an employer who is prepared to 
nominate you, and that’s why I set up the business advisory 
category — to have business people in the province who have 
used the immigrant nominee program to go out and work with 
other employers so that they know that this nominee program is 
available. 
 
We have done some good work with the trucking industry. 
They obviously are in various parts of the world recruiting 
long-haul truckers to the province. 
 
And if people want to go out and find people to nominate, we 
are ready and able to assist them in processing the application. 
We can get the application ready to send to the federal 
government in about a three-month time period. The federal 
government takes about nine months and three-quarters to 
process the application because they have to look at criminality, 
security, and health risks or health checks associated with the 
individuals that are coming. 
 
But employers have to make the nomination and they have to 
find the people. And that’s why we are attending immigration 
fairs in various parts of the world and we are working with 
employers to attract people here. 
 
So it’s up to employers to go out and find people and then 
nominate them. It’s not the province of Saskatchewan that does 
the nominations; it’s the employers. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. And that leads me to my next 
question. You spoke about getting information out to the 
businesses basically advertising the fact that the immigrant 
nominee program exists, and I think that’s very important. But 
talking to employers that have taken part in the immigrant 
nominee program, they find many hurdles. First, it’s costly. 
Some individual companies have done that work on their own. 
Some community-based organizations have done that as well 
but it’s mainly volunteers that do that and costly for them. 
 
Where do you see the private consultant’s role in attracting 
people to apply for the immigrant nominee program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department do not act as 
immigrant consultants. If employers want to enter into a 
contractual relation with an immigrant consultant or if 
immigrants enter into relationships with immigrant consultants, 
that’s up to them. But our department is not involved in the 
consulting business. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Minister. To the Chair, the second 
item of importance with all the businesses I have spoke to and 
the community-based organizations is really the lack of a 
community support plan, retention of immigrants that we do 
have coming. And they have found that it’s vital. It’s one thing 
to get the people here, but it’s certainly another to have the 
infrastructure in the community to integrate immigrants into 
Saskatchewan life. 
 
And many of them have community-based organizations that 
they rely on — the Ukrainian group, the German group, and so 
on — but we are also attracting immigrants from countries that 
really don’t have any support here. And they say, well the 
situation with community-based organizations is that it’s 
basically all volunteer work and they have very limited funding. 
 
And they want to do their part to keep immigrants here and 
integrate them into Saskatchewan life, but they’re very strapped 
for funds and person power really to do the job. And each case 
that I’ve talked with they’re looking to the provincial 
government for some help on really developing a community 
support plan and looking at the retention of immigrants that 
arrive. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member makes a very important 
point and this was a point that I have been making for some 
time, even when I was minister of Rural Revitalization. 
 
I have met immigrants in this province that have lived in 
communities for decades, and they have never been invited to a 
non-immigrant’s wedding. They have never been invited to a 
non-immigrant’s home for supper. They have never been 
invited to a non-immigrant’s anniversary. They have never been 
invited to participate in the kinds of things that you and I take 
for granted because we’ve been here for a long time. And they 
become quite lonely. 
 
And so what I’m saying to people is that when immigrants 
come to your community, it’s incumbent upon you to make 
people to feel welcome and to become part of the community. 
And if we’re not able to do that, they’re not going to stay. So 
it’s not just good enough to look to the province and the federal 
government for more money. Communities have to become and 



2950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

must become welcoming places for newcomers or newcomers 
are not going to stay. 
 
In terms of your issue around settlement agencies, there are 
presently four settlement agencies in the province. The majority 
of the funding for settlement agencies comes from the federal 
government because the federal government has jurisdiction 
over immigration. This year we have some funds in our budget 
that we are going to be sending to the settlement agencies to 
assist them in helping newcomers in our province. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Obviously at this point, we are working very hard to expand the 
immigrant nominee program. We know that the enhanced 
language training will be extremely important in terms of 
helping newcomers integrate into our workplaces because they 
need those enhanced language skills in order to be successful. 
 
So this year we’re focusing on our internship program for 
newcomers in the province as well as the enhanced language 
program. And we have some money available for the settlement 
agencies, and we’ve expanded our immigrant nominee program 
from 300 to 400. And as I said earlier today in question period, 
I expect that we will have some major announcements come 
fall. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you to the minister. I appreciate what 
you’ve just said, but I think it has to be emphasized the real 
concerns in the community and in the businesses that have 
brought immigrants into Saskatchewan about the lack of 
support for these individuals once they get here. And I believe 
the community-based organizations are working hard at doing 
that, and they are naturally welcoming these people into their 
communities and into their homes, but they can’t do it all. They 
can’t do it all on their own. They can’t do without any 
resources. 
 
And each time this has come up, they’re looking to the 
provincial government. And I don’t think they’re looking for 
tremendous amounts of funds, but they need some help, and 
they find that a real challenge to get the resources and the 
funding in place to make this work. And they feel that, you 
know, we’re moving in the right direction. Everyone wants 
more immigrants in this province because of the lack of . . . the 
shortage of workforce in this province is only going to get 
worse in the future. 
 
But each time I talk to one of these groups or individuals or 
businesses, that’s the biggest problem . . . is retention to keep 
them in Saskatchewan — not only keep them in Saskatchewan, 
from going back to their home countries. And I make the point 
if they ever lose an immigrant that has come to Saskatchewan 
and they go back to their home country, that’s going to ruin the 
whole program in that community where they come from for a 
generation. And they say we can’t afford to let that happen. 
 
And the other part of that is not only losing immigrant workers 
to their home countries but losing them to Alberta. 
Unfortunately we also . . . not only our young people move to 
Alberta, but our immigrants move to Alberta too. So there’s a 
two-fold aspect to that. And I just can’t emphasize the 
importance of retention and the support that’s needed by 

community-based organizations naturally but some help and 
direction from the provincial government. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Could you be more specific in terms of 
which groups you’re talking to that are having . . . so I can 
understand precisely which groups feel as though they are not 
being supported. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well it came up at the Ukrainian . . . which 
group, the Ukrainian group that met the week from Thursday. 
And that was one of the topics that came up during the meeting 
and also during the meeting and in private. They just 
emphasized that was the real concern. It was just not the 
Ukrainian people that had the problem. There were businesses 
from Croatia and other ethnic backgrounds that settled in 
Canada, and they also emphasize that that’s the major concern 
with them . . . is retention of immigrants. And once again I can 
only emphasize how important that is. 
 
Just looking at some of the material that I received from the 
Saskatchewan German Council, now they have talked about 
receiving some funding from Sask Culture. Is that funding still 
available for this type of work, or is there another avenue for 
funds to help with the retention of immigrants? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the German council came to see 
me, and what they’re interested in doing is becoming the 
immigrant consultants as a way to fund their cultural 
organization. This is not something that we are moving towards 
at this moment where we will fund various ethnic organizations 
in order that they can take on the role of immigrant consultant 
and then be able to fund their councils. 
 
In terms of community support plans, we had a very good 
experience with the Northern Steel in Tisdale where the 
company, the community, the Ukrainian congress, and our 
department worked in tandem to ensure that the people that 
were coming from Ukraine had a positive experience. And 
they’ve done it very incrementally where a group of people 
came initially; a couple of weeks later another group came. And 
we think that with the support of the community . . . in 
particular they had a welcoming evening. They outfitted the 
homes that the newcomers are living in, getting everyone 
settled in, and then their families will come. That has been a 
positive experience. 
 
Now we do have people that work here on work permits, and 
the federal government will have people that will come to 
Saskatchewan or come to Canada for a short period of time and 
they go back. I think it’s fair to say that one of the things that I 
am not worried about, but I just want to be assured of, is that 
when newcomers are coming here under the immigrant 
nominee program that what they’re told by the employer is in 
fact what happens. They’re paid what they’re told by the 
employer, the conditions that they’ve been told are in fact the 
conditions that they have. Because the worst thing that can 
happen is that we have a nominee that comes to Canada, moves 
their family, gets here and finds out that what they’ve been told 
isn’t in fact what is in fact the case in their workplace. And then 
if they go back, we’ve got problems. 
 
And so we are monitoring what’s happening very carefully so 
that . . . And certainly saying to employers, it’s very important 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2951 

that what you tell people is in fact what they’re going to be met 
with when they get here. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. You brought up a point. Through 
your monitoring, have you come across businesses that are not 
being upfront with their workers, and what is the government 
doing about those particular cases? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it’s fair to say that we’ve had a 
few examples of difficulties, but we’ve been able to sort those 
out. But when employers are going overseas or going to South 
Africa or wherever we’re going, we’re sort of saying — well 
we’re not sort of saying; we are saying — whatever you do, be 
totally upfront with the nominees so that when they get here, 
they know exactly what’s going to greet them in terms of 
wages, benefits, working conditions, and so on because we 
don’t want them to come here with one set of expectations and 
find out that it’s quite different than what they were told. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well I certainly agree with that, because that 
would be disastrous for the province and the program if that 
was taking place. 
 
In my discussions, I was told that Saskatchewan’s going to need 
1,000 truck drivers. Basically right now, there’s a need for 
1,000 truck drivers, probably long haul drivers or medium to 
short as well. And I just state that as what they’ve been saying. 
 
The one point that was brought up was the temporary work 
permits and the problem with the temporary work permits, it’s 
fine for the workers but the spouses can’t pull down a job. 
They’re not allowed to work and what they’re asking for is 
basically an open work permit so the spouses can work while 
their spouse is here working in Saskatchewan. Could you 
comment on that? Is that something that the federal government 
has influence over or something Saskatchewan can do about 
that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you’ve identified, work permits are 
federal jurisdiction; the federal government gives out work 
permits to people . And you’re absolutely correct, if you have a 
work permit the spouse can’t work, but as soon as that person is 
nominated under the immigrant nominee program the spouse 
can work. 
 
And we understand the federal government isn’t at this point at 
looking at changing work permits and allowing the spouse to 
work. But under our program if you come here on a work 
permit, then you’re nominated. As soon as you’re nominated, 
your spouse can go to work. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Somewhat on more or less the 
same topic, considering foreign students, and I understand the 
same situation is there, that the foreign students cannot take 
work while they’re in Saskatchewan or in Canada. Could you 
comment on that, and is there any plans in place to get these 
foreign students in a position where they can work and help pay 
for the tuition? Because they’re paying the full rate, it’s not 
being subsidized. 
 
And that certainly is a pool of talent that Saskatchewan business 
can nominate to continue to stay and live and work in 
Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as I said, we were able to 
successfully negotiate an amendment to our arrangement with 
the federal government where international students can now 
stay here two years after they graduate from school, and then 
they can be nominated under the immigrant nominee program. 
 
We had been working hard with the federal government to enter 
into an arrangement with the federal government where foreign 
students would be able to work off campus. Minister Volpe 
about two weeks ago announced that all international students 
now will be able to work off of their campus all across the 
country. And he has not yet signed the documents to allow that 
to happen because they have to enter into a sort of a tripartite 
arrangement between the universities, the technical schools, and 
the federal government, but that is certainly in the works. And 
we’re hoping by fall international students will have the 
opportunity to work off campus. 
 
It was interesting. Because the University of Saskatchewan 
leases its land to the big-box stores out on Preston Avenue, 
students were able to work there because they were basically 
working on university property. It was a bit of a stretch, but 
now with Minister Volpe’s recent announcement, we anticipate 
by fall our students who come from away will be allowed to 
work off campus while they’re here. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Next question is directed more to 
farm labour immigrants and from your news release dated 
December 6, 2004, that there’s a pilot project, a three-year pilot 
project. And I would just like to get an update on how 
successful has this program been to date. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Member, we’re having a difficult 
understanding what you’re talking about. So can you give us a 
little more information in order that we can respond to it? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I just assumed you would know. 
The program is administered through the Human Resources 
Development Canada as a pilot project with the active 
participation of Sask Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization. And it’s got some information here about . . . 
The plan was expected to bring in between 30 and 40 workers 
from Mexico in the coming year. I guess I was just wanting to 
know how this has worked, and how does one apply for 
bringing in farm labourers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is the program that is an 
arrangement with Ag and Food and HRDC [Human Resources 
Development Canada], and it’s a program for migrant workers. 
And they anticipated that they would bring in 30 or 40 people, 
and I would suggest that we . . . Our branch deals with the 
immigrant nominee program, some of the settlement issues, the 
accreditation issues. But we don’t deal with temporary workers, 
and you would need to direct your questions to Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. As you know, Minister, especially 
rural Saskatchewan is having troubles retaining doctors, and I 
note that there’s a category for health professionals under the 
immigrant nominee program. In Biggar we’re in the process of 
attracting a doctor from South Africa, and I believe it’s through 
the immigrant nominee program. 
 



2952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

Again is there any active support or active work done by the 
government to go out and look? I guess you’ve already 
answered that question before, but I’m wondering concerning 
health care professionals, is there any part on the department or 
the government to actively source doctors and health care 
professionals to help rural communities and rural doctors attract 
partners and doctors into their communities? 
 
[20:45] 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Generally when it comes to recruiting 
physicians in the province, the health regions are involved in 
recruiting physicians to various regions of the province. As well 
the Department of Health has had arrangements with a 
recruiting agency that assists them in recruiting health 
professionals to the province. 
 
I can tell you that we have expanded our health professions 
category to include all health professionals in the province. And 
just for the member’s information, I can say that we can 
expedite this situation very quickly. They can come on a work 
permit. That can be arranged fairly quickly, and then they can 
be nominated under the immigrant nominee program. So it 
doesn’t have to take a long time. 
 
I should also tell you that in the Department of Health’s budget 
there is a million dollars this year for international medical 
professionals such as physicians that are already in the 
province. And it looks as though there is going to be a 
partnership worked out between the Department of Health and 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons and hopefully the 
College of Medicine where we will be able to assess 
foreign-trained physicians that are already here. 
 
Most of them that are here have come here as refugees. And 
they obviously are not working in their profession. But this is a 
pool. I think we have about a hundred IMGs [International 
Medical Graduate] in the province that could be assessed in 
terms of their capabilities and the criteria that the need to hone 
up on in terms of adding additional skills. And we are looking 
forward to trying to implement a program that’s quite similar to 
what is happening in Manitoba for instance to support IMGs 
that are already here. As well there are some spaces for 
residencies for IMGs so that they can do their family medicine 
residency. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’m being told that we’re over our 
time limit, so I’ll ask one more question. But thank you to you 
and your officials for being here tonight. 
 
But my last question is on that same topic. It seems to me that 
doctors in particular, physicians, they basically have to rewrite 
the Canadian medical exams before they’re accepted. Are there 
countries that Canada or . . . I assume Canada . . . but accepts 
that the health care professionals don’t have to rewrite the 
exams and their standards from their home countries . . . are 
acceptable in Canada? And in countries that are not, I guess the 
question is, why are they not? 
 
I know that the South African doctors have to rewrite the exams 
before they’re approved, and I’m just wondering why is their 
. . . I’m told their training is as good as Canadian doctors get, 
and they’re as skilled and as learned as our doctors. And I’m 

wondering how all that process is working out, and is there any 
other avenues to speed up that process to get qualified doctors 
into Canada? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In Canada we have a number of 
self-regulating bodies that govern various occupations in the 
country, and so Saskatchewan is not unlike every other place 
where we have a regulatory body for physicians. It’s called the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, and they set the standard 
that people have to attain in order to practise medicine in this 
province. Now the College of Physicians and Surgeons has 
been excellent at assisting the province recruit people to the 
province and also being somewhat more flexible than other 
colleges across the country. 
 
We’re looking forward to this partnership between the college 
and the Department of Health because we know we have about 
100 IMGs in the province. They’re not practising medicine; in 
fact some of them are working at the Saskatoon Co-op on 8th 
Street because they haven’t been able to practise their 
profession. We’re hoping that we’ll be able to have their skills 
assessed, identify gaps, and then put further training in place so 
that we can get these IMGs into various parts of the province. 
 
You know, obviously we need to pay attention to what the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons has to say because they are 
much more knowledgeable than we are in terms of the kinds of 
skills necessary to meet the standard in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think that’s all I can say but — I know that our time is up 
— but I’d like to thank all of the Government Relations 
officials for being here tonight to support myself and the 
member from North Battleford. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee 
rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
asked to report progress and leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of committees is 
recognized. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the committee has asked that I 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2953 

Bill No. 88 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 88 — The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to rise and speak to Bill 88, An Act to amend The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act, Mr. Speaker — a 
rather long title that somewhat covers up an issue that’s been 
around a long time and which the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government has not been able to deal with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, really what this Bill does is just extend the Dorsey 
report for recommendations for yet another year while this NDP 
government is trying to figure out what to do about negotiating 
contracts with health care workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is particularly frustrating for many of them that 
the government has interfered and dictated how they are to 
negotiate their labour agreement. You’d think that a 
government that claims to be considerate and friendly to labour 
would have resolved this issue a long time ago rather than keep 
bringing it back to the Legislative Assembly and asking for 
another year extension to try to finalize this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it just seems like the NDP, they make a mess and 
then they see how long they can wallow in it. They’ve done it 
many, many times, and here we are dealing with this Bill yet 
again. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we can’t go on letting this 
happen, propping up an NDP government and allowing them to 
muck along in the dark year after year, piece of legislation after 
piece of legislation. Sooner or later we need some conclusion 
and some progress to be made in regards to some of these 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill 88 reminds me of the additional 
hours legislation. That’s been on the books for 10 years, and the 
government still can’t get its act together on that. Today they 
brought forward a Bill to repeal the legislation, and they began 
to filibuster it. We wonder if they are going to filibuster Bill 88 
as well. Do they know really what they want and what they’re 
trying to do? 
 
We see in Bill 88 similarities to the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund — something that they had to have to fight forest fires. 
Had it for a few years, now they don’t want it any more, so 
they’ve rescinded the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 88 is like the PST [provincial sales tax] in 
Saskatchewan. We just can never decide where we want it. 
You’d think it was a yo-yo rather than a sales tax. The NDP 
raised it from 7 to 9 and then down to 7 and then down to 6 and 
back up to 7. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan want to see some clarity 
and some direction from their government. And certainly when 

they see things like this Bill, Bill 88, which again extends the 
Dorsey recommendation for one more year, while health care 
groups like the lab techs are denied the right to choose their 
own union to negotiate for them, you wonder why in the world 
the NDP don’t show more leadership and more direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of an old cat that got into the 
gasoline. And for some reason this cat liked the gasoline and 
drank a little bit. And the cat was going every which way — up 
the walls and across the floor and it was turning circles. Finally 
after a long time the thing just fell down right in the middle of 
the floor and stayed there and didn’t move. And after a long 
time somebody asked, what happened to the cat? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the cat ran out of gas. This NDP government has run 
out of gas, doesn’t know where it’s going, doesn’t know what 
it’s doing — just has to keep putting on band-aid solution after 
band-aid solution. Here we have Bill 88, one more band-aid 
solution. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to move this legislation 
along. Let’s give the NDP one more chance. Let’s see if they 
can do something better next year. Let’s see if they can get their 
act together next year. I doubt it very much. I’ve become a real 
skeptic when it comes to the NDP. They never can seem to get 
their act together. But, Mr. Speaker, unless the NDP decide to 
filibuster this Bill, I recommend that we move it on to 
committee and see where it goes. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill No. 88, The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill this be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 88, 
The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 
2004 be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill 88 be referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 



2954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 95 — The 
Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
certainly a pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill 95, The 
Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005. Mr. Speaker, a 
number of my colleagues have already spoken to this Bill, and 
so you would know and I’m sure most people who have an 
interest in this Bill would know that this deals with an area of 
the Great Sand Hills down in the southwestern part of our 
province. And what it does is it enlarges the ecological reserve 
that’s already in existence, but it takes it a step further. 
 
This Bill requires that any changes to the boundaries needs to 
be done by legislation and would be dealt with by the 
legislature which is . . . The minister said this is to strengthen 
the protection for that fragile area, and it certainly would 
strengthen the protection. But, Mr. Speaker, I think if we just 
step back for a moment and look at this in a calm and logical 
way, it may complicate changes in the future, changes that 
would be beneficial for the area but would mean that it would 
have to go through the whole legislative process before any 
changes to boundaries or land use could be incorporated in 
future changes. 
 
[21:00] 
 
We have a study that the government is undertaking for that 
region of the province, the Great Sand Hills. That report or that 
study is just now barely getting under way. It’s funded in this 
year’s budget, and so we don’t know what the findings of that 
committee that is set up to study the area will bring forward. 
Yet we are enshrining in legislation boundaries of an area in 
that part of the province. 
 
There’s no arguing that that area, the Great Sand Hills, are an 
ecologically sensitive area of our province and need to be 
protected. I guess the question, Mr. Speaker, is how we go 
about doing that. 
 
I listened with interest to the minister’s second reading speech 
where he had commented that the amendments would allow for 
activities such as exercising treaty rights, ranching, hunting to 
continue. However gas development would not be allowed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then I noted with interest, Mr. Speaker, a letter in the 
Leader-Post shortly after the Bill was introduced. And it’s a 
letter by the chief of the Carry the Kettle Reserve at Sintaluta. 
Apparently that First Nations community was looking at an area 
in the Great Sand Hills in this region that’s being affected by 
this Bill. And they were looking at that area as treaty land 
entitlement land that they could use to fulfill the land, their 
treaty land entitlement. And they also talked about . . . In his 
letter, Chief Kennedy talks about the fact that his band was 
looking at gas development. 

But what I found particularly interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that 
even though this band has been looking at that area — and I’m 
sure this government has been aware that that First Nations 
community is interested in that portion of the lands that are 
being protected — there was no consultation. Chief Kennedy 
says in his letter, he said and I would quote, Mr. Speaker, 
“However we were not consulted about the change in status of 
this land in question.” And then in another part of his letter, he 
says: 
 

However this is difficult to do when our plans are 
interrupted by unilateral decision making at the provincial 
level [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So when we look at what the minister said and what Chief 
Kennedy has said, it raises some questions as to if some of the 
land that is within the ecological reserve is used for treaty land 
entitlement, what would the status then be of gas development? 
 
Certainly Chief Kennedy references the fact in his letter that the 
environment is important, in protecting this fragile status of that 
area of the province is important, and I have no reason to doubt 
that his community would certainly look at that. But it just 
seems that we may be in somewhat of a conflict of interest, and 
we’re not sure who would have the right to protect that area, 
that area of the Great Sand Hills, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
suggest that perhaps we need to have a clear understanding of 
the roles of responsibility of the provincial government, the 
First Nations community, the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we certainly do have some questions that we need to have 
answers to, Mr. Speaker. However I think that I’m sure the 
minister will be willing to answer those questions that we may 
have on this Bill, and so therefore I think we can accomplish 
what work we need to do by . . . we can get that done in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, so I would move that this Bill proceed 
to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 
95, The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? Chair recognizes the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that Bill 95, The Ecological 
Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 
that this Bill 95 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2955 

Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 98 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 98 — The Prairie 
and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’d like to enter 
into debate of The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also a number of my colleagues have spoken to 
this Bill. What this Bill does is it winds up the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. It is no longer . . . there is no funds in that 
. . . no dollars in that fund, and therefore there is probably no 
reason for that fund to exist, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as such, the few questions that we do have, we can 
certainly . . . would hope that we would get reasonable and 
good answers to our questions in committee. So therefore I 
move this Bill onto committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 
98, The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that Bill No. 98, The Prairie and 
Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 98 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 104 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 104 — The Planning 
and Development Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to comment a little bit on this Bill, an Act to amend 
The Planning and Development Act, 1983. 
 
This Bill streamlines municipal planning process and is 
consistent with the nature of the changes that were introduced 
in the new municipalities Act. However instead of requiring 
ministerial approval for changes such as zoning changes, 
authorities will have to submit some planning decision to the 
government for review for provincial interest. 
 
Provincial interest is a new concept in the Act, and it allows the 
provincial government to declare whether it has provincial 
interest regarding land use, planning, and development in a 
specific instance. This is an area that I think we’ll be addressing 
once the Bill goes to committee, Mr. Speaker, because it is a 
new concept of provincial interest, and I think we need some 
clarification on that. 
 
This Bill concerns municipal planning legislation and puts in 
place a number of new elements regarding the planning process 
for local municipalities which is a good thing. It provides local 
planning authorities with more autonomy in areas concerning 
planning and for undertaking capital works plans. And we’ve 
been consistently saying that municipalities — in fact lots of 
areas of the province — we need to devolve the authority and 
devolve the resources to interested organizations within the 
province. And this is a step in the right direction where you’re 
devolving the authority from municipalities and providing them 
with some autonomy. 
 
This Bill also provides for more accountability and 
transparency in local planning processes and public notices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of issues within the Bill that we 
will bring up in committee. We will be asking the minister for 
further clarification on the concept of provincial interests and 
whether this streamlines the planning processes I just 
mentioned, and the definition of provincial interest will be of 
interest to us. 
 
While some parts of the Act indicate that there will be greater 
autonomy for municipalities in the planning process, in other 
areas — such as approval of a zoning bylaw — seems the 
government has retained the same provincial government 
overview stating that municipalities refer bylaws to the minister 
for a review of provincial interest rather than ministerial 
approval of zoning bylaw and stating that authorities don’t need 
the minister’s approval of a subdivision bylaw but that the 
bylaw must be referred for review for provincial interest. 



2956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

So these are some concerns, Mr. Speaker, that we have within 
this Bill although it is very much in concert with the new 
municipalities Act. We can address these concerns in 
committee. So at this time I would like to recommend we 
forward this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill 104, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 104, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 
2005 be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 104 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 106 — The 
Municipalities Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I am 
pleased again to rise and talk briefly to Bill 106, The 
Municipalities Act as we are very familiar with this particular 
Bill. 
 
It was introduced originally last year and it’s a fairly extensive 
Bill. And thanks to the good work of SARM and SUMA, and it 
was their desire to have this Bill put forward . . . But as we 
know when it was introduced in the legislature with very, very 
short notice that the NDP tried to ram it through . . . and we 
were quite upset when we said what we really need with this 
Bill, a Bill of this size, a Bill of some 200 pages . . . and to try 
and ram it through within a few days in the legislature, it’s not 
fair to the stakeholders. And we debated that point extensively, 
Mr. Speaker. And as a result of the extensive debate that we had 

on this in a short period of time, the government finally saw fit 
that they would hold the Bill and do some consultations on it. 
 
So I would like to, I’d like to say that because of the 
consultations that were done — that were basically agreed to by 
the municipalities, that they had not been consulted properly — 
that the government saw fit . . . because we were ready to go out 
and talk to the municipalities and get their input so we would be 
able to further debate this Bill if in fact the government had not 
done it, went out and consulted. So the government went out 
and consulted. And lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, they pulled the 
Bill. So what we have now before us is a Bill that is corrected 
because of the consultation process. 
 
And I think the government could take some lessons on this 
consultative process in other Bills that are before the House 
currently. And this is one that it speaks very highly to what the 
consultative process can be. 
 
On the labour Bill for an example, there’s been negligible 
consultation, and the stakeholders are quite concerned about it. 
Well as this Bill was the same thing. There’s stakeholders that 
were very concerned, and now we see the Bill introduced with 
all of the corrections. In fact there are so many corrections to be 
made in this Bill that that’s why it was pulled and a new Bill 
introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill again is wanted by SUMA and SARM, 
and they put an awful lot of effort and work into this, and 
there’s a few, there’s a few issues that we’ll be discussing. But I 
think the issues that we have with the Bill — and they’re minor 
issues and small issues — that we’ll be able to deal with these 
in committee, Mr. Speaker. So at this time I’d recommend we 
move this Bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister for Government Relations that 
Bill 106, The Municipalities Act be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 
106, The Municipalities Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 106 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2957 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. 
 
[21:15] 
 

Bill No. 107 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 107 — The 
Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 
2005 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi 
intitulée The Municipalities Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, all the comments I made on the previous Bill, all I can 
say is ditto to this one. It’s a consequential Bill and it’s a 
housekeeping legislation. It goes right along with Bill 106, so I 
recommend that Bill 107 be moved to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Government Relations that 
Bill 107, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 
2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
107, The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
be referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that the Bill 107 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure. The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:17.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations — Vote 30 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2941 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2941 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2944 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2945 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2947 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2947 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2949 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2953 
  Van Mulligen (referral to committee) ...................................................................................................................................2953 
 Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2954 
  Forbes (referral to committee)...............................................................................................................................................2954 
 Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2955 
  Forbes (referral to committee)...............................................................................................................................................2955 
 Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2005 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2955 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................2956 
 Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2956 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................2956 
 Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Municipalities Act 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2957 
  Taylor (referral to committee) ...............................................................................................................................................2957 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




