






















































Hansard: November 15, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 6A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 163 
 November 15, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very delighted to 
rise today on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
horrendous conditions on Highway No. 310: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Foam Lake, Elfros, Wynyard; Brandon, Manitoba; Invermay. I 
do present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with citizens concerned about safety on 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from Humboldt today. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with the 
closure of the SaskPower office in Davidson: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the SaskPower office in 
Davidson remains open at its current level of customer 
service available to all SaskPower customers from the 
Davidson and surrounding service area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Davidson and Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens of Wilkie opposed to reductions of health care 
services. The prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received. A new petition being sessional paper no. 13 and 
addendums to previously tabled sessional papers being nos. 2, 
5, 7, and 8. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 11 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many clients accessed 
individualized funding program in the Heartland Health 
Region for March 31, 2000, and March 31, 2005? 
 

Also while I’m on my feet I also have a similar question: 
 

Minister of Health: what was the criteria for accessing the 
individualized funding program in the Heartland Health 
Region for March 31, 2005, to the present? 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 8 move a first reading of a Bill respecting The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive (Set Election Dates) 
Amendment Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I’m very pleased 
to introduce to members of the Assembly today the energetic 
participants for the Journalists’ Institute on Parliamentary 
Democracy who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are 
journalism students from the University of Regina. This 
journalists’ institute is hosted by the Office of the Speaker in 
co-operation with the Legislative Assembly Press Gallery 
Association and the University of Regina school of journalism. 
 
It’s an opportunity for these students to interact with 
representatives of government and the opposition and with 
professional journalists to discuss the role of media in a 
democracy. They’ve had excellent sessions this morning, some 
lively two-way discussions with the representatives of both 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

caucuses on processes and on the topic of women in politics. 
 
Please, members, welcome the participants to the fourth annual 
journalists’ institute. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to add my 
welcome to the journalism students. The member from 
Kelvington and Wadena and I did a presentation on women in 
politics, and we had some very lively questions and a very good 
discussion. So welcome to the proceedings this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too on behalf of the official opposition would like to 
join with yourself and the member from Saskatoon, the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena, and our chief of staff of the 
Saskatchewan opposition. I had the opportunity to speak with 
these students this morning for . . . I think we were there for 
almost an hour, a very good discussion, some excellent 
questions. And I want to wish them well in their studies as they 
move forward and become the leaders of tomorrow. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As many of you 
are aware, this is Arts Week in Saskatchewan. And we are 
extremely lucky to have with us here today some talented 
people who are sitting in the west gallery to help us celebrate 
Arts Week. 
 
Lyndon Tootoosis is from North Battleford. And Lyndon is also 
a member of the Saskatchewan Arts Board, and he’s standing 
up, in a suit. Marcia Chickeness is also from North Battleford. 
Marcia is a traditional artist whose work is featured in the 
Clearing the Path exhibition opening at 4:30 today at the First 
Nations University. Keith Bird is from Regina. Keith is also a 
traditional artist whose work is featured at the Clearing the 
Paths exhibition at the First Nations University. And with them 
today I would also like to welcome Gerald Bird, councillor 
from the Mosquito First Nation and their sons, Mark Bird, and 
Dalton Chickeness. Welcome. 
 
I would like to encourage all members to go and visit the 
exhibition at the First Nations University. And I would 
encourage everyone to help me welcome our guests to their 
legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to introduce to you and through you to all my colleagues 
students from Kelvington school. We have 21 grade eight 
students and 22 grade 11 students along with their teacher, Jim 
Lissinna, and chaperone, Sheila Guilbault. 
 
I had the opportunity to meet with these students for awhile this 
morning, and the Minister of Agriculture will be pleased to 
know that their main interest was the crisis in agriculture today, 
and they’re keenly aware of what’s happening in their 
community. 
 
Also while I’m on my feet, I’d appreciate also welcoming the 
students from the journalism group that we had a chance to talk 
to at noon. I’m sure I won’t be disappointed the day after I’m 
no longer elected if one of them comes and visits me so they 
can see if I broke my promise or my secret that I told to them. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, the individuals that are here celebrating 
Arts Week, we welcome them to their legislature. We 
appreciate their attendance and all the work that they do to 
encourage the passion we have in Saskatchewan for arts and 
culture. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased today to 
be welcoming to the legislature a delegation from the nation of 
Japan from the city of Tokyo. As members will know, myself, 
the Minister of Industry and Resources, and a delegation of 
Saskatchewan business people recently conducted a trade 
mission in Asia. Part of that mission took us to Tokyo where we 
had the opportunity to meet our guests. We extended an 
invitation to Saskatchewan, and they have returned the favour. 
They are here to visit our province. They are looking at 
particularly some of the energy resources and some of the 
carbon sequestration work that’s happening. 
 
I would like all members, therefore, to welcome Ms. Mika 
Sugiura, who is with one of the large Tokyo newspapers and 
was very kind in her coverage of our visit. With Mika is Mr. 
Osamu Kano from The Chemical Daily in Japan. Michiko 
Makino is with them as well, and she works in our Canadian 
embassy in Tokyo and in Japan. 
 
They toured yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the sequestration project in 
the Weyburn oil field with EnCana. They have toured the PTRC 
[Petroleum Technology Research Centre] at the University of 
Regina. 
 
And while we were in Japan, Mr. Speaker, they expressed an 
interest in snow. We have delivered as a hospitality of this 
province. To our visitors from Japan, we wish them all the well 
in their travels. We thank them for being with us. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

opposition we want to join with the Premier today and the 
members in the government benches in welcoming the 
delegation from Japan. We particularly welcome their interest 
in the energy sector in our province and the potential for that 
sector to really benefit the entire world as well as the peoples of 
our province. So welcome here to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Our visitors from Japan, Mr. Speaker, 
have sometimes been described in this country as coming from 
the Far East. I choose now to see our friends in Japan and Asia 
as being from the near west. 
 
But we do have some visitors also in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
from the east, in this case from the near east, the great province 
of Manitoba. Seated in your gallery today are the Reverends 
Laurie and Bev Simpson, long time personal friends of my wife 
and I. In fact we were all married together in the year 1975. I 
want to welcome Laurie and Bev to the Saskatchewan 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

A Have Province with a Heart 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Monday’s Throne Speech 
makes plain the vision that we on this side of the Assembly 
have for Saskatchewan as we move into our new century. Mr. 
Speaker, our vision is of a province where no one is left behind 
on the road to opportunity. Our vision is of a province with an 
unbreakable social fabric built upon the foundation of diverse 
and growing communities and a green and prosperous 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech focuses on the children of our 
centennial and plainly states our goal that they grow up living 
healthy, active lives and enjoying all the benefits of 
high-quality education; to live and grow and reach adulthood; 
proud of and involved in their communities, proud of this 
province and its diversity and prosperity, proud to call 
Saskatchewan home; to be from a place where everyone has the 
opportunity to achieve their dreams, whatever their dreams may 
be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout 2005 Saskatchewan people have been 
celebrating with pride all that is unique and wonderful about 
this province. With this Throne Speech, we are building on that 
pride and envisioning a Saskatchewan that is not just a have 
province, but a have province with heart. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Agriculture Support 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
agriculture groups, members of parliament, and members of 
provincial legislatures across Canada are calling on Ottawa and 
their provincial governments to address the crisis facing 
farmers. That is, except the Saskatchewan Minister of 
Agriculture and the Saskatchewan NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government who are oblivious to what is going on right 
here in our own province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta has announced just yesterday that they are 
investing 224 million more into CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization] to support their producers. But what do 
we hear from the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan? He 
said existing farm support programs, CAIS and crop insurance, 
meet the basic needs of Saskatchewan producers. He also said 
the demise of some farmers was because of business decisions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts are, falling income and high input 
costs are not the fault of inefficient farmers, and safety net 
programs have failed farmers in that they are deliberately 
complicated so that farmers cannot determine if they do or do 
not qualify. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are things the NDP government has control 
over and issues they can address if they have the political will 
to do so and if they really want farmers and businesses that rely 
on a healthy farm economy to survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan used to be known as the 
breadbasket of the world. Today many of our farmers are 
wondering if they will be able to put food on their own tables. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the NDP government going to make 
agriculture and our farm families a priority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Eco-Network Presents First Annual 
Environmental Film Festival 

 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Eco-Network is a non-profit, non-government 
organization whose membership includes dozens of 
Saskatchewan environmental groups. The membership reflects 
the diversity of organizations and individuals who share a 
common concern for environmental issues but who also 
represent a variety of different focuses and points of view. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the 19th to the 24th of this month in 
Saskatoon the Saskatchewan EcoNetwork is presenting its first 
annual Environmental Film Festival. The festival will be a 
celebration of our province’s first 100 years and includes films 
about Saskatchewan, our people, and our environment in a local 
context and in the context of our place in the country and in the 
world. 
 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

The event begins with a Saturday afternoon double bill that 
includes the film, Near to Nature’s Heart: Women of Waskesiu, 
that looks at the lives of eight women, all of whom made their 
homes in Prince Albert National Park. The film is a labour of 
love co-created by Jeanne Corrigal, who I am proud to say is a 
past student of mine. I’ve had the honour of seeing this film and 
I encourage members to see it. 
 
The Saturday evening gala will recognize 100 years of 
environmentalism of the past 100 years of Saskatchewan and 
includes a screening of The Tunguska Project about the journey 
of playwright and artist Floyd Favel to the Tunguska region of 
central Siberia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud the activities of the Saskatchewan 
Eco-Network and encourage everyone who has the opportunity 
to attend this First Annual Environmental Film Festival. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Plight of Farmers 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year 
Saskatchewan agriculture producers spent $6 billion in this 
province. There is a great deal of concern that this may not 
happen again this year. Grain and oilseed prices are down, 
down from last year’s low prices by an additional 25 to 30 per 
cent. Costs of production have increased dramatically, 
particularly fuel and fertilizer. Fixed costs including property 
taxes continue to increase. 
 
Farmers have burnt through their equity to finance operations 
over the past number of years. In many cases they have burnt 
through their personal resources, their savings, their retirement 
savings, and the resources of their families. 
 
The lending institutions are about to pull the plug on many of 
their clients. The existing insurance and safety net programs are 
simply not providing coverage that is, number one, bankable or 
number two, sufficient to meet their needs. The very formula on 
which these programs are based provide for decreasing 
protection during tough times. Our farming community needs to 
be assured that the governments and the people of this entire 
country are aware of this serious situation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

La Ronge Student Displays Community Spirit 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words 
about Calyn Burnouf, a young woman from La Ronge who is 
currently working on a nutrition degree at the College of 
Pharmacy and Nutrition at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Calyn is in the second year of a four-year 
program. Her long-term goal is to return to her home 

community of La Ronge as a registered dietician and a certified 
diabetes educator and do her part in the fight against diabetes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Calyn attended Churchill School in La Ronge 
where she earned a 92 per cent average in grade 12 as well as 
being on the student representative council and in various 
school activities. Her academic achievements and community 
spirit have earned her a Northern Spirit Scholarship, a $2,500 
bursary from the Foundation for the Advancement of 
Aboriginal Youth, and most recently a two-year, $14,000 
bursary from Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we should encourage our youth to follow 
their dreams no matter where their dreams may take them. But I 
am pleased and proud that for Calyn Burnouf, that means not 
only returning to her roots and community, but with a goal of 
making it a better and healthier place. 
 
I congratulate Calyn Burnouf on her academic achievements 
and her commitment to her community and wish her every 
success in the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Condition of Agriculture in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, agriculture in Saskatchewan is in 
an unprecedented crisis. People are totally frustrated with the 
lack of response by this government and the federal 
government. CAIS and crop insurance are not working. 
 
Farmers within my constituency in the past years have been hit 
by drought, frost, summer rain, and severe flooding. We may 
live in next year’s country, but next year isn’t going to come for 
many farmers. Add to these natural disasters the subsidies of 
grain by other countries, BSE [bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy], increased input costs, loss of rail lines, high 
education tax, and low grain prices, and you have a crisis in 
agriculture that is going to permanently change the future of 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only farmers but also RMs [rural municipality] 
are contacting my constituency office, frustrated with the 
provincial disaster assistance program. It lacks coverage for 
uninsured losses, and therefore agricultural losses covered by 
crop insurance are not applicable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recently had a frustrated farmer fax me his cash 
purchase tickets for 159,000 metric tons of wheat which he 
delivered to the elevator. After deductions he took home a 
cheque for $556.75. This won’t even pay the fuel for one day of 
combining, let alone the other input costs. He also sold four 
loads of barley, and after deductions his cheque was zero. 
Basically he still owes money on the production of this crop. 
And this is not an isolated case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers within Saskatchewan feel that nobody 
cares about the future of food in Canada. Are we willing to trust 
that the world is going to feed Canada, or are we going to 
ensure that our farmers receive fair value for their product and 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

are supported in times of crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Survey Ranks SaskTel Mobility as Most Popular Carrier 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The J.D. Power and 
Associates 2005 Canadian wireless customer satisfaction study, 
an independent survey of cellular customers in Canada, has 
ranked SaskTel Mobility the most popular carrier in the 
country. Mr. Speaker, this is a remarkable achievement as 
customer satisfaction questions were asked of customers of 
every cellular service provider in the country. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but SaskTel Mobility ranked a full 
10 per cent over the national average in terms of customer 
satisfaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have every right to be 
very proud of the province’s Crown corporations. They are an 
essential part of our social and economic fabric. This 
achievement by SaskTel and SaskTel Mobility speaks to the 
commitment, talents, and abilities of their employees, and is 
one more example of the excellent service provided to the 
people of Saskatchewan by our Crown sector. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in recognizing 
the high quality of service delivered by SaskTel Mobility and 
particularly in congratulating the employees of SaskTel 
Mobility on a job well done, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Mid-Year Financial Report 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the federal government announced that due to a 
significant surplus it’s going to give back taxpayers some of 
their money in the form of overdue tax cuts. The federal 
government made the announcement in the form of a fiscal and 
economic update outside the budget cycle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow this NDP government will release its 
own fiscal update in the form of a mid-term report. And we 
know they are not short of cash. You’ll recall a couple of 
budgets ago, Mr. Speaker, that this Premier and this Finance 
minister asked the people to tighten their belts, to suck it up and 
take a 1 per cent hike in the PST [provincial sales tax]. This tax 
hike, Mr. Speaker, came just months after the Premier promised 
in the 2003 election not to raise taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister announce tomorrow that he will 
be rolling back the PST hike and finally give Saskatchewan 
people a break by keeping their promise? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to thank the member for the question. I 
want to assure the member and the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan that in fact we will be presenting our mid-year 
report on the province’s finances tomorrow. The member will 
have one more sleep until then to find out the details of that 
report and one more night to reflect on his projection of $720 
million in additional oil and gas revenues and whether or not 
that projection is correct. So he has another night to now think 
about that, whether or not that projection is correct, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same minister 
who presides over a record that includes the highest taxes for 
low-income earners in all of Canada. 
 
In February of this year, the Saskatchewan Party proposed a 
plan that would ensure that everyone making $15,000 or less in 
this province would pay no provincial tax and those earning 
$35,000 or less a year would pay less tax. The minister has now 
had nine months to consider this plan. 
 
Will the minister announce tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, that he will 
be cutting taxes for those that earn the least in Saskatchewan? 
Will he make sure that low-income earners have more money in 
their pockets as soon as possible? They’ve waited long enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
will know and the people of Saskatchewan will know that the 
Government of Saskatchewan undertook significant personal 
income tax reform beginning in the year 2000 and phased that 
in over a number of years. Our reform was intended to make 
our tax system simpler and I think it achieved that. 
 
The Saskatchewan Conservative Party plan would again add 
complexity to the tax system. I can’t say I’m surprised by that, 
given the fact that member opposite and other members 
apprenticed during the regime of Grant Devine, when that 
administration seemed very preoccupied with adding great 
complexity to our personal income tax system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve achieved reform. They haven’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, not only does this 
government’s record include breaking its promise not to raise 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

taxes — the highest taxes for low-income earners — this NDP’s 
record also includes the highest education property taxes in all 
of Canada. 
 
This Premier, Mr. Speaker, told us that the status quo was not 
on but then he only took half of the Boughen Commission’s 
advice. He hiked the PST but failed to deliver on permanent 
property tax relief and now he’s got a tax revolt on his hands. 
 
Not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, this very Premier said, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . is there any wonder that [there’s] a tax revolt . . . 
brewing in this province? People are being taxed to death 
and . . . [they] can’t take it any more. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s time this Premier heeded his own 
advice. Can we expect the minister of high property taxes to 
deliver some much needed permanent property tax relief 
tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would just point 
out to the House that in last year’s mid-year financial report, the 
Government of Saskatchewan announced significant property 
tax relief for people in Saskatchewan, both for that year and for 
this current year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
We also announced prior to the report through the Energy Share 
program that we are mindful of the people’s pocketbook 
concerns, as we have done in the past. I would also point out, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party, Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party has put forward, has put forward a proposal 
that in their mind makes the tax system fairer. It doesn’t in fact 
do that, Mr. Speaker. In fact their proposal would ensure that 
. . . and perversely their plan would effectively increase the 
income tax rate for individuals earning less than $35,000. 
 
I’m not surprised. This is the party of the flat tax, the most 
regressive tax in Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister seems 
to have a problem getting his parties straight. Well I can assure 
him there’s one party that speaks for the people of 
Saskatchewan and it’s on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we provided the NDP 
government with ample ideas on how to lessen the tax burden 
for Saskatchewan people. We’ve asked them to look at making 
changes so that low-income earners and working people stop 
paying the highest taxes in the country. We’ve asked them to 

ensure that people of Saskatchewan who took it on the chin 
when the NDP hiked the PST will see some relief on that front. 
 
We’ve suggested that they provide some relief on the education 
side of property tax instead of a short-term, 8 per cent, band-aid 
solution that actually led to substantial tax increases. And what 
have they done, Mr. Speaker? They’ve hoarded the people’s 
cash all to themselves. They sit on this mountain of cash with 
some sense of arrogance and entitlement. 
 
I’ll give the minister one more chance, Mr. Speaker. He can 
pick one. What will it be? Tax relief for low-income earners, for 
property tax payers? Or a rollback of the PST to benefit 
everyone in the province. Mr. Speaker, it’s time to do 
something. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — For sure the party opposite is not 
sitting on anything. They’ve spent every dollar and then some 
that they’ve declared to be additional revenues for the people of 
Saskatchewan. In fact by my tally, since the beginning of the 
year the party opposite would have added something like $1.7 
billion to provincial spending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But then adding things up and making them add up has never 
been their strong point, Mr. Speaker, has never been and I don’t 
think it is today either. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 

Lawsuit for Wrongful Dismissal 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a 
few weeks ago David Degenstein launched a lawsuit against the 
NDP government. In his statement of claim Mr. Degenstein 
details how several senior members of this NDP government 
worked together to develop a cartoon depicting the former 
leader of the opposition as a Nazi. Mr. Degenstein was 
ultimately fired for this disgusting cartoon — only after he got 
caught of course, Mr. Speaker. And now he’s suing the NDP for 
wrongful dismissal. Mr. Degenstein has already received over 
$37,000 of taxpayers’ money in severance. Does the 
government plan to defend itself in this case or do they intend 
to give him an even bigger payoff? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it would be fair to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that through the election campaign of 2003 there were 
some unfortunate experiences that occurred. We understand 
that, Mr. Speaker. And it’s our appreciation that some work has 
been done in making sure that that’s been rectified. 
 
This is an issue, Mr. Speaker, that happened from within the 
party. And because it happened within the operations of the 
party, it was dealt with through the experiences of the party. 
And I say to the member opposite, I say to the member opposite 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

that you tread on some very serious ground here. Because there 
were issues that were related on the part of your member, Mr. 
Speaker, in this Assembly, on the part of one of your members 
and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask, I would ask the . . . Order 
please. I would ask the Deputy Premier to make his remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, that the member treads on 
some very, very thin ice. Because, Mr. Speaker, we had in this 
Assembly and in this province one of their members, Mr. 
Speaker, who said some very, very serious allegations. And 
what did the Conservative leader opposite do, Mr. Speaker, 
what did the Conservative leader do? Didn’t condone the 
behaviour at all, Mr. Speaker. And I say that when this 
Assembly begins down that path, Mr. Speaker, it undoes the 
integrity of this Assembly. And I ask the member to change his 
approach on this process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He said this was 
part of their party way that they operate. Yes it is, and that’s the 
unfortunate part. And we’ll point out some more of that in just a 
minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his statement of claim Mr. Degenstein states 
that he fully expected to be rehired, Mr. Speaker. In fact that’s 
what he was told by the Minister of Agriculture right over there. 
According to his statement of claim, the minister told 
Degenstein, and I quote: 
 

Hold on. I have it from the highest authority that you will 
soon be offered re-employment in an equivalent income. 
It’s all quite hush-hush. 

 
Mr. Speaker, did that Minister of Agriculture give that 
assurance to Mr. Degenstein, and if so, why? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the House and to the 
members opposite, this matter, Mr. Speaker, has made itself to 
the court system. It will be dealt, Mr. Speaker, in the court 
system. It would be most inappropriate, I would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, for members of this side of the House — or I suggest, 
Mr. Speaker, for members on that side of the House — to try 
and find a solution to an issue that in fact is before the courts. 
And we should allow, Mr. Speaker, the court system to make its 
way through this particular issue. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, and this leader were very clear 
about the outcomes of the issue, Mr. Speaker. And the party, 
Mr. Speaker, is dealing with it and should deal with it because, 
Mr. Speaker, this is a party issue. And I suggest to the members 
opposite that when you proceed down this path you need to do 
an examination of what’s happened with your own member, 

Mr. Speaker. And that may be why he’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll bring to the member’s attention once 
again that he should make all his remarks through the Chair. I 
recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes it is a party 
situation. It is their party situation, the one that thinks it has the 
right to govern this province forever. And now we find out what 
they’re really all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is really a very simple question. The statement 
of claim says, and I quote: 
 

Hold on. I have it from the highest authority that you will 
soon be offered equivalent employment. It’s all quite 
hush-hush. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, the man of the cloth — and I’m 
sure he should be somewhat passingly acquainted with the truth 
— did that minister say to Mr. Degenstein or not that he would 
find him that work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already pointed out to 
this Assembly and to the House that this matter, Mr. Speaker, 
will be dealt with in the court system and it will be repaired 
through that process, Mr. Speaker. If there have been some 
injustices that have been done, the court system will rectify that, 
Mr. Speaker, in its process of dealing with this particular issue. 
 
But I say to the members opposite that when you proceed down 
this path, Mr. Speaker, and you make allegations about what’s 
been said through private conversations with individuals and 
you make those kinds of allegations, Mr. Speaker, you set 
yourself up for some issues that there may be repercussions for. 
And so today we hear, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Kindersley is now leaving his chair, Mr. Speaker, being 
replaced by the member now who has sat in this Assembly 
before. 
 
Now there are reasons, Mr. Speaker, for why some of those 
decisions are being made, Mr. Speaker. And I say to the 
members opposite: when you go down this path, you need to 
face the repercussions yourself of those particular issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That whole caucus 
over there, Mr. Speaker, was involved in this. We’re finding 
that out. We’re finding that out. And we’ll be going a little 
higher yet today, Mr. Speaker. Trust us. 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

One more chance for the Minister of Agriculture. Did he make 
that commitment or not to find that job for Mr. Degenstein? 
Answer it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the members 
opposite that they’ll have an opportunity to hear the outcome of 
the court proceedings. This matter is before the courts and there 
will be an opportunity for the party to make its representations 
in court. Mr. Degenstein will make his accordingly, Mr. 
Speaker. And this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
will find in time what the realities of those discussions were, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not our purview today, Mr. Speaker, to conduct a hearing in 
this Assembly around the proceedings that happened during the 
election campaign. In this particular environment, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan have decided who they wanted to 
be government, Mr. Speaker, in this province. They’ve decided 
who wants to be speaker. 
 
And the decision that Saskatchewan people made were not 
about what happened in the discussion with Mr. Degenstein, 
Mr. Speaker. It was about whether or not Saskatchewan people 
wanted a NDP government operating in Saskatchewan today 
and managing the affairs or a Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker. 
And they picked the NDP, Mr. Speaker, to govern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Little did anyone know, Mr. Speaker, the 
kinds of individuals this province was electing when they 
elected that group over there. 
 
And I said just earlier on, we’re going to go a little higher. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, pay attention — we’re going a little higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the minister’s quote again: 
 

Hold on. I have it from the highest authority that you will 
soon be offered equivalent employment. It’s all quite 
hush-hush. 

 
Mr. Speaker, according to this quote, the minister, that’s the 
Minister of Agriculture, was speaking on behalf of the highest 
authority. I can assume, Mr. Speaker, that means the Premier. 
That means the Premier. 
 
Did the Premier tell the Minister of Agriculture that David 
Degenstein would be fixed up with a new job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 
Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan will find out in the 
next while about where in fact the direction on this particular 

case will settle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, if there was a statement of that 
nature made. Maybe the highest authority, Mr. Speaker, maybe 
the highest authority that the Agriculture minister spoke to in a 
long time is way higher than anybody in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. And so we may not get an answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the member opposite may have to wait for a different time, 
and he may ask St. Peter about who made whatever statement 
when the time comes for us to make that kind of understanding, 
Mr. Speaker. But today these decisions, Mr. Speaker, will be 
made in a court of law. There will be, Mr. Speaker, an analysis 
of all that was undertaken and the members opposite will 
understand that in time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Had the Deputy Premier kept his chair, we 
could have had an answer from the Minister of Agriculture and 
we would all know right now. But instead of that he steps in the 
way of us finding out what the truth is in this particular matter, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this statement of claim paints a clear picture of the 
culture that exists within this NDP government. It’s a culture of 
gutter politics, entitlement, and secrecy. Gutter politics, Mr. 
Speaker. The Premier’s office had virtually everyone in the 
building working on that Nazi cartoon, all at the taxpayers’ 
expense. 
 
Entitlement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Degenstein clearly expected to 
work in a high-paying government job for the rest of his life. 
Why? Because of his NDP connections. In fact he says so right 
in his statement. 
 
And secrecy. Mr. Degenstein says that even after he was fired 
— after — the Minister of Agriculture promised to fix him up 
with a new job, but it’s all quite hush-hush. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why is this government such a den 
of gutter politics, entitlement . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I find the member’s line of 
questioning to be somewhat out of order. I want to bring to his 
attention a previous ruling that the integrity or motives of 
members, whether individually or collectively, should not be 
questioned indirectly in debate. I therefore rule the remarks 
referring to gutter politics, implying integrity or motives of 
members across the House, to be offensive and to be out of 
order and would ask that member to withdraw that statement. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, I’ll reread that question leaving out the 
part . . . 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just ask the 
member to withdraw the statement unequivocally. Member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I will withdraw that statement at this time, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize whoever is going to respond — 
the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it was a bit difficult to try to 
understand what we’re responding to here based on the question 
that was put. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re proud of the history of our political party on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of it. We’re proud of it. 
We’re proud of those people who have led the New Democratic 
Party over the last 60 years, Mr. Speaker. And we hear every 
day, Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House, members getting 
up and condemning the rule of the NDP for 60 years, Mr. 
Speaker. We hear it on a daily basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they insult the Saskatchewan electorate 
every day in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, by saying to the 
Saskatchewan electorate that they didn’t have the wisdom to 
elect the kind of governments they wanted for the last 60 years. 
Saskatchewan people in this province have been very astute to 
the politics, Mr. Speaker. Because they said unequivocally they 
don’t want a Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Because every time they get a 
Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, we’re in the tank in this 
province. And that’s why for 60 years we have NDP 
governments. Because the people of Saskatchewan elect NDP 
governments. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Government Agricultural Policies 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, let’s see if the Ag minister 
can actually get out of his chair and answer for himself for 
once. The federal Finance minister released his economic and 
fiscal update yesterday and the document forecasts federal 
surpluses totalling $54.5 billion. The document talked about tax 
cuts. It talked about innovation. It talked about global 
commerce and networks. It talked about secondary education. 
But, Mr. Speaker, conspicuous by its absence, it did not 
mention agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is that? Did that minister and that 
government fail to get the message across to Mr. Goodale, Mr. 
Mitchell, and the federal government that we have a tremendous 
problem in Saskatchewan? And Saskatchewan farmers need 
help today — not next year but today. Will the minister get out 

of his chair and at least respond to that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 
for the opportunity to respond to an agriculture question. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make absolutely clear that I think the 
behaviour of the federal government is absolutely appalling. I 
believe that they have not only abandoned, they have not only 
abandoned Saskatchewan agriculture and Saskatchewan 
farmers, Mr. Speaker — and we have made that case over and 
over and over again — but they have abandoned the people of 
this province. 
 
The Minister Responsible for Finance for this federal 
government has abandoned the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, because he has not done anything about the things that 
he needs to do something about — about equalization, about the 
royalty grab that the federal government has taken out of this 
province, about the $2 billion annualized that that federal 
government has pulled out of this province that we could be 
using to support the farmers and to support the development of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem. We’ve identified it, and we’ve 
been pushing hard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Agriculture should know what he’s talking about. He’s talking 
about abandoning people in Saskatchewan. That government 
has done it for 14 years. Under the last premier, under this 
Premier, they’ve totally neglected agriculture and right now, at 
the worst time for agriculture in Saskatchewan history, they 
figure there’s no problem. 
 
Only a week ago that minister said CAIS is adequate; crop 
insurance is adequate. The Deputy Premier also made those 
comments. And Mr. Goodale paid no attention to agriculture 
because that government didn’t pass the message on that our 
farmers are in trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after question period we will be moving an 
emergency motion. The members opposite know about it. 
We’ve given them advance notice. Mr. Speaker, will that 
government this week finally debate the issue in agriculture, 
finally help us get the message through to the federal 
government? Our farmers need help. Quiet down about all the 
rhetoric about CAIS is good, CAIS is adequate, crop insurance 
is doing its job. Show the federal government our farmers need 
help. Join with us to get that message out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we’re seeing more of the same kind of 
let’s-jump-on-the-bandwagon routine from the members 
opposite. But the problem, Mr. Speaker, with those members 
opposite, is that instead of pointing to where the problems have 
been, Mr. Speaker, they have tried to turn them around on this 
government. They did it yesterday, Mr. Speaker, with the 
agroforestry. They’ve been trying to do that with agriculture. 
 
We have encouraged them. We have asked them. We’ve asked 
their Conservative counterparts federally to work with us to try 
and get a better deal, to try and change the CAIS program so 
that it is effective. The absolute drivel and nonsense that was 
coming from the other side suggesting that we said that the 
CAIS program was okay is just bizarre, Mr. Speaker. We have 
never said the CAIS program is okay. There’s a lot of work 
needs to be done. We’re working at it, and we welcome them 
finally joining with us to work at it too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Youth Justice Administration 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, The Youth Justice 
Administration Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 11, The Youth 
Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, The 
Archives Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial 

Secretary, the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation, that 
Bill No. 13, The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Provincial 
Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Provincial 
Secretary, the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation that 
Bill No. 14, The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I wish to 
table in the House correspondence from Lieutenant Governor 
Dr. Lynda Haverstock, pursuant to section 68.7, The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act, where she advises the 
Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
effective July 26 of the year 2005. 
 
Why is the member from Melville-Saltcoats on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
request leave to move a motion under rule 49, and I might just 
make a brief explanation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Due to the federal Finance minister yesterday bringing out a 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

pre-election budget and neglecting to even mention agriculture 
and the problems we have in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we feel 
that once again this week, as we did last week, that it’s 
necessary to have an emergency debate to bring attention to the 
federal government and, for that matter, to the provincial 
government that there’s large problems in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to read the motion that I 
am moving: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 
completely ignoring the current agriculture crisis in its 
November 14, 2005 economic update and that this 
Assembly condemn the provincial government for its 
failure to raise the importance of the current agriculture 
crisis with the federal government. 
 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave of the 
Assembly for an emergency motion with respect to agriculture. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed with his motion. The Chair recognizes the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Agriculture 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the fact that the government opposite this week has 
finally saw fit that they would take part in a debate of this 
nature, remembering that last week we brought this same debate 
to the table and had we of had the opportunity to raise it in this 
legislature last week, maybe Mr. Goodale and Mr. Mitchell 
would have saw fit to include agriculture in their pre-election 
budget yesterday. 
 
That week could have cost our farmers millions upon millions 
of dollars. But at least they have finally agreed to join with us, 
and as the minister said, jump on his bandwagon. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know, but I believe that bandwagon must have rubber 
tires. And they’re froze and they’re flat because absolutely 
nothing has been coming out of that Ag minister to help our 
farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this should be a little bit of education for the Ag 
minister. He’s been too busy doing other things than his Ag 
portfolio, as the member for Rosthern talked about earlier. If he 
would just pay attention to the Ag portfolio — as I might 
mention that he’s very weak in that portfolio — but he’s been 
getting carried away into other avenues, promising jobs to 
people that have screwed up within the NDP Party — but just 
be quiet; we’ll get that job back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well what I’m saying, when a person of his calibre is put into 
cabinet to represent in this case farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan, they should be the lobbyist for those farmers 
within cabinet. But they should also be, as Agriculture minister, 
the farmers’ representative on the national scene. What a failure 
that minister has made of his Agriculture portfolio. 

Once again I say, Mr. Speaker — and I plead with that minister 
— get back to the job at hand. You don’t understand that job. 
It’s evident. We need you in that job. As long as that 
government’s in power we need you to represent our farmers. 
Either that, call an election. Somebody on this side will 
represent farmers and we’ll actually get the message through to 
the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday Ralph Goodale had 
$54.5 billion to play politics with. And he didn’t even know — 
coming from Saskatchewan, he didn’t even know — there’s a 
problem that our farmers have with high input cost, 
tremendously high input cost, low commodity prices. And they 
can’t even move those commodities if they were getting a 
decent dollar. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll start the Ag minister’s lesson today, 
right now. Many members on this side represent rural 
communities, represent rural farmers — farmers that are really 
up against it, Mr. Speaker. And I would hope that the 
Agriculture minister would listen close, after the debate go to 
his office, get on the phone, and phone the federal government 
and say, the opposition in Saskatchewan has just enlightened 
me. I didn’t know we have a problem in agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. And I’m not here, I’m not here to embarrass the 
Agriculture minister. But if that’s what it takes, if that’s what it 
takes to get him to do his job, more power to us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So, Mr. Speaker, let’s get into the nuts and 
bolts of what we’re talking about today. I represent many 
farmers in the Melville-Saltcoats riding out there, as do pretty 
near every member on this side of the House. We have farmers 
calling us every day and telling us they have no money to pay 
their fuel bill, no money to pay their fertilizer bill, no money to 
pay their chemical bill. And the list goes on and on. 
 
And on top of all this, what do we get? We get an increase in 
SaskEnergy costs for farmers along with everybody else. 
SaskPower now has asked for an increase which, when it comes 
out, it shakes out, usually farmers are asked to pay a little 
higher percentage than everybody else because that’s what they 
call equalization on that side of the House — let’s dump a little 
more on the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, I find it amazing, Mr. Speaker. Our 100th birthday 
— our centennial — and that government forgets that farmers 
are part of the backbone of this province, have been here for 
many years longer than 100 and helped build this province. And 
when it comes a time when that government has money falling 
out of all their pockets but only that government has money, 
they see fit to neglect our farmers and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And, Mr. Speaker, they keep saying, oh all 
you ever do is talk about farmers. Well this time we’re talking 
about all of rural Saskatchewan. And actually not just rural 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

Saskatchewan because very quickly you’re going to see 
businesses all over Saskatchewan, including in Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, your home area, Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon are 
going to be hurting because agriculture is short of dollars. They 
can’t pay their bills and they certainly aren’t going to be able to 
buy things that they normally would be able to afford to buy 
because there’s just no cash out there. The hurt is tremendous, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re already hearing of farmers giving up rented land for next 
year. We’re already hearing of farmers considering going 
through bankruptcy. The stress level is amazing, Mr. Speaker, 
out there. And that’s the point we want to get across to this 
provincial NDP government. 
 
Last spring, Mr. Speaker, we talked — and it’s not a subject we 
like to talk about — but about the suicides that are happening in 
agriculture due to the stress caused by what’s going on out 
there. And it’s not something that we want to publicize, Mr. 
Speaker, but we feel we need to, to get the point across to that 
government and the federal government just how bad things are 
in agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the commodity prices are low. 
The inputs are higher than they’ve ever been. Fuel costs have 
never been this high. Many farmers that have called me and 
called other members on this side of the House didn’t even 
know when harvest started how they were going to get fuel to 
take this crop off. In many cases combines out there were 
taking up to $1,000 a day just to fill them with diesel. And 
many of those farmers have three, four, five combines, Mr. 
Speaker. And when the fuel bulk dealer says, I have to have a 
cheque in my hand; I’m sorry, you’ve been with me for a lot of 
years but I have to have a cheque in my hand before I can 
deliver fuel, just shows that the problems out there are many 
and they are great. 
 
And I know members on that side of the House, there are 
members on that side of the House, including the Deputy 
Premier, who know very well what I’m talking about is dead 
on, that farmers have never faced a problem like this as long as 
they’ve been farming in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I guess the lonely feeling, Mr. Speaker, that they have out 
there is that right now, especially after yesterday — they knew 
before yesterday that the provincial government didn’t show 
much sympathy to the problem out there — but now when Mr. 
Goodale and the federal government neglects to mention 
agriculture they really feel alone out there. They’re up against 
the wall and it’s a time when the people of Canada and the 
people of Saskatchewan, I believe the public really want to help 
our farmers. 
 
They know when they go to the grocery stores and the shelves 
are right full of food, the luxury we have in this country that 
many countries don’t have. Many countries when they go to do 
their shopping, buy their groceries, shelves are empty in many 
of those countries or half empty. We have the luxury of going to 
Safeway, Co-op stores, every kind of grocery store in this 
province. We have the luxury of fresh produce, fresh beef. 
Everything that we might want and anything that we need for 
our families is right there in front of us. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
scares me the most is maybe this government won’t pay any 

attention until our stores don’t have those full shelves. 
 
There’s going to be a time, if we don’t pay attention very 
quickly, and help agriculture out, that we’re going to end up 
with tremendously big farms. We’re seeing farms get bigger 
now. What happens if we end up 10 years, 15, 20 years from 
now with about 20 farms left in Saskatchewan? Twenty big 
corporate farms. And you know what those farmers will do, and 
I really couldn’t blame them if they did — they will be naming 
their price. They won’t be letting the wheat board set their 
price. They won’t be letting Cargill set their price. They will be 
telling Cargill and all the other buyers out there, this is what we 
want for our product and if you don’t pay it you won’t get it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what that’s going to come 
through and do? It’s going to, number one, raise the price of our 
groceries tremendously. We have a cheap food policy; we know 
that in this province. And it’s one of the good things we have in 
this province. We can afford to buy groceries of all kinds. It’s 
just too bad that the people that are growing the groceries and 
the products that we need to manufacture into what is in the 
stores are not receiving money for their products. 
 
We look at barley, Mr. Speaker, and the low price of barley out 
there. And yet anybody that’s gone and bought a box of beer or 
a bottle of beer lately, they haven’t seen that price go down. Mr. 
Speaker, can you imagine if there was 10 cents more on a bottle 
of beer and that went directly to the farmer, directly to the cost 
of barley? They’d be getting like 12, 15 bucks a bushel for 
barley. And yet at this point many farmers are not getting $1 a 
bushel for barley if they can sell it. 
 
Wheat is at an all-time low. Canola is at an all-time low. Every 
commodity that you could name is at an all-time low and 
farmers are trying, with the money that they can derive on what 
they can sell, to pay these high input costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s other things that this provincial 
government could do if they so wished. And it come up last 
week at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] convention and it goes back even to Tommy 
Douglas days, is the education tax, the highest education tax on 
property in Canada. And that’s something the provincial 
government has the ability to deal with. I believe it has the 
means and the funds right now to deal with it to a degree. They 
don’t have to wipe it completely out in one fell swoop but they 
need to start addressing the issue. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, they saw fit on average to lower the 
education tax on property, according to them, to the tune of 8 
per cent. But on my side of the province, probably my half of 
the province, Mr. Speaker, on the east half, with reassessment 
what has happened? Well what has happened is our assessments 
have gone up so much on farm land on that side, Mr. Speaker, 
that when the smoke cleared our education tax has gone up 
anywhere from 20 to 30 to 40, in some cases 50 per cent higher 
than it was before this government actually put the 8 per cent in 
for education tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know how the foundation grant 
works. The foundation grant works on assessments within a 
school division. So the school divisions have no choice. In 
many cases the foundation grant was lowered in their areas so 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

they have nowhere to turn but the local property tax payer, 
which in this case many of them out in rural Saskatchewan are 
farmers and it’s on farm land. And, Mr. Speaker, it is without a 
doubt the most unfair tax that we have in this province. It’s not 
based on the ability to pay. If it was, farmers probably wouldn’t 
be paying any education tax this fall because they don’t have 
any cash and there’s not the ability to pay. 
 
What we’ve saw in the last 14 years under this NDP 
government the shift from 40/60 — 60 by the government, 40 
by the property owners — that shift has totally gone the other 
way. And in many cases there’s zero per cent boards out there 
that get absolutely nothing from the provincial government. 
And the local taxpayer, the local property owner is expected to 
pick up 100 per cent. And something that the Education 
minister talked about last session was we have to deal with 
these zero boards; we have to even this out. 
 
Well I don’t think for a minute by making the bigger, larger 
areas out there is going to deal with that problem at all. In fact 
we’re going to be right back to where we were before very, very 
quickly and what is going to happen is our farmers are even 
going to be asked to pay a larger portion of education tax. And 
someone said here earlier today that the Premier, and he did, he 
told SARM, I think at two different conventions, Mr. Speaker, 
the status quo is not on. 
 
And I guess the SARM people and the convention people 
believed him. They didn’t realize that what he meant is, we’re 
not going leave the education tax on property where it is on my 
side of the province. We’re going to raise it. We’re going to 
charge you more, we’re going to make you pay more at a time 
when we certainly can’t afford to pay more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I talked a little bit about before and we’ve 
talked about this before in here, that the NDP roots going back 
to I believe it’s August 31, 1944, we read a quote in here and I 
think the members really took notice that day when we read it. I 
want to read it again: 
 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 
as we get the new sources of revenue to take the place of 
the revenue now realized from that tax. When we develop 
new sources of revenue sufficient to supplant the revenue 
now raised from the tax, we shall do away with the tax 
because we consider it regressive legislation. 
 

Said the premier of the day. That premier, Mr. Speaker, was 
Tommy Douglas. 
 
Now this government every election — in fact in between the 
elections quite often but especially at election time — they prop 
Tommy up, bring about and say vote for us because Tommy did 
everything right, and we’re Tommy’s disciples. I don’t believe 
for a minute there’s a member on that side of the House that has 
enough class and respect to tie Tommy’s shoes, Mr. Speaker. 
They do not have it. Tommy did some good things for this 
province. These people were certainly not around when Tommy 
was doing them because if they had have been, they might have 
learned something from those days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, never in the history of Saskatchewan, in my time 
in Saskatchewan, my time on this earth, have I seen a 

government neglect part of society as such as they are 
neglecting our farmers. And that Ag minister, Mr. Speaker, as 
we heard in question period today, is busy doing other things 
than representing the farmers in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to go on and on about this 
issue, but there’s many members on this side of the House that 
want to speak to this issue. And I think having explained to 
these people exactly what is going on in agriculture — and I 
believe there’s a number of them on that side are already know 
but are scared to say anything — but I think they understand 
that our farmers need help, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask today 
that the Ag minister and the Premier would get on the phone, do 
whatever it takes, a email, every federal Liberal MP [Member 
of Parliament] that there is, get a hold of them and get the point 
across that we have tremendous problems in the farming 
community in this province. 
 
We need help, Mr. Speaker. It should have been months ago 
that this message and this point was got across to them. But it’s 
never too late, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe being that there is a federal election looming, whether 
it’s early January, whether it’s in February. Mr. Goodale I 
believe has got more billions of dollars sitting there, and I 
believe they want to win the next election. And if they want to 
play politics by putting 2 or $3 billion into Saskatchewan 
agriculture, I’m all for it. Won’t tell you how I’ll vote, Mr. 
Speaker, and I won’t tell you if it’ll buy me, and I don’t know if 
it’ll buy any farmers. But I will tell you it’ll certainly help the 
economy of this province, and it will certainly help the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So this, Mr. Speaker, at this time, seconded 
by the member for Kindersley, I move the motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 
completely ignoring the current agriculture crisis in its 
November 14, 2005, economic update; and that this 
Assembly condemn the provincial government for its 
failure to raise the importance of the current agriculture 
crisis with the federal government. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats and seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 
completely ignoring the current agriculture crisis in its 
November 14, 2005, economic update; and that this 
Assembly condemn the provincial government for its 
failure to raise the importance of the current agriculture 
crisis with the federal government. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to join in the debate today. And as the 
amendment states, we should be condemning our federal 
government for its complete failure of agricultural policy across 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

this country. 
 
It’s come to my attention that it is not just Saskatchewan 
farmers right now that are hurting; it is farmers in Canada that 
are hurting. Farmer receipts were the lowest, the lowest, Mr. 
Speaker, federally in the last 25 years. This is a deplorable 
situation. It’s been put forth by BSE. It’s been put forth by farm 
subsidies internationally, and it’s something that has not been 
addressed in any meaningful way by the federal Liberal 
government. It’s continued to fail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas where it’s devastated Western 
Canadian farmers, the repeal of the Crow freight rate has caused 
cereal grain farmers to see a third of their gross production costs 
now going into freight. That’s something that at the same time 
that this was yanked, there was no market freedom allowed for 
farmers to develop their business plans and from that gain 
access to new markets. No instead we had a wheat board that 
keeps taking our grain, demanding that we sign contracts for it, 
and failing to honour those contracts. 
 
Now with that being said, Mr. Speaker, that is the reality on the 
federal side. But I’ve had the privilege of living in three 
different provinces. I’ve lived in the province of British 
Columbia in the beautiful capital city of Victoria for four years. 
I’ve lived in the capital of Ontario, in Toronto, also for five and 
a half years. I’ve worked on Bay Street, Mr. Speaker. And I can 
tell you when the rest of the country thinks about 
Saskatchewan, what they think about first and foremost is 
farmers. We are the farming centre of this nation. We have 48 
per cent of the arable acres and the best farmers in the world, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we completely fail and have failed more miserably 
than at any time in our history, Mr. Speaker, is to have a 
Minister of Agriculture who has a clue about what’s going on in 
this industry and making that case to Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, the CAIS program had 
potential, and this minister completely dropped the ball. They 
have forced farm families into bankruptcy. They are closing 
rural communities. They are pitting family against family, 
community against community, and they will continue to do it 
because they are callous, and it serves their political interest. 
And that is the only reason, Mr. Speaker. It is not incompetence 
alone because one individual or one party could not raise that 
level of incompetence in agriculture. 
 
We hear the Deputy Premier speaking for it. And what has he 
done for agriculture since he has been elected, Mr. Speaker? We 
have seen farm families leave the land. It is more, Mr. Speaker, 
than just a matter of economics. It is a matter of our history. It 
is a matter of what makes our country. Farm stock is good 
stock, Mr. Speaker. Farmers send their children on to 
university, which go on to run the boardrooms of this country. It 
is a failure of this government that they have to do that outside 
this province. 
 
But what do we get, Mr. Speaker? We get time and time again a 

failure to represent our case to the government in Ottawa by this 
NDP government. And they will continue to fail. 
 
And the reason is, Mr. Speaker, not because they don’t 
understand it, not because they don’t understand what is right, it 
is a callousness. This is an intent to fail, Mr. Speaker. It is their 
intent to fail the farmers of this province. It has been, it will 
continue to be, until they are booted out of office, Mr. Speaker. 
And I could tell you the farmers in my area believe this 100 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt about it. There is one sector, one 
sector, Mr. Speaker, that has had a profitable existence in 
agriculture over the last five years, and that’s the 
supply-manage sector. Where is this Minister of Agriculture on 
that sector? 
 
We have 48 per cent of the arable land in this country. We have 
3.9 per cent of the quota. Has he asked for more quota? Has he 
asked to get more dairies coming into Saskatchewan? Has he 
asked for more turkey quota, bird quota, chicken quota, egg 
quota? No, Mr. Speaker, he sat on his hands and will continue 
to fail. 
 
And the reason is, Mr. Speaker, is that it is in his political 
interest to have rural Saskatchewan depopulated; to have small 
towns fight each other for school board office jobs; to have 
people leave this province, go to Alberta, vote for Ralph Klein 
and hopefully have more left for the rest of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality of this Agriculture minister is that he 
did not go forth to put together the CAIS program. And let me 
tell you about this program, Mr. Speaker. We have had 
bureaucrats come forth and tell us, this is designed so that if 
there is one, one, Mr. Speaker, one error that the application is 
rejected and sent back. And why is this the case, Mr. Speaker? 
This is the case because it allows for the creation of 
bureaucratic jobs outside of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Government of Quebec, Mr. Speaker, they do their own 
CAIS administration. Where are those jobs in Saskatchewan? 
Instead they’re around in Winnipeg, Mr. Speaker, around with 
the Canadian Grain Commission and the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
It has been failure after failure after failure on the part of this 
Agriculture minister to have the agriculture industry centred in 
this province, so that at the end of the day when Ottawa wants 
advice, they have to call. They have to call. Not the situation 
they have now where they’re questionable who’s on the other 
end of the line and they don’t bother at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask the minister, Mr. Speaker, if he has any idea what’s 
coming up in the go around of World Trade Organization 
negotiations. There is light at the end of the tunnel possibly. 
What kind of input has he had to our federal minister or our 
foreign minister? Has he told him, you know, if the Europeans 
were to cut back their export subsidies by 80 per cent, maybe 
this would be a good thing? 
 
I pose it to you, Mr. Speaker, what he’s concerned about is 
moving Department of Agriculture jobs out of rural 
Saskatchewan and into the city on the hope that he’s going to 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

buy a vote. That’s where his interest lies, not in the interests of 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell you a little story now. It’s not a 
happy story, Mr. Speaker. It’s about a young boy. He has to ride 
the bus 25 minutes a day, Mr. Speaker, and he comes home. 
And the bus stops outside the driveway of the farm. And the 
farm has a barn and there’s a farmhouse and there’s a barn, and 
his dad’s half-ton is parked with the nose out from behind the 
barn. And so he gets out. It’s been a hard go, Mr. Speaker, for 
this family. And he walks past the barn to that half-ton, to see 
his dad. And he sees his dad, but his dad’s no longer living. 
There’s a gun in the truck. You can draw your own conclusions. 
 
These are the realities that are facing farm families. Is it because 
his father was not a honest man? No, that wasn’t the case. Was 
it because he wasn’t hard working? That was neither the case. 
Was it because he failed to understand his industry? No, that 
was not the case either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was because after years and years and years of things going 
wrong, things beyond their control, things, Mr. Speaker, 
whereby hope broke, and it’s not just the tragedy of that loss of 
life, Mr. Speaker, the destruction that that caused to that family. 
That’s a part of Saskatchewan that has died and will not be 
resurrected. 
 
And when we have a real human face to this kind of story, what 
kind of reaction do we get from this NDP government? I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, we get the same reaction we do when we get 
loud and . . . [inaudible] . . . over the fact that they don’t 
understand the economic side. We get no reaction, Mr. Speaker. 
We get no reaction from a government preventing this from 
occurring. 
 
The member from Melville-Saltcoats alluded to the rise in farm 
suicide. This is a reality. It’s a reality that when we have these 
horrific numbers in other areas of our society, they’re hopefully 
addressed. But these are ones that are addressed in silence. 
They’re addressed in the churches where the community 
members come together. And the real tragedy here is not just 
the loss; it’s from eye-to-eye at those funerals. They’re looking 
at who may be next. 
 
Where is our government on this, Mr. Speaker? Are they 
camped out in Ottawa telling the Minister of Agriculture this is 
what we need? No, Mr. Speaker, they’re not. They’re right here. 
They’re right here silent and incompetent. 
 
What’s the answer, Mr. Speaker? Well perhaps this Minister of 
Agriculture could get on a plane, could take that $300,000 to 
show the Premier next to a zero sign, and do some lobbying in 
Ottawa to bring back the bacon. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, they 
could send officials to put together a farm program that worked. 
But that won’t be the case, Mr. Speaker, because it is politically 
not opportune for them to act on those matters. So they will not. 
They will fail. They will continue to fail. And this minister, this 
minister in particular will act self-righteous and tell the entire 
province — he’ll tell the media — it’s Ottawa that doesn’t get 
it. 
 
You know I’ve lived in Ontario, Mr. Speaker. When people 
from Ontario listen to a Saskatchewan farmer, they believe that 

we know what we’re talking about. This government would like 
to portray our agriculture industry as Green Acres, local yokel, 
driving a 1952 Massey Ferguson tractor . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’44, Massey ’44. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Massey ’44, Mr. Speaker. Just like Lee 
Pearce the NDP candidate that had to parachute in to run 
against me drove — with a lovely picture of the Premier on the 
front of it — down the parade at the Goose Festival in 
Kindersley. This is their idea of forward-looking agriculture. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s not get away from the fact that there was 
a new idea came forth, there was a new idea came forth — 4.8 
million acres of trees, Mr. Speaker. Bravo. I mean, where are 
we going to put these? Are they going to line our streets? 
Who’s going to pay for them? You know I’ve got real worries 
about putting the crop in next year and trying to peg the market 
within 45 days to hit the highest of the PROs [pool return 
outlook]. I suspect that when you plant something for 10 years, 
it means that your return on the investment is going to be 
somewhat lengthened and spaced out. This is a complete, is a 
complete failure to understand the reality of the cash flow 
crunch which exists today in agriculture. 
 
To put money into trees, Mr. Speaker — 4.8 million acres, 
larger than the nation of Wales, Mr. Speaker — and for what? 
Is this a blind attempt for captain potato to rescue Weyerhaeuser 
that suddenly we’ll have trees? You know, we have more than 
half a province of trees now, and they can’t make money. But 
somehow this is the brainchild. This is what is coming forth. 
This is this minister’s answer — 4.8 million acres of trees. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is so ridiculous. It is so ridiculous it defies 
explanation. Have we heard anything from the minister thus far 
about who’s going to pay for the planting of these trees? What 
happens if there’s a forest fire? Mr. Speaker, how does crop 
insurance handle these trees? 
 
You know, we don’t have a lot of trees in the southwest of 
10-25-26. The ones we have, we planted or my 
great-grandparents planted or my parents planted. But there’s 
not a lot of trees there. 
 
I don’t really know how my landlords would react on the 
three-year contracts I have, telling them that I’m taking this 160 
acres and converting it to spruce. It did well for lentils. It did 
well on coriander. But from the direction of our Minister of 
Agriculture, two years after my contract expires I’m going to 
have one great acorn crop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are their answers. They’re ludicrous. 
They’re ludicrous. And maybe we’re going to get a by-product 
of a squirrel-hunting industry. I don’t know if that has been 
spelled out or not yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The long and short of it, Mr. Speaker, is time and time again 
this government has failed Saskatchewan’s farmers, 
Saskatchewan’s farm families. They have cut the coverage on 
crop insurance at the same time that they’ve raised premiums. 
They cancelled the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 
program. They didn’t go to the table on AIDA [agricultural 
income disaster assistance]. Nobody understood how that 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

worked, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t go to the table on CFIP 
[Canadian farm income program]. 
 
And on CAIS, Mr. Speaker, a program that actually had some 
potential, they washed their hands of it and then believe they 
deserve some sort of medal and to say, well we committed to 
this so we’re actually going to commit to it for this year. Next 
year well that’s a different story. We expect that we may be 
committed earlier, but possibly not to the program, Mr. 
Speaker. This is the reality that we get out of this Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
I sat, Mr. Speaker, with a constituent of mine, an old Kindersley 
family; been farming in the area since the ’20s and done very 
well. Good farmers. They don’t know where their equity has 
gone. It rained three days in August; they lost $300,000 when 
their barley went from malt to feed. Hopefully the minister 
understands the difference between the two. 
 
However with that being said I’m not certain that the NDP 
maybe has a plot to convert feed barley to beer and then we 
could own the whole industry there as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is is that farmers have run out of 
money. They’ve run out of equity. And what has this 
government done with regards to our financial institutions? Did 
it have anything to say when the federal government almost 
cancelled the farm improvement loans? Farm improvement 
loans used . . . 80 per cent of them in Canada are used in 
Saskatchewan and 90 per cent of that 80 per cent are used by 
our credit unions. This was going to devastate the industry. 
How come they weren’t up on this, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where is their consistent lobby effort in Ottawa? Why are they 
not there this week? Why are they not there every week? This is 
a multi-billion dollar industry, Mr. Speaker. Every week they 
should be in Ottawa getting results, not sitting behind the bar 
talking like a peacock and understanding precious little. 
 
The reality, Mr. Speaker, there aren’t farmers on that side. They 
don’t get it. They don’t understand the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
you cannot take your CAIS program to the bank because the 
bank has come to realize that this is a bureaucratic nightmare. 
There is no guarantee on receiving funds from it. The formulas 
have changed year after year and the payouts are 18 months, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where has that minister been on that fact? This is something 
that could actually be taken forth to a financial institution. 
Where have they been, Mr. Speaker? Where have they been on 
expanding the supply management, the small sector in our 
province that is making money, Mr. Speaker? Have they raised 
it at all with the federal minister? 
 
[15:00] 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. Plant trees instead. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — We’re going to plant trees, Mr. Speaker, as 
the member from Wood River . . . I know that his area will 
benefit greatly from this. I know that his area, Mr. Speaker, will 
be able to see, will be able to see the trees lining the highway. 
And as they come to plant the trees, Mr. Speaker, bouncing 

along, there may be from time to time that the holes will already 
be dug. And they’ll put the tree in the hole. And now we’ll have 
trees in our highways as well as potholes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Agriculture has failed. He 
continues to fail. What he needs to do is this: go to Ottawa. Get 
us a real deal. Get their attention. Spend that $300,000 on the 
big zero campaign on a lobby effort to put money into the 
pockets of farmers. 
 
It’s a minority government right now, Mr. Speaker. We have 
the most powerful cabinet minister in the country, below the 
Prime Minister, from this province. It shouldn’t be that hard, 
Mr. Speaker. It is complete, complete incompetence, Mr. 
Speaker. Why? Why won’t they do this? I posit to you again, 
Mr. Speaker. It is purely politically callous. They choose not to 
because they know that, regardless, the good people of 
Cannington are not going to vote for them. They’re not going to 
be tricked again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where this government could act — and in another 
demonstration of its mendacious attempt to bleed rural families 
— is on the education portion, education portion of property 
tax, Mr. Speaker. There is, Mr. Speaker, time and time again 
where SARM has been promised this relief and this relief has 
not come. They’ve been told it would come. I was at SARM, 
the mid-term convention here, Mr. Speaker. SARM does not 
believe this government any more. They’ve been misled too 
many times. Their interpretation of what tax relief means, this 
government’s interpretation of what tax relief means, are two 
very, very different things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason that this particular tax is so difficult for 
farmers to endure is that it has no bearing on their income or 
ability to pay. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it is highly suspect the SAMA 
[Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency] assessments 
and the formulas used to determine the assessment, and thereby 
the entire tax amount that will be derived from rural 
Saskatchewan . . . Somehow year after year of recession, year 
after year where we have a quarter of, 160 acres of farm land 
falling in price in the actual commercial movement of that 
property — we have that number falling — yet cumulatively 
the assessment for rural Saskatchewan rises by $6 million. That 
doesn’t sound like a huge number across the entire province. 
But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is try to find a rural 
municipality where the price of farm land’s increased. Herein 
lies the problem. 
 
They tinker, Mr. Speaker, with the formulas used to do the 
assessment so that they can do a larger gouge on the rural 
communities, on the communities least able to pay. We have 19 
rural municipalities now up in arms in a tax revolt. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is sad that it has to come to that, but hence it has 
come to that. 
 
I’m going to read what was put up at SARM at the mid-term 
convention. And it states: 
 

“We are pledged to do away with the education tax as 
soon as we get new sources of revenue to take the place of 
the revenue now realized from that tax. When we develop 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

new sources of revenue sufficient to supplant the revenue 
now raised from the tax we shall do away with the tax 
because we consider it regressive legislation,” said the 
premier. 
 

Tommy Douglas, August 31, 1944. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, a situation where this aspect that greatly 
affects the farm community has gone forth for 60 years — 
promises, promises, promises — but a failure to deliver. They 
took part of the commission’s recommendations on education, 
raised the PST, did the amalgamations. It’s farm children, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s farm children who are very much distant now from 
their small schools who are going to suffer because it’s those 
children that are now not going to go to school at all. They’re 
going to go into correspondence because their parents don’t 
want them on the bus for two and one-half hours a day. And 
then we’re going to wonder, are these children adequately 
prepared? 
 
What has this government done? What has this Agriculture 
minister done? Well they’ve done this to them. They’ve done 
this intentionally. It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker. And like, as I said 
earlier, that farm child that had to come home off the bus to find 
that disturbing scenario behind his family’s barn, this is a result 
of this government’s lack of action. They’re literally killing 
rural Saskatchewan and doing it with full intent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to second the motion. I’m going to 
second the motion. I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, that we will derive 
some answers. The federal government is partially to blame but, 
Mr. Speaker, when you have a complete failure to deliver our 
message, how are they going to know, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We have now the minister of Social Services, Mr. Speaker, 
trying to explain agriculture to our members. We’re enlightened 
by her fact that she has an understanding of freight rate 
subsidies. I would hope that she would also enlighten this 
House by joining in the debate to demonstrate to us the 
correlations between our commodity prices, the rising value of 
the dollar, the monopoly’s ability of the CWB [Canadian Wheat 
Board] of not being able to market our products. 
 
I would hope that she will engage all these issues because I 
think, Mr. Speaker, as the minister of Social Services she would 
have something to say about the trauma that that young man 
who had to walk into his family’s farm, go behind the barn, and 
see what happened to his family because of this government’s 
lack of inaction. I would hope that she would have the decency 
to enter into this debate and have something worthwhile to say 
about it, Mr. Speaker, because that is the situation, Mr. Speaker, 
that farm families and all of Saskatchewan has to deal with, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to second the motion 
and I look forward to having a number of individuals enter in 
on this debate today. Hear, hear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
following my remarks I will move the following amendment to 
the emergency motion. It will read, after the word “updated” all 
those words will be deleted and replaced with the following: 
 

and that this Assembly condemn the federal government 
for its failure to fulfill its commitment to negotiate an 
energy accord for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
I will make that amendment following my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that agriculture, not only in 
Saskatchewan but across this country, is in very dire straits in 
many circumstances. There are those who are successful, those 
who are doing well today, Mr. Speaker, but there are many, 
many who are in dire straits. And there are many circumstances 
that have brought us to this situation as I suspect the members 
opposite know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we welcome today this opportunity for an 
emergency debate on the situation of agriculture because we did 
have some hope that we would hear in the federal Minister of 
Finance’s remarks some support for the agriculture industry in 
this country. We still expect that there may be some 
announcement from the federal Minister of Agriculture when he 
arrives here next week for the federal-provincial ministers’ 
conference. But we are also worried that it will be no more than 
what the announcement in the spring was, Mr. Speaker, an 
announcement of a cash input which was appreciated by many, 
Mr. Speaker, but did nothing to change the circumstances other 
than a short-term fix for a few people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need more than political donations into the 
system. We need more than short-term fixes, Mr. Speaker. 
Agriculture in Canada needs the support of our federal 
government if we are going to be able to compete in the world. 
There is no other country in the world, Mr. Speaker, that 
expects its states or provinces to compete against other federal 
treasuries, and yet that is where this federal government leaves 
us. And so we clearly identify that they are the root cause of 
many of the problems that we are facing today in agriculture. 
 
I would like to go through a number of the things that have 
happened over the last couple of decades here in this province 
that have made a significant difference. Mr. Speaker, when the 
federal Conservatives were in power, they initiated a split 
between the federal government and the provincial governments 
in terms of the cost of agriculture programming — a split of 
60/40. When the current Liberal government came into power 
under the former prime minister, they adopted the 60/40 split 
for agriculture. And I can tell you . . . And I think again that the 
members opposite understand this and are well aware of the 
impact of this kind of division on a province where we have so 
much of our economy being agriculture. 
 
When we are in difficult straits here, for us to pay 40 per cent of 
the cost of those programs when so much of our economy, so 
many of our people are hurting, Mr. Speaker, this kind of split 
simply hits this province so inordinately compared to the other 
provinces that we can only feel that the federal government 
simply has written off Saskatchewan and abandoned us, Mr. 
Speaker. 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

When we looked at the numbers when the CAIS program came 
in, we began to look at what the relative costs were. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this province, given those numbers, was being 
expected to pay 10 times the provincial per capita average in 
order to fund this program, Mr. Speaker — 10 times the 
provincial per capita average. Well, Mr. Speaker, after much 
struggling and really working hard to pull the money together, 
we were able to fully fund that first year of the CAIS program. 
It was not easy and we struggled hard to get the federal 
government to acknowledge the inequity across the nation. 
They did not, Mr. Speaker. They have not yet acknowledged 
that inequity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that over the past couple of 
years as I have been Minister of Agriculture, I have worked 
very, very hard with the other provincial ministers, and we now 
have unanimity all across the nation. Every provincial 
Agriculture minister has stood with us to say that the system is 
inequitable, and we need to change CAIS. It is not fair, Mr. 
Speaker. And we have put forward a proposal that is 
unanimously supported that says when margins drop below 50 
per cent, the federal government must cover it all because at 
that point, Mr. Speaker, it is a disaster. We worked very closely 
with our neighbouring province, Alberta, and we came up with 
a program that we know will help in dealing with this program. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is only one of the fixes that needed to 
happen to the CAIS program. There are many more that need to 
happen. 
 
One of the other fixes, Mr. Speaker, was with regard to the 
deposits. The deposits on the CAIS program, Mr. Speaker, were 
very, very difficult for many people to manage. And we worked 
very hard to take the deposit off completely. We were not 
successful in getting the deposit removed, Mr. Speaker. But I 
can tell you at getting it at the point four five per cent really did 
reduce it to a point where it was negligible. And most farmers 
then were able to go into this program and at least get whatever 
levels of support were available through the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also been very, very important for us 
over this last number of years to recognize some of the other 
changes. There was that 60/40 split that has hit Saskatchewan 
so hard. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I also want to talk about the Crow rate and the changes there, 
Mr. Speaker, because behind the taking off of the Crow rate 
there were actually some good ideas, the need to value-add on 
agriculture. And we wanted to see that happen, Mr. Speaker. 
But taking the Crow rate off had one single effect because there 
was not the one corresponding investment put back into the 
province, $500 million a year. Mr. Speaker, $500 million a year 
was simply pulled from the Saskatchewan economy — money 
that could have been used to help develop those value-added 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker; money that could have been used to 
help build up the transportation system in this province which is 
in need of having much, much heavier duty highways to handle 
that value-added agriculture development and industry 
development in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That has been raised time and again with the federal 
government; I raised it as Transportation minister, and I’ve 

raised it many times as Agriculture minister. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we try to point out to them that if that kind of investment were 
made, we would move ahead in this province, and we would not 
be so dependent on their support on every issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, have they come to the table on that front? No, 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve exulted, they’ve exulted in their $10 
billion surpluses, their $13 billion surpluses, and we have paid, 
Mr. Speaker, we have paid dearly. Five hundred million dollars 
a year for the Crow rate being removed and no corresponding 
investment to make up for that, Mr. Speaker, or to help out our 
rural or our agricultural economy from whom that $500 million 
a year was drawn. Mr. Speaker, the federal government 
abandoned us on the Crow rate when they pulled it out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also abandoned us in ’94 and ’95. They were 
at world trade talks, Mr. Speaker. What did they do? Mr. 
Speaker, what did they do? They chose to be an example to the 
other nations and simply cut our subsidies, a unilateral decision. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity and the honour to go 
down to Ottawa in 1999, shortly after I was elected, with a 
delegation of members opposite and members of municipal 
government, farm organizations, to lobby the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, because you know what that subsidy 
grab took out of our economy, Mr. Speaker? I bet the members 
opposite know. They were there, some of them. A billion 
dollars a year, Mr. Speaker. Another billion scooped out of the 
agricultural economy of this province by this federal 
government, Mr. Speaker, and they celebrate their big surplus. 
Mr. Goodale smiles about the wonderful surplus. Mr. Speaker, 
that is wrong. 
 
We’re talking now $1.5 billion annually scooped from the 
agricultural economy in Saskatchewan by this federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. There is no justifying that kind of a 
scoop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about one other area that has 
had significant impact on the broad economy of this province 
and, Mr. Speaker, one that the Premier has referenced many 
times and one that has to be changed, one which we are dealing 
with now. And, Mr. Speaker, that is with regard to the energy 
accord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are being abandoned in this province by a 
federal government that has made deals with Newfoundland, 
Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker. If we were getting the kind of deals 
that they were getting — exactly the same so that there was 
some equity in this nation, Mr. Speaker, some fairness in this 
nation — if we weren’t getting the big fat zero that the federal 
government has been pushing on us around this issue, Mr. 
Speaker, we would be getting somewhere between 5 and $700 
million for that Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
$2 billion a year would make a lot of difference to our ability to 
be able to shore up rural Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have been abandoned by this federal government, and I have 
heard nothing substantial. And I tell you I have been pushing as 
hard as I can push on the federal minister to get some answers, 
to get some changes, and so, Mr. Speaker, have many other 
members of our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also important to note that we have asked for 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

support from the members opposite in trying to get a better 
deal. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province need to 
know that that support has been very, very minimal. 
Occasionally we’ll get a supportive comment and that is 
appreciated, no question. But overall, Mr. Speaker, very, very 
little support. 
 
We called for support from the federal Conservatives, Mr. 
Speaker, because the federal Conservative government owns 
many of the seats in this province right now. They hold many of 
the seats in this province, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, very, 
very little from those people in terms of helping us. For some 
reason, Mr. Speaker, instead of dealing with their federal 
responsibilities they turned around and shot at a provincial 
government that was working hard to try and get a fair deal for 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. Why, Mr. Speaker? Cheap 
politics, nothing more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want a fair deal for the farmers of this province. That’s 
what we’ve been working for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other areas that we have done, 
worked hard with farmers to try and get a better deal for 
Saskatchewan. One of the other issues, Mr. Speaker, that we 
had to deal with was the whole issue of BSE because our 
agriculture sector was hurting so significantly as a result of that 
disease and the resulting border closure and the politics that was 
being played in the US [United States] around that issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government came to the table, put the money on the table 
for every one of the programs that were brought forward, Mr. 
Speaker, to make sure that we could put some stability into the 
livestock industry, to make sure that the support would be there 
for Saskatchewan cattle producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am thankful to say that, though that issue is not 
completely behind us, with that support — and there was 
support from the federal government. I must acknowledge that 
there was support through that, Mr. Speaker — we were able to 
weather that period. And things are starting to turn around and 
look better in the livestock area, Mr. Speaker, and we’re glad to 
see that. 
 
I think it’s also important to note, Mr. Speaker, there is one 
further item that has seriously impacted not just the rural 
economy, but significantly the rural economy of Saskatchewan 
and significantly the agriculture sector where so much of what 
we produce in this province is exported, Mr. Speaker. And that 
is the value of the dollar. 
 
The rising value of the dollar has taken arguably somewhere 
between 20 and 30 per cent from the return to producers, Mr. 
Speaker, and that hurts deeply. Mr. Speaker, this is something 
over which we have very, very little control, but it’s a fact of 
life that the farmers and manufacturers in this province are 
dealing with, particularly those in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the other areas, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite 
raised it and I think it’s a very, very important issue — it’s also 
one that Mr. Wayne Easter the Parliamentary Secretary for 
Agriculture pointed out — and that is around the cost of inputs. 
Mr. Speaker, there has been no break from any of those 

companies that have been making significant dollar in this 
industry. 
 
Last year I asked for a meeting with former Agriculture 
minister in this province, Lorne Hepworth, who is now with a 
consortium of major farm chemical companies. And I pointed 
out to him the kind of situation that we were in, the kind of dire 
straits that many of our farmers were facing. 
 
And there was a lot of controversy going on around own-use 
inputs, particularly around glyphosate, Mr. Speaker, which 
would be a generic chemical similar to Roundup, Mr. Speaker, 
which most people would be familiar with. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have been . . . We pressed the federal government to change 
regulations to make it easier for farmers to be able to get the 
generic product because it was significantly less, somewhere 
between two and greater dollars less than what some of the 
name brand glyphosates were, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only did we do that, when I met with Mr. Hepworth, I 
said, Mr. Hepworth, your companies, the companies you 
represent have made a lot of money off the farmers in 
Saskatchewan and continue to make a lot of money. Don’t you 
think that looking at our circumstances today and looking at 
where those people are who are your loyal customers, that you 
could cut the prices some, cut your profits just a little to help 
out the producers through this very difficult time? The answer 
is, you want to see the 25-year plan. The 25-year plan has the 
farmers working for those companies, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s where they’re headed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned about this because there are people 
who want to own their land. They want the independence of 
farm life. And, Mr. Speaker, there certainly is a lot of work in 
this nation and in this world to undermine that possibility. And I 
find that discouraging and troubling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we still are continuing to press for the pest 
management regulation agency to make it more possible to get 
the generic chemicals which will help maximize returns for our 
producers, particularly those chemicals which have wide use in 
the province, like glyphosate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well a number of the things that we’ve talked about as well 
around agriculture certainly have been — from my perspective 
— have really looked at trying to build a solid agriculture for 
the future, Mr. Speaker. We have sought to find ways where, 
with whatever resources we can pull together, that we could 
make strategic investments that really would help the industry 
to move ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recently had opportunity to be up in Melfort 
where one of the members opposite holds a seat, Mr. Speaker, 
just to show that it’s not all about politics, Mr. Speaker. We 
were up there to try and help a couple of companies along in 
their process of developing meat processing in the province, 
Mr. Speaker, and also to advance the toll processing because, 
Mr. Speaker, we are convinced that if we can put dollars in, we 
can provide support in these strategic areas. We will see an 
increase in the effectiveness of those industries in the province. 
And it will bring more jobs to rural Saskatchewan. And it will 
bring more security for farmers who are able to sell into our 
own domestic markets, Mr. Speaker. 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

And if you look at that in the broadest picture, the way that this 
will work, Mr. Speaker, is that there is need for livestock to be 
able to put through those meat processing systems. We can 
finish those animals right here in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
because we have abundant feed. That feed is sold into the 
process for feeding these animals. They’re slaughtered and 
processed here in Saskatchewan, and then we sell the 
value-added products outside the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we are working with private industry to develop these 
industries across the province to try and strengthen them by 
whatever way we can provide support, Mr. Speaker. Why? 
Because we do care. Because we do have a vision for where 
agriculture can successfully go in the future, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re doing everything we can — putting our money right 
where our mouth is — to try and make sure that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the items that was mentioned — and it’s 
not particularly under my portfolio but one that I find quite 
interesting — is the whole issue of ag forestry. And In ag 
forestry I just want to say very clearly that despite what seems 
to be a real flim-flam around everything that’s going on, that 
there is absolutely no federal money that’s been put on the table 
to help move ag forestry ahead. And so I think that’s very 
important that the people of this province know that because 
certainly it was represented differently by the federal Minister 
of Finance. But certainly our Minister of Industry and 
Resources has made clear that that was not the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But because one of the members opposite chose to mock out 
this area, which actually does hold some promise for some 
farmers in the province, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to talk a little 
bit about some of the work that has gone on around ag forestry. 
And it is a hopeful area for many farmers within the province. 
 
I attended and spoke at an ag forestry conference here in Regina 
last year, Mr. Speaker. And there was tremendous interest from 
quite a number of farmers from around the province. And the 
vision around ag forestry isn’t that you just kind of immediately 
go in and plant the crops, Mr. Speaker, and reap a return. Yes it 
is long term. But the planting is long term. It’s staged, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s particularly helpful for those who are going 
into farming or who are looking for passing on their farms 
through the generations as well, Mr. Speaker, because it is a 
long-term crop that can provide some stability and is one which 
is nicely rotated through the years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is interest and there is possibility of 
selling those products — the trees that are grown there — into a 
domestic market which again helps increase the value-add. 
Whether it’s ethanol or wood fibre products, Mr. Speaker, it can 
help move this forward. And we do want to see jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan, and we know that ag forestry is possible. 
 
And just for a little enlightenment for the member from 
Kindersley who was talking about planting a lot of spruce trees 
and laughing about it and then laughing about the harvest of 
acorns you’d get, acorns actually come from oak trees not 
spruce trees. I hope his members will fill him in on that. 
 
It’s very important, Mr. Speaker, I think to take seriously the 
kind of interests that people in this province have. And many of 

our farmers are interested in the possibilities that are there with 
ag forestry, and we are working with them to try and help build 
viable industries on the area where their interests are clearly 
pointed out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also see some real developments on a number 
of fronts. One of those areas certainly has been organic where 
there have been expanding markets. I had the privilege last year 
of being in Germany for the BioFach conference which is one 
of the largest organics conferences in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
And I had opportunity there to help represent Saskatchewan and 
Canadian producers and to talk with buyers from Europe to 
encourage them to look at our Saskatchewan and Canadian 
products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very, very proud of our organic producers 
there because around the Canadian pavilion it was very clear 
that Saskatchewan producers are committed to this industry; 
they’re putting their investment there. We are supporting them, 
Mr. Speaker. And at the banquet following this event, an 
American representative came up to one of our party and said, 
you know you people from Saskatchewan have really 
embarrassed us. You’ve put on such a very, very good show 
here. People know that you’re here. And, Mr. Speaker, when 
you’re trying to market, that’s what it’s about. People know that 
we’re here, know that we’re out there, that we’re marketing 
Saskatchewan’s very, very good organic products. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we will continue to see positive growth in the organics 
industry in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s some question that was raised by members 
opposite about the connections with the agriculture community 
and the kind of work that goes on there. I have to say that I have 
been very privileged as Minister of Agriculture to work with a 
wide, wide variety of agriculture groups, and those are 
everywhere from the more municipal area working with SARM 
and their executive, Mr. Speaker, and working with the BSE 
group made up of producers, Mr. Speaker, to our farm support 
review committee. Mr. Speaker, there are a large number of 
groups of producers that I meet regularly with, that I listen to 
for not only for advice, Mr. Speaker, but to hear clearly the 
circumstances that they as farmers in this province and people 
involved in the agriculture industry are facing. 
 
Working with them, Mr. Speaker, we found areas where there 
was . . . that needed to be addressed. There were concerns that 
lenders might be pulling back, that they might not be providing 
the kind of support that farmers needed. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
we were able to meet with the lenders and deal with some of the 
rumour that was out there and to find out that in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, they were continuing to provide support and that they 
were dealing with farmers on an individual basis and still 
providing a fairly good level of support. 
 
All that said, Mr. Speaker, is not in any way to minimize the 
very, very dire straits that many farmers in Saskatchewan are 
facing because there are many of them who, in terms of cash, 
are strapped. Mr. Speaker, there are farmers who have been 
going into their assets. Mr. Speaker, this has been a very, very 
difficult time. 
 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

But any, any kind of assumption or comment or question that 
would intimate in any way that this government has not been 
there, that this government has not put the money forward that 
we could to support this industry is simply wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
It is wrong. 
 
I want to tell you about the finances that we have put into this 
industry because we believe in it, because we want to see 
success in agriculture, Mr. Speaker — $1.2 billion in the last 
two years; 1.2 billion to support this industry, Mr. Speaker, 
$650 million for the ’04-05 fiscal year. This is far, far more 
than any other province puts in on a per capita basis, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when we look at the comparison between the province and 
the federal government, if you take off the tax breaks, Mr. 
Speaker, and you just simply look at the investment that we 
make, over $400 million per capita . . . or $400 per capita put 
into agriculture, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan. For Canada, 
what do you think it is? Seventy-four dollars per capita, Mr. 
Speaker. We have been abandoned by our federal government 
in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over $400 million put into agriculture. The 
province closest to us in terms of the amount per capita put in 
would be Prince Edward Island at just somewhere over 200 
million. Next Manitoba and Alberta at just under 200 million. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s just bizarre, bizarre to suggest in any way that 
this NDP government does not care about agriculture in this 
province. We have been making the investments, Mr. Speaker, 
far beyond what any other province has been making and 
certainly far beyond what the federal government is doing. 
 
Member opposite says, oh what about Alberta? Well let’s just 
take a look at Alberta, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to look at Alberta. 
Even with their new program in place, Mr. Speaker, even with 
their new program which is offside with the rest of the nation, a 
program that they can put in, Mr. Speaker, they said they were 
putting it in as a pilot project. But no, they’re putting it in, Mr. 
Speaker, despite the fact that we’re looking for a broad federal 
program that will support farmers all across this nation at a 
similar level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the three years the clear estimate is that they 
will be, Mr. Speaker, over $300 million less in terms of their 
support, actual dollars in their support for the farmers in Alberta 
than we are here in Saskatchewan. Real dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what it’s about. That, Mr. Speaker, is our clear estimate 
from our department, Mr. Speaker, second to none, second to 
none in terms of our support for this industry. So any 
suggestion from members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is naive, 
ignorant, or just simply ludicrous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there need to be changes to the 
programs. We know that very clearly. And we will continue to 
work as hard as we can press. And we will continue to try and 
form strategic alliances with the other provinces to get these 
changes made, Mr. Speaker. Because if they won’t pay 
attention to us because we’re just 1 million people, and if the 
one Liberal member from this province doesn’t have the 
strength to stand up for us, Mr. Speaker, then we know that we 
have to have strategic alliances with the other provinces. And so 
we’ve been forming those alliances. That’s why we have 

unanimity, Mr. Speaker, on the equity program, and that’s what 
we’re working for there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to see a successful industry in this 
province. We know that our producers are efficient. We know 
they produce the highest quality products. And we want to see 
them be able to succeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the members opposite asked about the whole issue of 
supply manage, Mr. Speaker. And clearly in the long-term 
national plan for supply manage, one of the items that they refer 
to is comparative advantage. And this province clearly has 
comparative advantage in terms of supply management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of our space it is much better in terms of 
disease control to have livestock operations here in this 
province. You don’t have the same kind of concentration for 
fowl that you would have along the Fraser Valley, Mr. Speaker, 
and so your disease control can be better here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have feed — this is part of comparative 
advantage — significant, good feed that would enable us to 
build a larger dairy industry here, to build a larger chicken 
industry here, Mr. Speaker. And we have pushed that with the 
federal government. We’ve pushed it with the marketing 
boards, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
push that. And we will take the legal channels necessary to try 
and get a fair deal for Saskatchewan supply manage, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s something else that I think is very, very 
important for us as we look at the success or failure of 
agriculture, not just in Saskatchewan but in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is the issue of world trade. 
 
And in world trade, Mr. Speaker, because we have had so many 
disparate voices in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, there was the 
Western Wheat Growers and groups like them that really do not 
feel supportive of the Canadian Wheat Board as it stands. And 
on the other hand you’ve got the wheat board and its many 
supporters across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got 
the supply managed industry. All represent very different points 
of view as we move towards the world trade talks. 
 
And so sometimes when you get into those kind of forums 
where there is so many things in the balance, to have all these 
different voices means that we do not have the kind of strength 
that we need — not just as a province but as a nation — to be 
able to accomplish what needs to be accomplished. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on that front again we look to form alliances. I 
called together the broadest table that I could in this province, a 
round table of various representatives from industry to sit and to 
work together to try and get, if not a consensus, at least a 
highest common denominator that we could agree to as our 
focus for those world trade talks, Mr. Speaker. Not only did we 
meet around the round table but we selected out of that group a 
subcommittee and tasked them with finding that highest 
common denominator. They will be reporting back to me and to 
the larger committee soon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we go to those WTO [World Trade 
Organization] talks, we want to have the strongest possible 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

position that we can have for Saskatchewan farmers and for 
Canadian agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And that is the kind of work 
that is going on. Producers involved, producer organizations 
involved, Mr. Speaker — guiding, challenging, pushing to get 
the best position that we can possibly get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to successful agriculture in this 
province. We are committed to successful development for rural 
Saskatchewan in this province. Mr. Speaker, there are a whole 
number of other issues that we have been working diligently on 
with a variety of groups because it’s not just about this NDP 
government. It’s about the canola growers. It’s about the wheat 
growers. It’s about the wheat board, about the NFU [National 
Farmers Union]. It’s about APAS [Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan]. And it’s about the kind of 
dreams and visions that they have for this province and we can 
work with them to make a stronger vision, Mr. Speaker. And 
we can help with the kind of regulation that we can put in place 
to help build these industries for the future. 
 
One of those industries, Mr. Speaker, that we have already 
taken some action on and we have seen some building on but 
there’s still more potential, is the ethanol industry, Mr. Speaker. 
We will see further growth in this industry of renewable fuels, 
not just ethanol but biodiesel, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, these fuels are renewable, they’re easier on the 
environment, and we can have the whole loop right here. The 
production, the sales, Mr. Speaker, we can do it here in 
Saskatchewan. And our primary producers can get the return, 
Mr. Speaker. We are working with the producers and the 
producer groups on these fronts so that we can have successful 
industry here in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many other things that we have been doing, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know that the member from Yorkton, our 
Deputy Premier, would like to also address some of these 
issues. But I just think it’s very . . . I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, 
that the members opposite are clearly saying that they want to 
go after the federal government for a fair deal as well. 
 
They did say, Mr. Speaker, and it’s in Hansard, they did say 
that they would be with us if we fully funded CAIS and I 
perceive that to be the case now. I’m thankful for that because I 
know even though we have many differences and even though 
they seem to enjoy the personal attacks, Mr. Speaker, the fact is 
if we pull together as a legislature, we can be stronger in trying 
to get good results for the people in this province who are 
suffering and who need our support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m thankful that they have brought forward their motion 
but, Mr. Speaker, it is in my opinion a little misguided, a little 
misdirected. And so we have an amendment, Mr. Speaker, that 
will look at the broader picture. And at this point, Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to move that amendment that, Mr. Speaker, I 
move: 
 

That all the words after the word “updated” in the original 
motion be deleted and replaced with the following: 
 
and that this Assembly condemn the federal government 
for its failure to fulfill its commitment to negotiate an 
energy accord for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. member from 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, seconded by the member for Yorkton that 
the motion be amended by: 
 

That all the words after the word “updated” be deleted and 
replaced with following; 
 
and that this Assembly condemn the federal government 
for its failure to fulfill its commitment to negotiate an 
energy accord for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased this afternoon to enter into the debate as it relates 
to the lack of sufficient funding, I think adequately put by the 
federal government, in maintaining a stronger Saskatchewan 
agricultural industry. For that matter, Mr. Speaker, a stronger 
Canadian agricultural industry. 
 
I want to say first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
listening this afternoon both to the very eloquent speech that 
was given, Mr. Speaker, by the Minister of Agriculture on the 
issues that he’s attempted to pursue and pursued in trying to 
make a difference for agriculture in Saskatchewan. And I 
listened with some interest both to the two speakers from the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, in relationship 
to the motion and the seconding of the motion. And I want to 
speak briefly, Mr. Speaker, if I might about some of the issues 
of which I heard and where I think this particular industry is 
going. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for the last four years, five 
years to work very closely with the body of men and women 
who represent all of rural Saskatchewan called the action 
committee on the rural economy, Mr. Speaker. And why I want 
to preface some of my comments this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is 
because in all of the research and work, which by the way, 
Madam Speaker, has not been endorsed only by the men and 
women who did the work, but it’s been endorsed, Mr. Speaker, 
by people who serve in this Assembly irrespective of what their 
political affiliations or associations might be. They’ve had an 
opportunity to examine the work of ACRE [action committee 
on the rural economy] in Saskatchewan. They’ve had an 
opportunity to speak about the work of ACRE in Saskatchewan 
and have given it credit, Madam Deputy Speaker, for the kind 
of work that they’ve done. 
 
And I find it passingly strange today, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
in the House today where you have the opposition members 
stand up and say that the reason why agriculture is going to hell 
in a handbasket is because it has to do with the provincial 
government, Madam Speaker. And we hear that from the 
members opposite on a regular basis. 
 
It was just only about a little bit more money for agriculture. 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

Then you know what? And we got rid of the NDP? You know 
what? We would have a better agricultural industry in 
Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And there is absolutely no evidence to support that in the work 
that men and women have been doing in this province for the 
last five years. Not by the academia who serve in the 
universities, Madam Speaker. Not by the members of the 
federal government, Madam Deputy Speaker. Not by men and 
women who live and work in rural Saskatchewan today. There 
is absolutely no evidence to the position of which the official 
opposition is making today. 
 
Because this is what’s happened in Saskatchewan that ACRE 
has identified. You’ve had a massive shift in the agri-industry, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, where in fact today you have only but 
30,000 people who live in rural Saskatchewan as opposed to 
70,000 in urban, which is an absolute complete shift over the 
last 60 years. There’s been an absolutely complete shift in that 
period of time. 
 
And the other thing of which they’re saying is that this has 
happened because people have made those decisions in rural 
Saskatchewan because the farms have gotten bigger. And not 
only did it get bigger in Saskatchewan, they got bigger in the 
Midwest of the US. They’ve gotten bigger in Manitoba. 
They’ve gotten bigger in Alberta. 
 
And all of the evidence that Mr. Partridge has presented at the 
University of Saskatchewan just recently out of his rural 
department of agriculture, in the department of agriculture, 
makes all of those statements — that agriculture has had a 
major, major shift over the last 50 years. 
 
And it isn’t about putting additional money into the industry to 
make it survive because there is evidence all over the place that 
show that governments across Canada and North America have 
put tons of money in it to prop the industry up, and it is 
struggling. It is struggling. When I listen to the members 
opposite, they appear to say that they have the corner on 
knowing what should be done in agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have only but a 
small farm today in Saskatchewan. We farm about 1,700 acres 
on our farm together, my brother and I. And we seeded this 
spring a variety of crops. We had six crops on our farm this 
year. And our production this year was as good as it’s ever been 
in many years. And we’ve got grain piled outside which we 
haven’t yet been able to market. And it’s a pretty good quality, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s pretty good quality. 
 
But you know what? The price of that commodity today — 
which every farmer in Saskatchewan is facing today — is in the 
tank. The price of what we got for our commodity today is 
lower than it’s been in the last 20 years. We are getting today 
the cheapest, the poorest return for what we produce on our 
farm in the history of the last 20 years. And the members 
opposite know that. The members opposite know that. We all 
know. 
 
We don’t need to recite the problems in Saskatchewan that 
agriculture producers are facing by saying yes, we have high 
input costs. We all know that we have high input cost. We 

know that fuel prices have gone up. We all know that the fuel 
prices have gone up. We know that there’s been an increase in 
property taxes and fewer people who are paying the property 
taxes. We know that. 
 
But who over there, who over there, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
has stood up in the last two speeches that they gave and said 
this is what we should be doing for Saskatchewan producers in 
Saskatchewan? Not a word. Not a word. They recite, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, what the issues are today in Saskatchewan, 
which we all know what the issues are in Saskatchewan. But 
not a word about what the solution should be. Not one word 
about the solution. 
 
And I say why there is no solution, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 
because they don’t know what the solution is. They don’t have 
any idea what the solution should be. And they got 25 members 
over there who run about rural Saskatchewan and say that we 
have the answer. And what are they doing? The member from 
Kelvington, Kelvington-Wadena was on a combine a couple of 
weeks ago taking pictures of water — water, guys combining in 
the water. And what does she say? She said boy, I tell you, you 
know the farmers are in trouble over here. 
 
Well we were in Nipawin right after the rains, and we know that 
the farmers are in trouble. And we provided for those producers 
in that area an opportunity to draw on the disaster program. And 
what did the member opposite do? She took pictures of it, not 
only on her own but with her good buddy Mr. Breikreutz; with 
her good buddy Mr. Breikreutz, the good old Conservative from 
our area. 
 
And every day they stand up here and they say well, we’re not 
Conservatives. But do you know who they get into bed with the 
first time they get a chance? With their good old Conservative 
buddies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And that’s what they’re doing — and not 
only, not only our good member, not only our good member 
from Kelvington-Wadena, but our good friend from Saltcoats. 
 
I was at an event not long ago in Yorkton where we had Mr. 
Harper on the podium. Mr. Harper is on the podium, and he’s 
talking about agricultural policy for Canada. And what does Mr. 
Harper say? Mr. Harper says, you know what we should do? 
We should have today a cost-shared agreement in agriculture 
that is one-third paid by producers, one-third paid by the 
provinces, and one-third paid by the federal government. 
 
And we had both of the members from Saltcoats and 
Kelvington go to the mike and say you know what? Mr. Harper, 
that’s a pretty darn good idea. And I . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Yes you were there. The member from Kelvington was 
there and so was the member from Saltcoats there because I was 
there, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I saw the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena at the event in Yorkton with Mr. Harper. 
And she was there. 
 
And when they said one-third here and one-third here and 
one-third here, you know what that means for me as a 
producer? If I’m picking up one-third of the agriculture subsidy 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

programs, it means an escalation in my premium on every front, 
is what it means. 
 
And this is what we have our good old Conservative friends 
doing here — getting into bed with Mr. Harper in Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan and agreeing to a farm policy which would 
destroy producers in Saskatchewan and in Canada . . . is what it 
would do. And then they have the audacity to stand up and say 
to us that we’re not Conservatives. Because you know what? 
These people are as clearly Conservatives that we’ve ever seen, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and they’re exactly in the very same 
camp. 
 
Why don’t we have, why don’t we have on one occasion, why 
don’t we have on one occasion, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
opposition say to us what their solutions to this problem would 
be? I listened on GX Radio not more than a week and a half ago 
— two weeks ago maybe, Madam Deputy Speaker; I can’t 
remember — when the caucus of the Conservative Party met in 
Humboldt. And what did I hear the member from Saltcoats say? 
Well this is what he said. We’re going to Humboldt, and we’re 
going to have a conversation in Humboldt as a caucus, as a 
Conservative caucus. And what we’re going to do is we’re 
going to figure out what’s wrong with agriculture, and we’re 
going to make a statement on agriculture. 
 
And you know what I did? I called into the radio station, and I 
said to Saskatchewan people, well why don’t we just wait until 
they come back out of their meetings? Because when they come 
out of their meetings, we’re going to be able to get some 
measure of direction that the Saskatchewan Conservative Party 
are going to be going. And then what happened is they met in 
Humboldt. They met in Humboldt. And then I heard the next 
day the Leader of the Opposition, the new Conservative Party, 
not one word about agriculture. Not one word about agriculture 
was mentioned coming out of Humboldt. And why is that? 
Because they have no policy on agriculture, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. They have no policy. They have no direction. 
 
And I tell you where the policy is. The policy is in Kindersley. 
That’s where the policy is. Because when the member from 
Kindersley left the last time, he took the agricultural policy with 
him. And when he returns to the legislature, which won’t be all 
that long, Madam Deputy Speaker, because if you’ve got an 
opportunity to make the kind of trade that they’re making, you 
want to take old over new any day from what you see over 
there, Madam Deputy Speaker. And so when the member from 
Kindersley returns in the next little while, not only will be he 
delivering a new agricultural policy; he’ll be delivering a 
speech to be the new leader of the Conservatives because that’s 
what they need, Madam Deputy Speaker — a new leader over 
there. 
 
I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, when the opposition stands up 
and says, what have you done for agriculture today in 
Saskatchewan? You can take a look, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
of this, of the history of this party in supporting agriculture in 
Saskatchewan and being leaders in delivering what we want for 
Canada. 
 
The new CAIS program, Madam Deputy Speaker, wasn’t 
devised by a group of individuals. It was devised by all of the 
Ag ministers in Canada led by the federal government. And 

when we devised a new agricultural farm policy plan, it was 
previously precedented by the old AIDA program. 
 
And I’ve said on other occasions in this House where I haven’t 
had the opportunity to tell the whole story . . . And I expect that 
what will happen when I tell this story, that my member from 
Thunder Creek will stand up and say that that’s not quite right. 
But let me tell the story, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We were, Madam Deputy Speaker, in Ottawa and we took with 
us the member from Saltcoats to that meeting, and we took with 
us, Madam Deputy Speaker, the member from Kindersley to 
that meeting,. And we came home with some money that time 
when we went. We came home with some money collectively, 
and we did some work with our friends from Manitoba. 
 
And then we said before we left, we want to make sure that we 
get a better deal for Saskatchewan Canadian farmers, that we 
don’t have a 60/40 formula. And we also said, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that what we wanted is that we wanted to get rid of the 
AIDA program and replace it with a new system. 
 
And I’ve said on other occasions, Madam Deputy Speaker, and 
I say it again today. Our plane barely touched the ground when 
the member from Saltcoats was already saying, you know 
what? We need to get back to the old 60/40. The province 
should put its money in, and we should cover AIDA. We should 
cover AIDA in the interim. He couldn’t stay with us for two 
minutes, Madam Deputy Speaker, to help us with the farm 
policy. Couldn’t stay with us for two minutes. Why? Because 
it’s only about politics. It’s only about politics. Don’t have any 
idea over there, 25 men and women, about what good 
agriculture farm policy is because they don’t know. They don’t 
have any idea of what it is, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I say, well the member opposite from Saltcoats says how 
many farmers out of there. I’d like to know how many acres the 
member from Saltcoats seeded this given year. Instead of 
standing up and being the critic over there, tell me how many 
acres you’ve seeded, and I bet you I’ll know how many acres 
the member from Saltcoats seeded, Madam Deputy Speaker. He 
seeded this many this year — absolutely this many is what he 
seeded. 
 
And so what you shouldn’t do, Madam Deputy Speaker, is you 
shouldn’t throw stones when you live in a glass house. And the 
member from Saltcoats shouldn’t throw stones. He understands 
some of the issues; I give him that. He understands some of the 
issues, as does the member from Humboldt understand some of 
the issues having been the critic in the past. But I’ll tell you 
what the member from Humboldt didn’t do. She did not 
degrade herself to the kind of debate that I heard in the House 
from the two animated individuals that I heard earlier today on 
the Saskatchewan Conservative Party. She did not do that. 
 
[16:00] 
 
What she did, Madam Deputy Speaker, is she worked with this 
administration on a regular basis through some of the toughest 
times that we had in the province. She did. That’s exactly what 
she did, Madam Deputy Speaker. She helped us through the 
BSE piece. Never tried for a minute to politic around it and to 
divide Saskatchewan people with rural and urban — didn’t do 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

that. Worked through that process, not like what we see today. 
 
What we see today is we see a clear division of what we get 
from a Conservative administration when they have only in 
their mind, power. Only in their mind, power, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and this is what we see today. That kind of a division, 
that kind of a division where they stand up on a regular basis 
and say the solution to agriculture is only about taking a bit 
more money and putting from the treasury into the pot. That’s 
what they’ll need to make a difference. 
 
There isn’t one person today who knows anything about 
agriculture who would say that the way in which you solve the 
agriculture problem today is to put a ton of money into it. 
Nobody would say that, not even, not even the people who 
studied the agriculture industry today to a larger degree than the 
wisdom of all the men and women in this Assembly, they 
wouldn’t suggest that, Madam Deputy Speaker, because we’re 
in a trend today and a change in agriculture that will require far 
more than that. 
 
Do we need a new disaster program for agriculture and the 
industry? Of course we do. Are the current programs today 
covering that off in the way in which we’d like to cover them 
off? Of course we don’t. But should there be a greater, should 
there be a greater contribution on the 60/40 piece as a national 
program? Of course there should be. Canadians, Canadians 
should be paying for an agricultural farm policy, for an 
agricultural farm policy that isn’t covered 60/40; it should be 
somewhere in where the Minister of Agriculture today says that 
it should be. It should be a 20/80 formula. It should be a 85/15 
formula, where the larger portion of the dollars are contributed 
by the national government. That’s what it should be. And you 
should have a broader expansion of it. 
 
The member, the member, the Minister of Agriculture talks 
about having a Saskatchewan-Canada national agricultural farm 
Bill. We should have a Canadian farm Bill. We should have a 
Canadian farm Bill. And we’re working on a Canadian farm 
Bill to make a difference, not just standing up and saying, you 
know what, what we should be doing is dumping a bit more 
money into this thing because we put more money into the 
agricultural community in Canada every year for the last 10 
years, which the issue is not the money. The issue of course is 
making a different or recrafting, recrafting the structure of the 
current policies that are in place today. 
 
I’ll tell you why, Madam Deputy Speaker, why the opposition 
hasn’t gone to the subsidies, a national subsidy in the way in 
which the Europeans and the Americans have. 
 
Why they haven’t gone there is because they have a couple of 
members who are old Reformers, Conservatives but old 
Reformers. And what did the old Reformer say, from 
Rosetown, what did he say? Well what the old member from 
Rosetown said is that — you know what? — we don’t believe 
in agricultural subsidies is what he said from Rosetown. Is that 
what he said? And you see because they don’t believe in it, 
they’re not prepared, Madam Deputy Speaker, to support a 
national program that provides for a national subsidy for the 
game. 
 
I’ll tell you why they don’t do that. Because Mr. Harper doesn’t 

believe in it; Mr. Harper doesn’t believe in it. Mr. Harper 
believes on unloading the larger share of the cost on the 
producer, of which the member from Kelvington and the 
member of Saltcoats support, by the way. They support that and 
they’re on record. We have them on record in Yorkton for what 
they said. And I say when you have a Conservative 
administration like we have across the way where you have 
Reformers and old Alliance people and old card-carrying 
Conservatives, you get this kind of a policy today which you 
see over across the House, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is 
what we find. 
 
I want to say this, Madam Deputy Speaker. I was at Mr. 
Easter’s speech a couple of days ago at SARM. And some of 
the Saskatchewan Conservative Party members were at that, 
and they heard Mr. Easter speak. And what did Mr. Easter 
speak . . . and by the way, Mr. Easter got a fairly comfortable, a 
fairly comfortable . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you got 
now the member from Canora-Pelly chirping. He’s chirping 
over there. The member from Canora-Pelly is chirping from 
over there, Madam Deputy Speaker, you see. And I say to the 
member from Canora, I wouldn’t put you in the Conservative 
camp. I wouldn’t put you there. You’re one of the guys who 
didn’t have a membership over there. The rest of you have had 
one or two of those along the way, but you haven’t, sir. You 
haven’t. 
 
But you see what you did is you took your old Liberal soul, and 
you sold it to the Conservatives which is as bad as carrying the 
card. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And so I say this, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
I say this. When I was at the Wayne Easter speech the other 
day, when I was at . . . when Mr. Easter was speaking at the 
SARM convention, when he was speaking at the SARM 
convention and there was other Conservative members there, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they were there. And of course the 
SARM convention gave Mr. Easter a fairly warm reception I 
thought. In fact I thought they gave him an extremely warm 
reception for what Mr. Easter said. 
 
Well what Mr. Easter said is that what we should have today in 
Canada is that we should have a national farm Bill. And then 
what he went on to say is, he said, well you know what? If we 
got in the game because the other guys aren’t getting out of the 
game . . . And I think the member from Kindersley today said, 
you know what? We’re making good progress on the Doha 
agreements or on the Doha discussions. 
 
Yes we’ve made wonderful movement on the Doha discussions. 
They’ve now delayed the issues on whether or not we’re going 
to have national subsidies in Canada and in the US [United 
States] and in Europe by another 10 years. Where we’re 
supposed to have decisions on this piece in 2009, now they’ve 
moved it out to 2025. And the good old member from 
Kindersley says, you know, we’re making good progress on this 
piece. Because what happens of course is that the Americans 
and the Europeans are staying in the subsidy game, and we’re 
getting out of the subsidy game. And we say, and Mr. Easter 
says — and he gets nearly a standing ovation — we should get 
in the game. We should get in the game. 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

Well here you have, Madam Deputy Speaker, a member of the 
Liberal government today standing up, standing up . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member from Canora is 
chirping again. The member of Canora is chirping again 
because, you see, the member of Canora is having an extremely 
difficult time controlling himself in his chair. And I know that 
he’ll stand up. I know that the member from Canora will stand 
up, and he’ll provide us a debate . . . No. When you’re red . . . 
you’re not always red because you’ve proven — the member 
from Canora — that you can be red and you can be blue. So you 
should not be going there. The member from Canora can show 
us that he can be two colours at the same time. But I say it 
doesn’t matter what you do. You can grow your hair longer. 
You can have a beard. You can have hair transplants. You can 
do whatever you want. But at the end of the day, when you’re a 
Conservative, you’re a Conservative. It doesn’t matter how you 
change your colours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Madam, I want to say . . . 
You see, Madam, you see, Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to 
say this. You see, on this side of the House for 60 years, we’ve 
all been New Democrats. We’ve all been New Democrats. 
 
And we don’t stand up on a regular basis and we don’t insult, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we don’t insult the people of 
Saskatchewan on a regular basis by saying, you know what? 
You shouldn’t have voted NDP. Saskatchewan people, you 
were all wrong about this. You are the people who were to 
blame about this. 
 
And so on a regular basis, they stand up and say that the people 
of Saskatchewan have made the wrong choices. The Leader of 
the Opposition gets up on a regular basis and says, 
Saskatchewan people, you’ve made the wrong choice. You 
should have never voted NDP for 60 years because we know 
better than you do. And you know what? We’ve had this 
province in the tank on two occasions, and both times they 
follow Conservative governments. And they’re lining up again, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. They’re lining them up again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to speak to 
the motion before the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you for bringing me back, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, because I wanted to talk about, I wanted to 
talk a little bit more about my good friend, Mr. Wayne Easter. 
Because here you have Mr. Wayne Easter showing up at a 
SARM convention and making an eloquent speech about how it 
is that he wished he wasn’t a Liberal. And he talked at length 
about how it is that we should have a national Canadian farm 
Bill, how it is that we should be getting into subsidy programs 
and taking on the Europeans and the Americans. And he talked 
about working on a different price system for Canadian 
commodity. And he said more about Saskatchewan . . . 
Canadian farmer power is what he said, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Well that’s exactly what we’ve all been saying in this 
side of the House. On this side of the House, that’s exactly what 
we’ve been saying. 
 
And what happens of course is that you have a Liberal 
government, Madam Deputy Speaker, who is saying to us 

today, you know what? Our agricultural industry needs to limp 
along by diversifying. What else in this province can we 
diversify to? What else are we going to diversify to because 
today we’re growing all kinds of grains, all kinds of pulse 
crops. I think the member from Indian Head yesterday said 
we’re growing canaries I think in this province. We’ve got all 
kinds of livestock diversification in Saskatchewan today. We’ve 
taken our 60 million acres of arable land and we’ve converted it 
in a variety of different ways. And we want to do agroforestry. 
 
And, you know, I listened today when they were talking about 
the agroforestry piece, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I see the 
member from Kelvington crouched over in her chair in laughter 
saying, well we’re not going to plant all these trees in 
Saskatchewan. In her own riding, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 
her own riding or in the riding from Melfort — I’m not sure in 
where that farm belongs to — but it’s either in the Kelvington 
constituency or in the Melfort constituency where there is a 
farmer today who is planting a number of acres of trees into 
agroforestry. 
 
And you what? And the member from Melfort and for sure the 
member from Kelvington thinks it’s a joke. She thinks it’s a 
joke. She thinks it’s a joke that somebody in her own 
constituency is planting . . . You see, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena doesn’t know. She doesn’t know that 
they’re doing it in her riding. 
 
And we should be converting more of our Saskatchewan farm 
land into agroforestry. And there should be a national program 
for agroforestry. And we should be taking some of our land 
today that isn’t arable in the way in which we can produce good 
farm crops today and transplant it back to somebody else, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the member from Kindersley stands up and thinks that this 
is a joke. This isn’t a joke. We should be doing those kinds of 
things. We should be making a difference in that kind of a way 
because farmers are already doing that in Saskatchewan, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and they don’t need to have people 
from the Saskatchewan Conservative Party standing up and 
condemning them for their efforts. They should be supporting 
them because they’re in their very same ridings of which 
they’re doing that work instead of sitting in their chairs and 
condemning the work that their own producers in their own 
constituencies are doing. This is an extremely important 
process. 
 
And I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, for those who stand up 
today and say that we have the best farmers in Canada are right. 
They’re absolutely right . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
the member from Canora says maybe on my farm one day I 
might have 1,700 acres of trees. We might have 1,700 acres of 
trees one day on my farm. We might have that. We might have 
that. And we might convert that over time. And we may have in 
Saskatchewan a forest industry that will take, as we do today, 
the agroforestry that we have today and convert it to the kinds 
of wood and lumber of which my farm might be able to make a 
living from. Those are the kinds of options that we will 
entertain over time. 
 
Well you see, you see there are many examples in the world 
today where agriculture has made that kind of conversion to a 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

variety of different diversifications. But that’s not what we hear 
from the members opposite on the other side, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. That’s not what we hear from our Conservative 
friends, you see. Because you know what? They’re only about 
providing division. They’re only about providing division and 
the only agenda they have is to say to Saskatchewan rural 
people that we have the answers, that they have the answers. 
 
And you know what? There hasn’t been an answer, not one 
answer from that Conservative Party in the last 10 years. Not 
one suggestion, not one idea, not one direction other than 
saying, you know what, we need to put more money into this 
piece. That’s all we ever hear from them. We just need to put 
more money in and you put more money in and this will 
salvage the industry. And I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, there 
are no ideas, there are no initiatives, and there is no direction 
over there. 
 
And that’s why our good buddy, the member for Kindersley, is 
coming back. Because he’s coming back not only to . . . I mean 
the job that the member from Kindersley really wants is he 
wants that job right over there that the member from Swift 
Current sits in. That’s the job he wants and that’s the one he’s 
after. And that’s why he’s coming back — not only to bring a 
bit of direction to that operation but he’s going to plant back the 
old Conservative roots that were there before. Because what did 
he say in Saskatoon last year when they interviewed him right 
after the Saskatchewan Party convention there? He said, yes 
there’s other men and women in this party who come from 
other parties. But I tell you who wears the pants in this party, 
it’s the Conservatives that wear the pants in this party. And our 
good old Conservatives are coming back to wear the pants in 
that party across from us. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, for those members in the House 
who stand up on a regular basis, that stand up on a regular basis 
and say that Saskatchewan producers are the best producers in 
the world are absolutely right. They’re absolutely right. 
 
We’ve diversified our farm land in a massive way in this 
province today. We’re planting crops today that 15 years ago 
many of us in this Assembly and those of us who are involved 
in the agricultural industry haven’t even heard of. You go to the 
Crop Insurance office today and they’ll show you a board of 65 
crops that we grow in Saskatchewan today, of which I bet you 
that there are many of us who wouldn’t be able to identify. And 
I can tell you I couldn’t identify some of the crops that we grow 
today in Saskatchewan and the kind of fruits and vegetables that 
we grow in the province today. 
 
The member from Rosetown . . . Kindersley, he has a group of 
men and women in his constituency that we’re going to do 
some work with because they’re asking us to do some work 
with. They want to get engaged, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 
having a horticultural industry in Saskatchewan. They’re going 
to build, I think, probably one of the state-of-the-arts, one of the 
most state-of-the-arts operations in Saskatchewan where we can 
grow some of our own vegetables right here in Saskatchewan. 
We should be doing that. And they’re going to be using some of 
the water that they have close access to on the irrigation system. 
They’re going to use some of SaskPower’s and SaskEnergy’s 

resources that are close to them. 
 
And we can build yet another value-added industry in 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. Why? Because people in this 
province have that kind of initiative and they’re coming to us. 
They’re coming to us to see how we can develop that in a far 
broader way. 
 
I haven’t heard from the member from Rosetown on one 
occasion on this issue, not one — as a rural development issue 
— not one. 
 
And I say that we can build a stronger, well . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I hear the member from Wood River chirping 
away about who’s government. Well we’re government and he 
should try to be a more effective opposition member, you see. 
 
And a good opposition member would come to the government, 
would be able to provide for government and the people of the 
province some ideas about where to go. And all we ever hear 
from the member from Wood River is what we’re hearing 
today, just a whole lot of noise. Just a whole lot of noise and a 
whole lot of air — this is what we hear from the member from 
Wood River. 
 
And I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, we know that in 
Saskatchewan today there has been tremendous growth on a 
number of areas in the agricultural industry, but there has to be 
a national farm plan. There has to be a national farm policy. 
There has to be a national agenda that provides the kinds of 
resources that are necessary for the industry. There needs to be 
further diversification. There needs to be greater investment in 
the areas of supply management of which we’ve been able to 
move the supply management piece. Both in the feather 
industry and in the egg industry we’ve been able to move that. 
In an environment where we started a long ways back, we’ve 
been able to move that. And we’ve made some progress, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, on that side of the file. 
 
And I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, I listened to the 
member from Saltcoats, Melville. My vision is not about 20 
farmers is what he said. He said we’re going to have 20 farmers 
left in Saskatchewan. That’s his goal. My goal is not to have 20 
farmers left in Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy Speaker. That’s 
not my goal. 
 
My goal, Madam Deputy Speaker, is to make sure that we have 
a number of more organic farmers in Saskatchewan. My goal is 
to see that we have a tremendous number of additional 
specialized farmers in the province that are growing a variety of 
different crops. My goal, Madam Deputy Speaker, is to see that 
we see some of that land today that’s in production that’s 
marginal come out and planted into the forestry area. I want to 
see, Madam Deputy Speaker, a growth in the livestock industry 
where we can take some of that value-added grain today and put 
it into the livestock industry and build the processing and 
feedlot industry which is happening in the province today. 
 
That’s what we want to see as a major plan that we’re working 
on in Saskatchewan today. Why? It’s because we have an 
agricultural strategy. We have an agricultural plan. We have a 
direction in terms of where we’re moving towards and it isn’t 
only, Madam Deputy Speaker, about finding another bag of 



190 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

money and providing the kinds of divisiveness which our 
friends in the Conservative Party opposite continue to portray in 
this province. 
 
And I say, Madam Deputy Speaker, you know what? I’m proud 
on this side of the House to serve as a New Democrat. I’m 
proud on this side of the House to build policy for the 
betterment of Saskatchewan people today as a New Democrat. 
And I’m glad that we’ve stayed, Madam Deputy Speaker, on 
the principles of which we support and that we don’t have to 
change our spots on a regular basis to try to find a solution in 
terms of just seeking power. It’s not about power. It’s about 
developing good public policy, good relationship with 
Saskatchewan people, and painting a good agricultural industry. 
 
And that’s why, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am voting and 
supporting the amendment as opposed to supporting that motion 
that’s put on by our newly formed Conservative friends about 
what it is to build a Saskatchewan agricultural industry, which 
by the way has failed on every occasion. And not one idea that 
we’ve seen, Madam Deputy Speaker, in the history that I’ve 
been around this Assembly of which this member here . . . Well 
I hear the member from Canora again. And I guess this time 
he’s going to tell me, I guess this time he’s going to tell me now 
he is a Conservative and doesn’t want to be red any more. 
 
Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker, I appreciate the 
opportunity to have been part of this debate today. I look 
forward to the additional support that the opposition will give 
us in getting new resources from the federal government. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m delighted to add my voice to this debate we’re 
having today on agriculture. I was listening to the Deputy 
Premier and my first question has got to be, whatever this man 
is smoking today is what every farmer in Saskatchewan needs 
to get him through this winter, because there is nothing this 
provincial government is doing to make them make this winter 
bearable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — The only thing we can do is listen to that 
garbage that the minister has been spouting for the last 45 
minutes to let us believe there is something happening for our 
farmers, and there is nothing, Madam Deputy Minister. 
 
Madam Deputy Minister, I was elected 10 years ago as a 
Liberal, I think maybe the person on the other side of the House 
. . . And that was after the reds over there closed 52 hospitals 
and got rid of the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 
program. The reds over there decided that the only way they 
could balance . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the House itself set the rules 
that there are some words that will not be used within the 
Assembly. And so I’d ask the member to get back to using 

words . . . 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I would like to . . . That 
word has been used . . . No. 
 
Madam Deputy Minister, Deputy Speaker, I have listened for 
two years being called a Conservative. I am not a Conservative, 
and if I’m going to be called a Conservative, they’re going to be 
called a red. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I believe there are certain 
words that the House Leaders agreed upon would not be used 
within the Assembly, and we’ll stick with the rules that the 
Assembly has set for themselves. I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena to get back to the motion before the House. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I was elected in what 
was called red square. I was elected in what was known as red 
square at one time, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I was elected 
when this government decided that the only way that they could 
keep their political party alive was to cut out rural 
Saskatchewan, was to listen to the Stabler report that said there 
was only 51 viable communities in Saskatchewan, and they 
were going to do whatever they could to make sure that only 51 
communities survived. 
 
We had Mr. Olfert and Stabler go and do an economic 
feasibility study of this province and they listed them. And you 
know what, Madam Deputy Speaker? There wasn’t one 
community in my constituency that would survive under this 
government. We had . . . [inaudible] . . . we watched our 
hospitals closed. We watched the amount of money that was 
spent on roads cut back. We have saw everything that has 
happened to farmers in my constituency to just be a mess just to 
make sure that they could keep their political favours on that 
side of the House. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Deputy Premier said that this 
wasn’t about politics. There wasn’t one word said this afternoon 
that wasn’t politics. There wasn’t anything said that was going 
to be positive for the farmers of our province. 
 
And I really . . . the Deputy Premier made a statement about me 
going to my constituency and riding on a combine. I did that. I 
rode around on a combine that had dual wheels on it, for 
farmers who were trying to take off a crop that has absolutely 
no value. And the only way they can manage to even get a little 
bit of crop insurance if they took garbage crop off the field and 
spent the money that it took to fill up their combine and their 
grain cart — which you had to buy because you can’t get a 
truck on the field when there’s been 17 inches of rain. Going 
around the field with a tractor with dual wheels left ruts that 
were a foot and one-half deep and as they moved the ruts 
became full of water. 
 
And do you know what? That same day that people that asked 
me, Madam Deputy Speaker, to ride with them phoned the 
Deputy Premier’s office. And Monday morning the Deputy 
Premier phoned the lady back and she called me. And she was 
quite upset because you know what she said? She said the 
Deputy Premier had nothing to say about the farm prices. He 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

only had something to say about me. He wanted to say that I 
had changed political parties, so they shouldn’t listen. This has 
got nothing to do with whether there was a crop in the field, had 
nothing to do with whether . . . [inaudible] . . . the fact that you 
couldn’t combine. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when I sat in that combine, for the 
first time in my life, I saw these people trying to take the crop 
off, just the heads, because if the header of the combine lowered 
too much, they would put water into the header, which would 
go immediately into the grain hopper and ruin an entire tank of 
grain. That’s the kind of heartbreaking, sickening thing that’s 
happening to farmers in rural Saskatchewan. And the Deputy 
Premier phones and says don’t listen to the member that’s 
elected to represent you because she changed political parties. 
That’s got something to do with agriculture? And you wonder 
why we’ve got frustrated with this government over here. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the farmers that were crying because 
they need help . . . There was 30 farmers came to that farmer’s 
yard just a few days before to talk to their MP and explain what 
kind of a problem there was in farming, 30 farmers who could 
have been in the field but instead were trying so desperately to 
get somebody’s attention. They couldn’t get the attention of this 
Deputy Premier because he’s too political. He can’t care what’s 
happening to the real people. 
 
The farm wife that I talked to had tears running down her 
cheek. She said that her kids were not going to be on the farm 
this winter. She said for the first time, their family sat around 
the table wondering how they’re going to pay their gas bill. It 
cost $1,200 to fill up their combine and their grain carts and the 
augers and the machinery it took to combine for one day. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, do you know how much you get 
for barley right now through the wheat board? You get 45 cents 
a bushel. How long does that take to combine, to pay for just 
the fuel, let alone the fertilizer and the chemical and the taxes 
and the property taxes, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
So here we have this government who thinks they’re doing 
something for farmers, and they’re an absolute insult. And the 
Deputy Premier, the Deputy Premier also said that they have a 
provincial disaster assistance program. But, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I have to read a letter that came from the RM of 
Porcupine regarding this provincial disaster assistance. She 
said: 
 

As of this date, our municipality has yet to receive the 
claim forms for private losses due to flooding. 
 

This was dated on November 14. For just about two months, 
they’ve been writing to this government and asking them for the 
claim forms they needed to get this provincial disaster 
allowance that this government is talking about. They’ve yet to 
get the forms. So this is a lot of help, isn’t it? This is what we’re 
doing to help our farmers. We’re going to announce it to make 
everybody feel good, but we’re not going to get the papers 
ready yet. 
 
Then, Madam Deputy Speaker, that wasn’t the only problem. 
She goes on to say that as the provincial administrator, she was 
also required to estimate the total losses before the claim could 

be established. For municipal losses, she could just about 
understand that. But she also was required to estimate private 
losses. 
 
The administrators are not insurance adjusters. They’re not loss 
assessors. They don’t have the ability to visit every site and 
determine an estimate for losses. This just added another step in 
what was happening to farmers who so desperately needed help, 
that this government absolutely refuses to acknowledge as even 
happening in our province. 
 
[16:30] 
 
This program lacks coverage for agricultural loss. The position 
of the provincial disaster program, the administration, is that the 
program is to cover uninsured losses. And therefore agricultural 
losses covered by crop insurance are not applicable. This 
appears to be a little bit short-sighted. Crop insurance has 
proven to be more of an impediment to cost recovery under the 
current circumstances. The percentage of loss in comparison 
with the value of insured is not high enough to trigger a payout. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if you want to hear some of the real 
problems that farmers are having trying to even deal with the 
few programs that are there, they have to go out and listen to 
them. 
 
I had a farmer that phoned into my office and said that they . . . 
that faxed me the grain tickets. Basically on six semi loads of 
wheat and after all the deductions, they took home a cheque for 
$575. Not $575,000, not $5,000 — $575. There are people that 
maybe live in an urban area would think that $575 is a lot 
money. Do you know what it costs to fill up a fuel tank? 
Probably one of my colleagues can tell me because I myself am 
not a farmer. But I do know that the people that I’m dealing 
with are at their wits’ end trying to figure out how they can 
actually make ends meet. 
 
I have one farmer that phoned my office, said he had to borrow 
gas from his neighbour to get to town to pick up the mail to see 
if his CAIS cheque was there. And of course it wasn’t because 
it’s only 2003 CAIS so of course they haven’t got around to 
doing that yet. I do understand that this government knows that 
they laid off a bunch of CAIS workers last year in March and 
didn’t hire them back until the end of August. And we wonder 
why the CAIS applications aren’t being processed at this time. 
 
I also listened to the Deputy Premier talk about some of the 
issues that are going on. In 1989 Canadians realized farm 
income was just over $3.9 billion. That was in 1989. Do you 
know what it was in 2003? Negative $5 billion. That’s what 
happened in that short of time — eight years it went to negative 
$5 billion. 
 
The price of combines during that time — and I think maybe 
this is some information some of the members on the other side 
of the House should hear — the price of combines during that 
same eight-year period increased by, from 1992 and 2003, 74 
per cent. The cost of a new combine from 1992 to 2003 went up 
74 per cent. Fertilizer costs since 1992 went up 67 per cent. 
Pesticide cost increased 60 per cent. And the price of seed 
increased 50 per cent. And prices for crop have gone down 
every year for three years. 



192 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

At the same time, the country of Canada relies on agriculture. 
We keep saying that we’re the bread basket, we feed the world. 
that in Canada, agriculture contributed $81 billion to the GDP 
[gross domestic product] in 2002. It provides one in eight 
Canadians with jobs. It was a leader in Canadian productivity 
between 1984 and 1995. Exports grew 150 per cent between 
1990 and 2003. Canada’s the fourth largest export of agriculture 
and agri-food products. Only US, EU [European Union], and 
Brazil are larger. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, all farm income as a percentage of 
total farm increments has increased from 72 per cent in 1980 to 
87 per cent in 2002. Now that’s telling us in order to put food 
on the table of Canadians, our farmers are working off the farm. 
They cannot live on their farm and eat themselves. They have to 
go out and get a job. What’s that telling us, Madam Deputy 
Speaker? We’re not doing enough. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the member opposite indicated that 
bigger is better in many ways. We’ve heard them say that, not 
just about farms. And we know that’s happening because of 
their interest in the larger hog barns. But we’re doing that in 
health care and in education. 
 
But just today on the radio, Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr. 
Florian Possberg who is the owner of one of the largest hog 
operations in Saskatchewan has said that bigger is not better 
when it comes to the hog industry. He’s learned after 10 years 
of trying to do it that it isn’t working. A 10,000-head barn 
should only be 2,000. That’s more profitable. And that’s what 
the leading producer in Saskatchewan is saying. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, you know, this year I went to . . . one 
of the best things about living in rural Saskatchewan is going to 
the fowl suppers around our constituency. And I found that 
even there, there was fewer people. And when I talked to the 
people that were there, they were saying the cost of $9 a person, 
which is really cheap when you consider the meals that you get 
at a fowl supper, it’s too much for a lot of farm families. They 
don’t have that kind of money to give to organizations to 
basically keep their communities going. For as much as they try 
to and want to support them, they can’t do them. They don’t 
have $9 that isn’t accounted for. 
 
Madam Minister, the beginning statement that we made in our 
motion today had a lot do with the mini-budget that the federal 
government put down yesterday. And we were very 
disappointed that Goodale did not mention the word agriculture. 
And it made us wonder why in a community or in a province 
like Saskatchewan, when we know he talks to farmers, why he 
didn’t do it. 
 
We started to question that maybe the provincial government 
would have had to put some more money into agriculture. Is 
that true? You think maybe there’s the chance that the province 
said to Ralph, no don’t put any more money into agriculture 
because then we’re going to be expected to add 40 per cent and 
that we don’t want to do? We don’t want to have to say to our 
people again we’re not going to support rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I think there’s people not just on this side of the House but 
outside the walls of this building, they’re wondering if maybe 
this government is again not wanting to support farmers. 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I have tried for 10 years to represent 
the people in the Kelvington-Wadena constituency from this 
side of the House. I’ve brought their issues to the floor of this 
Assembly. I’ve been trying to make people realize that there is a 
real need for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As we grow the province, you’re not going to see oil wells on 
Albert Street in Regina. The growth that’s coming is going to 
be from rural Saskatchewan. And we have to have the 
infrastructure there — the roads, the hospitals, the schools, and 
the people to build rural Saskatchewan. It’s not happening. 
 
And the only thing that I can say is when, after leaving this 
Assembly and going back to my constituency this weekend, is 
that when we debated this issue in the House the only thing this 
government could do was, again, be political. They could blame 
the federal government; they could blame the opposition; they 
could blame the farmers; but they can’t blame themselves. And 
that’s the type of thing, Madam Minister, that makes us realize 
that these guys only care about being in power. It’s nothing to 
do with representing all of Saskatchewan’s citizens. It’s got 
everything to do with staying on that side of the House to the 
detriment of anybody that stands in their way. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there isn’t anything we can do to make 
them change their mind. They’ve already made up their mind 
because as long as they can get their urban voters to think, 
okay, they’re trying, that’s all they have to do. 
 
And we have to go back home and tell our people this 
government doesn’t care. I’m quite prepared to do that, Madam 
Minister, and that’s what I will be doing. I’ll be supporting the 
motion put forward by the member from Saltcoats and I will not 
be supporting the motion brought forward by the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
think it’s entirely appropriate at this time, Madam Deputy 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I know the debate before the 
Assembly is very close to everyone’s emotions. I’m judging the 
decorum of the House based on the Speaker being able to hear 
the person who has been recognized. So I recognize the member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
think it’s entirely appropriate that I begin this particular debate 
by reading a piece from a letter that I received from a 
constituent last spring. And this was after a visit to this 
legislature. This young woman, this young lady, visited this 
legislature with her class and wrote a letter to me afterwards. 
And I think this is an entirely appropriate time to read it to all 
members. I’m going to read just an excerpt from the letter and 
the excerpt goes like this. She says: 
 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

I thought it was extremely rude, especially for adults, to 
behave in such ways. I do think that one has to voice their 
opinion but I totally disagree with the interrupting 
someone. Let me tell you that you should be ashamed of 
yourselves and others, because remember you are 
representing the people of Saskatchewan. If you think of 
it, [she says] Saskatchewan’s land and environment are all 
peaceful things, not a commotion of noise. 

 
I read that, Madam Deputy Speaker, to begin this talk because I 
will not engage in any histrionics. I want to talk to the debate 
itself, to the issue that’s been raised this afternoon, which is an 
issue that’s very near and dear to my heart. 
 
So what I would like to do first of all is do a little then-and-now 
and what has happened in between. And when I talk about then 
I want to go back to when I grew up on the farm. 
 
Now one of the members opposite talked about being on the 
farm and driving a Massey 44. And I listened very intently 
because a Massey 44 is the first tractor that I ever drove on the 
farm as well. It was a mixed farm, a mixture of grain and beef. 
My father’s philosophy was that you have both because when 
times are difficult in the grain market you can always depend on 
beef to get you through, and if times are difficult with cattle you 
could depend on grain. 
 
It was a good way of life. It was a way of life that I’ll always 
value for the rest of my life but there were tough times. I can 
remember, I can remember when I was in my teens hearing my 
father swear for one of the first times ever. And it was because 
we were shovelling out rotten grain during the grain glut of the 
late ’60s. Because at that time as well, farmers were caught in a 
cost-price squeeze. Low prices for their commodities; high cost 
for their inputs — not to the extreme that there is now but that 
was a pressure on farming at that time as well. 
 
And so as a result of that, my father had very little confidence 
on the open market and depended greatly on orderly marketing 
and the Canadian Wheat Board and the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool. 
 
And at that time, Madam Deputy Speaker, as everyone here 
knows, there was a richness in community across this province. 
On a Saturday night everyone would go to town and the main 
street would be full of people shopping and visiting, and there’d 
be a movie that night at the Dreamland Theatre and a dance at 
the community hall. And it was a rich way of life. 
 
What has happened since then? Let’s look at what’s happened 
since then. That was then. What’s the situation now? We’ve 
ended up of course, Madam Deputy Speaker, with fewer and 
fewer farms, and the farms have become larger and larger. The 
communities in rural Saskatchewan have gotten smaller and 
smaller to the point where, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are 
communities in this province that have signposts but no people. 
And none of us are happy about that. 
 
We’ve reached the point now as well where many, many farm 
people are employed off the farm. The farm that I grew up on, 
the farm that I was talking about earlier, is now rented out. My 
brother, my sister, my brother-in-law work off the farm for their 
income. And it’s not a great situation on the farm, as members 

on both sides of this House have already indicated. 
 
As an MLA I see this in my constituency. I see the same 
pressures, this year exacerbated by the weather. This year rain, 
last year frost, and the two years before that, drought. And the 
talk in the country where I come from and the constituency that 
I represent is that a lot of farmers are going down this year. 
There are going to be a lot of farm auctions. We’re in a farm 
crisis. 
 
The net farm income now is at 54 million — negative $54 
million in Saskatchewan. So why has this happened? Why has 
this happened? I’ll give a few of the reasons from my 
perspective as to why it’s happened. And I’m pleased to be 
speaking to this because it’s rare that I have a chance to talk 
about these kinds of issues in the House. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So let’s start with the first item on my mind, and it is this. You 
see, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe in the power of symbols. 
Symbols are often more powerful than anything else and the 
greatest symbol in terms of federal farm policy was the ditching 
of the Crow rate in the 1990s. That was symbolic. That was 
symbolic of a federal government that had decided that it would 
have nothing more to do with farmers. You’re on your own and 
it was survival of the biggest as far as the federal government 
was concerned. 
 
Now I listen to the members opposite shouting at me at this 
time, Madam Deputy Speaker. There is a speaking list and I 
will listen to them as intently as I can, but I ask for their ear at 
this time. We were given two ears and one mouth for a purpose, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So first of all the Crow rate, which has cost farmers half a 
billion dollars a year in freight costs, and the ditching of the 
Crow rate done by the federal government. 
 
Second, federal policies that said, either you get big or you get 
out. I can remember my father saying, it’s reaching the point 
where I have to get big to stay in farming, that I can’t afford to 
stay small. And so many farmers did. 
 
And federal farm policies that said, farmers got to get efficient. 
They’re not efficient enough. They’ve got to get more efficient 
and they have to diversify. So farmers did. 
 
But there was a concerted federal policy in this country that 
moved farmers off the land. And I have read pieces from the 
federal government, from the deputy minister of Agriculture 
years ago that essentially said, it’s time that farmers woke up 
and got off the farm and realized there’s no future for them. So 
federal farm policies as well as the Crow. Federal farm policies. 
 
Third, a flurry of trade agreements that have inflicted incredible 
damage in this country. The MAI [Multilateral Agreement on 
Investment], GATS [General Agreement on Trade in Services], 
FTAA [Free Trade Area of the Americas], WTO [World Trade 
Organization], and NAFTA [North American Trade 
Agreement]. There has been a push in this country to force 
farmers to join the market economy, to join that global casino 
and play that little game. This is not fair trade. This is free 



194 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2005 

trade, not fair trade. This is one-way free trade and as a result of 
that farmers have had another blow from the federal 
government. 
 
The responsibility for addressing issues of trade injury and 
unfair subsidies is not a provincial responsibility. That is a 
federal responsibility. 
 
So we have the Crow rate. We have farm policies from the 
federal government and we have so-called free trade agreements 
— federal, federal, federal responsibilities. 
 
And in this global market, in this global economy, what has also 
occurred — and probably this has put the most pressure on 
farmers — is a corporate concentration that has put more and 
more of the agricultural economy in the hands of fewer and 
fewer people. And one of the members opposite was talking 
about the high costs of inputs. That is the greatest pressure right 
now on farmers. From the seeds, from the seed to the shelf, 
there has been a corporate concentration that has put more and 
more pressure on farmers. 
 
When it comes to inputs I’m reminded of a discussion I had 
with a constituent of mine a few years ago. And I wrote her 
words down and I’ve pulled this out now for this talk. And this 
was a young woman. They had one child. It was a farm family 
and she said, we’re badly in debt. It’s just hard to make land 
payments and combine payments and all the chemical and 
fertilizer bills and the freight on the grain. We can’t seem to get 
ahead and we seem to always get punished for diversifying. It’s 
a no win situation. If we don’t get a decent crop this year, we 
won’t make it. 
 
Which government in this country has the power to address 
corporate concentration? Which government in this country has 
the power to address the high input costs that farmers are 
experiencing? It’s the federal government. 
 
Fifthly, farm support programs. There’s already been discussion 
this afternoon. Well the member asks, what would you do? Be 
patient, I would say to the member opposite. I’m talking right 
now about the situation that exists for farmers. I’ll get to that. 
So the fifth point . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I ask that all remarks be made 
through the Speaker to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. So the 
fifth point is the whole area of farm support payments. As other 
people have already indicated this afternoon, the 60/40 split that 
exists within this country is unfair. And that is a formula that is 
imposed upon us by the federal government and is the 
responsibility of the federal government to fix. 
 
So these are some of the issues, and again the common theme in 
all of them is that the federal government, the federal 
government has the power to do what’s right for farmers. 
 
Now the deputy minister earlier was talking about the 
presentation that Wayne Easter gave at the SARM convention 
last week. And I encourage opposition members to read the 
report that Wayne Easter gave to provincial Ag ministers last 
July. The report is called empowering farmers in the 

marketplace. And the title indicates exactly what I was talking 
about, empowering farmers in the marketplace. 
 
And in that paper, Wayne Easter, Member of Parliament, 
Liberal Member of Parliament, talks about the cost-price 
squeeze that farmers are experiencing — the low prices, high 
costs of inputs. He addresses the imbalance between 
agribusiness and the primary producer and says that 
governments, all governments have to focus more on the 
primary producer. 
 
But he was addressing particularly, as the Deputy Premier 
indicated, he was addressing particularly the federal 
government and its responsibility to put more emphasis on the 
primary producer. And as the Deputy Premier explained, Mr. 
Easter received a standing ovation from the SARM delegates. 
Now my question is, will his own government listen to him? 
And that’s the question we don’t know. 
 
But it is incumbent on all of us, it’s incumbent on all of us to 
look carefully at the recommendations from the Wayne Easter 
report and to encourage his government to implement the 
recommendations that are contained there. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, federal responsibilities regarding 
freight rates and how the Crow . . . elimination of the Crow 
took that away; federal farm policies that have encouraged 
farmers to leave the land; trade agreements that our federal 
government has signed that has compromised the integrity of 
farming in this country; corporate concentration that the federal 
government could address, particularly in the area of high 
inputs; farm support payments that are unfair, which again are a 
federal responsibility; and then lastly, the ability and the power 
of the federal government to do something about it. 
 
Twelve billion dollars in surplus, the federal government has — 
$12 billion. And I would say here that in this province, this 
government has the will but not the resources to properly 
address the farm issue, the net farm income issue, the farm 
crisis. Whereas the federal government has the resources, but I 
don’t see the will to address these problems. 
 
So the member earlier asked, what is the answer? Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I am a student of history. I know that 100 
years ago when farmers faced some of the same problems this is 
what they did, and maybe we can learn from them. When they 
couldn’t receive support or credit from the banks, they formed 
credit unions. When they couldn’t receive a fair price on their 
inputs, they created co-operatives. When they were getting poor 
or inaccurate grades or weights on their grain at the elevator, 
they formed their own system of distribution; they created 
wheat pools. When the marketing system wasn’t serving them, 
they organized and as a result we have the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
So maybe the answer, maybe part of the answer, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is getting back to this idea of working 
together, of developing more supply management in this 
province — community-based co-operative answers to this 
solution. Maybe that’s part of the answer. But certainly an 
important part of this answer is that the federal government 
assume its responsibility for farm policies, for addressing the 
farm crisis. And in fact some people would see the disaster 



November 15, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

that’s occurring in rural Saskatchewan and in other provinces at 
this time — this is a federal responsibility. 
 
I will say this, Madam Deputy Speaker. As a provincial 
government, we have committed 650 million in farm support 
and tax exemptions in 2004-2005. That is an indication that we 
are doing our share in terms of supporting farmers at this very 
difficult time. But the root problems, the problems I talked 
about earlier — the cost-price squeeze, the high inputs, trade 
injury — all of those issues are federal responsibilities. And we 
as members in this province should stand together and ask the 
federal government with its resources to address those issues. 
 
And one way they could address those issues is to address the 
issue of the energy accord so that the dollars that should come 
to this province, come to this province so that we can respond to 
all people including farmers in the best possible way. 
 
And so I’ll conclude by saying this, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
One thing is for certain, with 45 per cent of the arable land in 
this country, 43 million acres of arable land — and as my 
father-in-law used to say, and they’re not making any more of it 
— this is our most valuable resource in this province, and we 
have to take good care of it. We grow food for people, and that 
is a value that all of us understand at the deepest level. And so I 
say, we will stand by our farmers as a provincial government. 
We will work together looking for solutions. 
 
But I tell you, I support the amendment to the motion from this 
side because it puts the major responsibility where it belongs — 
on the federal government. Thank you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to get 
in this debate. I’d like to make a few remarks on it. But first of 
all I want to congratulate you on your new Speaker role, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
I also want to make a few comments. Member from Yorkton, he 
did a nice little rant. I’ve heard him make some speeches in 
here, but I think he made one of the poorest ones. This motion 
is dealing with agriculture. He did a rant on the Conservative 
Party, attacking our members. I never heard him once, Madam 
Speaker, mention the federal Liberal Party that deals with this 
motion. I never once heard him condemn the federal Liberal 
Party. You would think that that member from Yorkton was 
going to run federally for the Liberals next election at that. 
 
He talks about our party. What about their party getting in bed 
with the Liberal Party? I’ve hardly heard them condemn the 
Liberal Party at all, Mr. Speaker. They’re cousins, Madam 
Speaker. They’re cousins of the Liberal party. I don’t know. 
Maybe they’re going to join a new party. I don’t know what 
they would call it. I would say maybe the DLS party which 
stands for democratic liberal socialist party. 
 
But the member from Yorkton, the rural revitalization minister, 
Madam Speaker, I was quite disappointed in that speech. I 

didn’t hear about one plan about how he was going to help rural 
Saskatchewan. That’s his ministry, Madam Speaker. That’s his 
ministry that . . . I never heard him say one thing about rural 
revitalization at that, how he was going to do that rural 
revitalization through Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, my constituency when I talk to the farmers out 
there, the biggest thing I hear about this government, the most 
thing they criticize, Madam Speaker, is that, no plan, no action, 
that this government has been in power for a number of years. 
The running joke out there, what they say the NDP stands for is 
no darn plan. And that’s a shame when people talk about a 
government that way. 
 
You know what they say also about the Premier? They say he 
seems like a pretty nice guy, but he’s not a leader. We are in 
trouble in this province. We are in trouble in agriculture, in 
losing population, in a number of things, of losing 6,200 jobs 
and no plan yet. And that is not only spread out in 
Saskatchewan that there is no leadership, that has filtered all the 
way to Ottawa — that there is no leadership in Saskatchewan. 
Nobody stepping forward and taking it. 
 
And that just shows with equalization. The amendment. He 
comes home again with no money, no deal. How can you go to 
Ottawa, when Newfoundland and other provinces are getting 
deals, and you come home constantly with no money? How can 
you come back and face the people? Come home with a big fat 
zero. So now he’s doing a campaign here in Saskatchewan that 
nobody in Ottawa is even heard of. Has he talked to the 
Minister of Finance at the Liberal end? Has he met with him? Is 
he working with him? Is he working with the parties? No plan 
again. 
 
But getting back to the motion on agriculture, it is desperate out 
there, Madam Speaker. This party wants some ideas on how to 
do something that’s under their power? Tax. That’s one of 
them. That’s under their jurisdiction — land tax. That has been 
a problem in rural Saskatchewan and throughout Saskatchewan 
right from one end of Saskatchewan to the other. And it has 
been brought up constantly in the House. It was brought up 
under different parties in this House — is the property tax — 
education tax on property, Madam Deputy Speaker. That is 
something that this government can look at and address and do. 
 
Our taxes in the RM of McCraney have gone up again this year, 
have gone up even with the minister saying, well we put money 
in. Well it didn’t hit where it was supposed to of. It didn’t hit 
where it was supposed to, Madam Speaker. It didn’t hit the 
farmers that needed it. Their property tax has gone up again. 
You check the assessment throughout Saskatchewan. That 
property tax has gone up, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., the House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. this day. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................163 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................163 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................163 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................163 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................164 
  Calvert ...............................................................................................................................................................................164, 165 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................164 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 A Have Province with a Heart 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................165 
 Agriculture Support 
  Bakken Lackey..........................................................................................................................................................................165 
 Saskatchewan Eco-Network Presents First Annual Environmental Film Festival 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................165 
 Plight of Farmers 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 La Ronge Student Displays Community Spirit 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 Condition of Agriculture in Saskatchewan 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................166 
 Survey Ranks SaskTel Mobility as Most Popular Carrier 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................167 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Mid-Year Financial Report 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................167 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................167 
 Lawsuit for Wrongful Dismissal 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................168 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................168 
 Federal Government Agricultural Policies 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................171 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................171 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 11 — The Youth Justice Administration Amendment Act, 2005 
  Prebble .......................................................................................................................................................................................172 
 Bill No. 13 — The Archives Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................172 
 Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................172 
TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................172 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................173 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................175 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................179 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................184 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................190 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................192 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................195 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


