















































Hansard: May 17, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 114A  TUESDAY, MAY 17, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3109 
 May 17, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents who live along Highway 32 and are 
concerned about the deteriorating condition of that highway. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the notorious condition of that highway is 
recognized by signators from the communities of Medicine Hat, 
Leader, Swift Current, Prince Albert, Fox Valley, Eatonia, Red 
Deer, Kindersley, and Saskatoon, as well as hundreds of others. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise again on behalf of constituents concerned about the amount 
of residential support offered to people with lifelong disabilities 
in my constituency. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners representing today are from 
the city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to stop the forced school board amalgamations by 
people who think that they will not be a benefit to students. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to rescind this decision to force 
school boards to amalgamate. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
fine community of Dinsmore. And I’m pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Silver Springs regarding a much needed elementary school in 
the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Wright Crescent, Peters Cove, and 
Buckwold Cove in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
that, to halt crop insurance premium hikes and coverage 
reductions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and reduction in 
coverages. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue, Dinsmore, Saskatoon, 
and Grandora. I so present. 
 



3110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour today to rise in the 
Assembly and present a petition on behalf of citizens of south, 
west central Saskatchewan concerned with the rerouting of 
Highway 51. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 51 is rebuilt to 
go through the town of Kerrobert so that local business 
may be given the opportunity to promote themselves to 
and gain business from patrons passing through Kerrobert. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by citizens of the 
towns of Kerrobert and Wilkie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of constituents 
who are very concerned with this government’s reluctance to 
implement the SARC’s [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres] human resources plan and the negative 
impact that it’s having on Deer Park Villa. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly will please consider implementing 
recommendations as outlined in SARC’s human resources 
plan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Kelliher, Ituna, Hubbard, and Goodeve. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A new petition calling on the government to allow parents 
to place their children into involuntary drug treatment. 
That’s sessional paper 815. 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers nos. 63, 640, 666, 716, 720, 798, 808, and 814. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure Committee is recognized. 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report Bill No. 104, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 104. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 104, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report Bill No. 105, The Local Government 
Election Amendment Act, 2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 



May 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3111 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Relations has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 
Whole for Bill 105. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Government Relations. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 105 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 105 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the policy committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report Bill No. 106, The Municipalities Act, 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill 106. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
When shall this Bill be read a third time? I recognize the 
minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 106, The Municipalities Act, be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Infrastructure to report Bill No. 107, The Municipalities 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole for Bill 107. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 sur les modifications 

corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée 
The Municipalities Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill 107, The Municipalities 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 



3112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 88, The 
Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration of Bill 88 in Committee of the 
Whole. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
The Chair of the Standing Committee on Economy is 
recognized. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I would like to 
report Bill No. 88, with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendments be read a first time? I recognize the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes once again the Minister 
of Labour. 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that these amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations 
Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is required to move this a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Labour that this Bill No. 88 be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 95, The 
Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 



May 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3113 

Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole for Bill 95. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
[13:45] 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves  
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill 95, The Ecological Reserves Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy is recognized. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I was directed by Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 98, The Prairie 
and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Minister of the Environment is 
recognized. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Environment has requested 
leave to waive consideration of the whole on Bill 98. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall this Bill 
be read a third time? The minister. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill 98, The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
today for me to introduce to you and, through you, to all 
members of this House two people in your gallery, Alma 
Neudorf and Rita Guenther, and I’d ask them to give a wave, 
please. Alma is the wife of past MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] Bill Neudorf from the constituency then 
of Rosthern, and Rita is Bill’s sister. 
 
I had the good fortune years ago to be involved and be the 
nominator at Bill’s first nomination. And it was a small 
nomination, Mr. Speaker, only about 1,500 people were there, 
all of them members. Bill was highly respected in the political 
area, in sports, and in his community as well. And Bill is one of 
the reasons why what used to be the Rosthern constituency — is 
now the Martensville constituency, Mr. Speaker — has never 
voted CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] or NDP 
[New Democratic Party]. 
 
Would all members of the House please join me in welcoming 
them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with my colleague in welcoming Alma to the 
Assembly today. I’d like to acknowledge the fact that Bill and I 
became very close friends, and we worked together an awful 
lot. 
 
There’s one thing about Bill that seems to just have followed 
his legacy. Mr. Speaker, we all remember how Bill, when he 
got a little irate, he could stand up; he could shake his finger. 
And I think the current member from Rosthern is pretty good at 
that as well. But we’d like to extend our welcome to Alma and 
to her sister-in-law Rita and welcome them to the Assembly. 



3114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleagues in welcoming Alma and Rita to the 
Assembly. I had the privilege of also serving in this House with 
Bill. And fact is this was his desk, and I sat right behind him. 
And I do very much remember Bill wagging his finger at the 
government, and then he would rant and rave, Mr. Speaker, sit 
down in his chair, turn around and wink at me. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Bill enjoyed this House, and I think Alma 
and Rita will enjoy being here today. I’d ask everyone to 
welcome them again. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today and introduce to you and, through you, to all members of 
this Assembly 27 grade 10, 11, and 12 students from the John 
William Head Memorial Education Centre at Red Earth, 
Saskatchewan in the beautiful Carrot River Valley, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Today the students are accompanied by teachers Linda 
Bernauer, Judy Mahoney, and Marcel McKay, as well as 
chaperones Cameron Head and Joe Whitecap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as welcoming these students, teachers, and 
chaperones to their Assembly, I would also like to say that I’m 
looking forward to meeting with them for pictures and drinks 
shortly after question period. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join with my colleague from Carrot River Valley in 
welcoming the students here. I see many of them are, or all of 
them are Aboriginal students. And in Cree . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And I just told them in Cree, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very, very 
pleased that they’re here today. And ask all members . . . if I 
may join with my colleague inviting the students from Red 
Earth here today and hope they have a wonderful day. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am too pleased 
to welcome a school group to our Assembly today. From the 

Eston Composite School we have 29 grade 4 and grade 5 
students. And they’re sitting up in the east gallery. If they all 
give a wave so that all of my colleagues know that they’re from 
Eston. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Jodi Bjornerud, who 
also has a special interest in the legislature. And Jodi was here 
for the Social Science Teachers Institute, and after having met 
her, I’ve decided that perhaps the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats isn’t as old as I thought he was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as these fine students and teacher, we have 
chaperones Tawna Hansen, Debbie MacKeracher, Luana Bahm, 
Cindy Gardiner, Lynne McEvoy, Rob Lobdell — and Rob’s 
been here before — Brian Anderson, Brian Tysdal, Lyle Olson, 
Pat Toner, Arlene Robinson, and Cheryl Skwara. I would like to 
welcome them here. Also not all of them are sitting up in the 
gallery. We have one student, Jordan Andrew, who has joined 
us right down here at the eye level behind the bar, and we’re 
pleased to welcome Jordan Andrew here as well. 
 
I’d ask all of my colleagues to welcome them. We’ll be having 
a little meeting later, and we’ll talk about the proceedings here 
in the legislature and any questions they might have pertaining 
to what they’re doing today and what they’ve seen. So please 
welcome the grade 4 and 5 students from Eston to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great sense 
of pleasure and pride that I introduce to you, through you, and 
to all members of the Assembly, Inspector Chuck Orem who is 
with us in your gallery today. And perhaps Inspector Orem 
could stand for a moment. Inspector Orem is with “F” Division 
of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police posted in Regina and 
works in the field of contract and community policing and acted 
as Chair of the Queen’s Golden Jubilee statue project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] is 
such a valuable entity to the people of this country, province, 
and city. Not only do they serve to protect us as citizens, but 
they are also very community-minded in their volunteer 
activities as well as being a very proud symbol for us as 
something that is uniquely Canadian and has an amazingly 
revered reputation worldwide. 
 
As my brother, Sergeant Gerald Grobmeier, also of the force 
says, it’s in your blood; once a Mountie always a Mountie. And 
I think we can witness that when we speak to our members of 
security here in the legislature, as many of them are ex-mounted 
police as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Inspector Orem was well acquainted with my late 
father-in-law, Superintendent Cliff Morin, and through him I 
would like to thank the RCMP for their dedication, 
representation, and welcome him to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



May 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3115 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleague from Rosetown-Elrose in welcoming again 
Mr. Rob Lobdell to his legislature. As I’ve mentioned before in 
this Assembly, he was central in getting West Central Road and 
Rail up and running which moves a great deal of the grain in the 
Eatonia and Eston area. It’s a producer-car facility, and it has 
greatly helped the economic stability of both those 
communities. And Mr. Lobdell is a business leader in west 
central Saskatchewan and I welcome him back to his Assembly 
again today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the Minister of Transportation and myself, I would 
also like to welcome Rob Lobdell who has been a principal in 
the development of West Central Road & Rail, a grain logistics 
concept that really could be a whole new paradigm for moving 
grain in Western Canada. I think a tremendous asset to that 
area, as the member opposite has said, and certainly in helping 
keep the railroad there. There was threat that the rail was going 
to pull out. West Central, with one of its prime movers being 
Rob, did tremendous work there. And we’re always happy to 
see him here in the legislature and thank him for his work and 
ask all members to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It’s my pleasure, members, to introduce to 
this Assembly a small group seated in the Speaker’s gallery 
front row who are with the visitor services branch. Patrice 
Tremblay, D’Arcy Frohlick, and Denise Gregoire have just 
recently been hired on to the visitor service teams as bilingual 
information officers. I hope their work experience here in the 
Saskatchewan legislature serves to be a very interesting and 
rewarding experience. They are accompanied in the gallery by 
Lorraine DeMontigny, director of visitor services, and 
Marianne Morgan, assistant director of visitor services. 
 
Please join me in welcoming our new bilingual information 
officers and directors to the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Also members, seated directly behind them 
are Murray and Lucille Scheidl. They are here today to observe 
the proceedings in the House and to observe their daughter in 
action in the Chamber today, this being Pam Scheidl, one of our 
legislative Pages. 
 
And I also want to mention that Murray Scheidl was in a 
classroom when I was just a starting teacher back in Prince 
Albert many, many years ago and he managed to survive it and 
raise a family as well. So welcome here to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Saskatchewan Dragoons Celebrate 100th Year of Service 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we celebrate our 
Saskatchewan centennial so too are the Saskatchewan Dragoons 
commemorating their 100th year of service to Canada. 
 
This past weekend the Saskatchewan Dragoons celebrated their 
storied existence with a reunion, parade to city hall, and 
rededication of their Vimy memorial crosses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Dragoons perpetuate the 46th 
Battalion and King’s Own Rifles of Canada and carry the battle 
honours of the 46th Battalion which served so bravely in World 
War I. 
 
Young Saskatchewan men and their families gave hugely for 
the cause of justice and peace in our world. Of 5,374 men who 
served in the 46th Battalion, 4,917 were killed or wounded. We 
owe them much. 
 
On Sunday the Saskatchewan Dragoons and congregation of St. 
Aidan Anglican Church honoured the memory of the valiant 
Prairie men who died at Vimy Ridge on April 9 and 12, 1917, 
by rededicating the Vimy memorial crosses. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, noble men and women from southwest 
Saskatchewan serve their country and their world in the cause 
of peace and good order as reservist soldiers in the 
Saskatchewan Dragoons. Based out of the armouries in Moose 
Jaw, from the Swift Current and Moose Jaw region they are 
ready to serve at the call of their country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to join together in honour 
of 100 years of service by the men and women of the 
Saskatchewan Dragoons by saying thank you, congratulations, 
and happy centennial. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Herb Sparrow Charity Roast in North Battleford 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, May 14, I had the pleasure of attending a roast in the 
honour of the Hon. Herb Sparrow. As you know, Mr. Sparrow 
served in the Canadian Senate for 37 years, being summoned to 
the Senate in 1968 at the age of 38 by the then prime minister, 
Lester Pearson, and retiring in 2005 at the mandatory age of 75. 
 
During his years as senator, Herb served Canada, 
Saskatchewan, and his community of North Battleford in many 
capacities, holding numerous positions in numerous 
organizations and committees. His 1984 Senate committee 
publication, Soil At Risk: Canada’s Eroding Future, set the 
standard for North and South American soil conservation 
methods and made Senator Sparrow a recognized leader in soil 
conservation through out the world. 



3116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

As mentioned, Herb is very active in his home community and 
one of his many achievements was the school lunch program 
which he ran out of his office at the local Kentucky Fried 
Chicken. This program made sure students at schools in North 
Battleford did not go hungry. 
 
The North Battleford Rotary Club hosted the evening, which 
Senator Sparrow would not agree to unless the proceeds went to 
a charity — $22,000 was raised and will go towards the Senator 
Herb Sparrow Rotary Club splash park. 
 
The roast brought together family, friends, colleagues, and other 
dignitaries for an evening of good humour and a hearty serving 
of wit as those roasting the guest of honour gave their shots and 
received the usual quick comebacks from Herb. 
 
Thank you, Senator Sparrow, for your dedication and 
achievements and for an enjoyable evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.] 
 
That’s the national anthem for Norway, and it’s sung on this 
day to celebrate Constitution Day in 1814. In Saskatchewan we 
have many people who are Norwegian descendants who 
celebrate May 17 here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This past weekend in Saskatoon, there were quite a number of 
people that gathered at the Western Development Museum with 
other Scandinavians to celebrate this event. At Birch Hills they 
have an annual event as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many people who are proud of 
their roots in Norway, and we have many of those people in 
Saskatchewan. And in fact in Canada we have the most 
Norwegian descendants of any province in the country. 
 
So on this day I would like to ask all of us to celebrate 
Norwegian Constitution Day along with the members from 
Regina Coronation Park, The Battlefords, Rosetown, Biggar, 
Saltcoats, Saskatchewan Rivers, Lloydminster, and all of those 
others who wished they were Norwegians here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Female Athlete of the Year 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in this Assembly today to congratulate Kelsie Hendry on 

her achievements. Kelsie Hendry is the recipient of the Mary 
Ethel Cartwright Trophy which honours the Female Athlete of 
the Year at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fifth-year Kelsie Hendry led the number one 
University of Saskatchewan Huskies women’s track and field 
team in successfully defending the CIS [Canadian 
interuniversity sport] championship title in Winnipeg. Hendry 
made CIS history as she was named the CIS Female Athlete of 
the Year and first female to ever do this. She went on to be 
crowned the CIS gold medal champion in the pole vault for the 
third straight year, beating the record she set last year with a 
jump of 4.22 metres. 
 
Hendry entered the national championship ranked number one 
in the country at the 2005 Canada West Championships. She 
won gold medal in the pole vault and set a new conference 
record and was named Female Field Performer of the meet for 
her accomplishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know the University of Saskatchewan, the 
U of S Huskies, has one of the most competitive and successful 
sports programs in Western Canada. 
 
I know Kelsie personally, and I know both her mother and 
father are very proud of Kelsie. 
 
I would ask that all members of the Assembly join myself and 
the official opposition in congratulating Kelsie Hendry and her 
fellow students and teammates for the tremendous efforts. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Statue of Her Majesty and Burmese 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, one of the major events that will 
take place during Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II’s visit will be 
the unveiling of a statute of Her Majesty and her horse, 
Burmese, created by Susan Velder of St. Walburg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Burmese was a beautiful, pure black, 
gentle-tempered horse born at Fort Walsh, Saskatchewan in 
1962 and was later selected to perform in the RCMP’s 
world-famous musical ride as the lead horse. Burmese 
performed with distinction and in 1969 was among 150 horses 
presented to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II during a musical 
ride tour in England. She quickly became Her Majesty’s 
favourite mount in parades up until 1987 when Her Majesty 
began riding in an open carriage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my father-in-law, P.J. Clifford Morin, was a 
member of the RCMP musical ride during the Burmese 
presentation to Her Majesty. And he served as the officer in 
charge of the musical ride for a good portion of the 23 years he 
spent with the ride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cliff was also instrumental in assisting Ms. Velder 
with her creation of the statue. Throughout the project, he was 
called upon often as a consultant to provide the artist with his 



May 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3117 

knowledge and expertise with respect to Burmese. Mr. Speaker, 
my father-in-law always spoke with pride and enthusiasm about 
the RCMP musical ride and Burmese, and he was very pleased 
to be able to be of assistance in the creation of the statue. 
 
It is unfortunate that Cliff passed away last June prior to its 
unveiling. But I know that he took great pleasure and great 
pride in knowing that this statue of Her Majesty and Burmese, 
with its association to the musical ride, would one day grace the 
grounds of this legislature. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Beef Industry 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week is the two-year anniversary of the discovery of BSE 
[bovine spongiform encephalopathy] in one Alberta cow which 
marked the beginning of a dark period in Canadian agriculture. 
Following this discovery, the US [United States], Japan, Korea, 
and other countries that imported Canadian beef closed their 
borders. 
 
This blow to the beef industry has cost the Canadian economy 
billions. Before the discovery of BSE, Saskatchewan was 
exporting about 23 million worth of beef per month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan beef producers are still suffering 
through this ordeal and now have to deal with a provincial 
government that refuses to fully fund the CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] program and has designed an 
inadequate set-aside program. Our program works out to be 
about half of what the Alberta government, per animal, has put 
in for their farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has provided a 
pre-feasibility study with a price tag of about $55,000. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a paltry sum in comparison with the 37 million 
that has been provided in Alberta for market expansion and 
research. 
 
The government has done little to attract new packing facilities 
in the province as well as encouraging the development of the 
feeder cattle industry to support an expansion in 
Saskatchewan’s packing industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has made commitments and then 
turned around and broke those commitments. Currently the 
feeder cattle industry faces challenges in growing due to the 
lack of infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to turn a disadvantage into 
an advantage for Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan producers, 
but as usual we point the finger to someone else to take the 
leadership role when it comes to farm families in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 

Elphinstone. 
 

Great Excursions 
 
Mr. McCall: — Monsieur le Président, je voudrais dire 
quelques mots au sujet de Monsieur Claude-Jean Harel et sa 
compagnie de voyage, Great Excursions. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words 
about Mr. Claude-Jean Harel and his company, Great 
Excursions.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Great Excursions is a Regina-based company that 
specializes in providing clients with enriched travel packages 
where adventure, discovery, and learning are integral parts of 
the travel experience. Mr. Harel is fully aware of what a great 
place Saskatchewan is and how much it has to offer. Great 
Excursions works with partners who share in his belief that 
Saskatchewan, with its rich natural and cultural heritage, has the 
potential to be a destination of international appeal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Harel recently attended Rendez-vous Canada 
2005 in Saskatoon and says that Great Excursions had its best 
Rendez-vous ever. The company is receiving commitments to 
list Saskatchewan products in greater numbers than ever before 
with tour operators, wholesalers, and partners from France, 
Luxembourg, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, England, the 
United States, and India, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is due in no small part to Claude-Jean Harel’s passion for 
Saskatchewan’s history, geography, flora and fauna, and 
people. As one of his customers has said, “Through Great 
Excursions, I have discovered the diversity, exoticism, and 
magic of Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank Mr. Harel for his work in ensuring 
that the world gets a little more Saskatchewan. 
 
Une autre fois, merci et félicitations à Monsieur Claude-Jean 
Harel sur tout son travail. Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
 
[Translation: Once again thank you and congratulations to Mr. 
Claude-Jean Harel on his work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Condition of Provincial Highways 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the Road Builders and Heavy 
Construction Association of Saskatchewan has a simple 
question for this government. Why is the gas tax filling holes in 
the budget rather than holes in the road? Mr. Speaker, why is 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
While the members will know that the Highways budget was 



3118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

increased by $5 million last year, we’re up to $300 million. 
We’re honouring our commitment, Mr. Speaker, of $2.5 billion 
over 10 years that goes towards road improvement and 
maintenance. And we’re also honouring our commitment of 1.2 
billion over four years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the travelling 
public that we apologize for the inconveniences that they will 
experience this summer, because there’ll be lots of construction 
this summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, travel the roads of this province. 
You can experience first-hand our crumbling infrastructure. The 
association compares our roads and urban streets to those of 
downtown Baghdad. Mr. Speaker, we have First World taxes 
and then some. Why do we have Third World roads? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again let 
me talk about the facts, Mr. Speaker. We recognize it’s 
springtime in Saskatchewan. We recognize that there are 
potholes in the road, Mr. Speaker. It happens every year. It 
doesn’t matter how much work you do, Mr. Speaker, there will 
always be potholes on the roads in the springtime in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the crews are out there. They’re 
doing temporary patching right now. They’re waiting for the 
surfaces to dry out. And as I say again, we apologize to the 
travelling public, Mr. Speaker, but there will be construction 
crews out across our province everywhere this summer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the facts are 
that the government takes in $65 million more than they spend 
on roads and highways in this province. Mr. Speaker, the Road 
Builders and Heavy Construction Association of Saskatchewan 
has hired a consultant to look at the Highways department 
budget. The conclusion is simple — fixing roads is not a high 
enough priority. 
 
The mayor of Regina agrees, saying his city’s roads are in 
deplorable condition. Mr. Speaker, when will this minister show 
some leadership and make fixing our crumbling infrastructure a 
priority? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
Conservatives opposite say one thing but here are the facts. Mr. 
Speaker, the amount of revenue taken in is correct. The member 
is correct — $365 million. But it is from vehicle fuel tax; it is 

from aviation fuel tax; it is from locomotive fuel tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amount of revenue that we collect for vehicles 
is about $320 million. The amount of expenditure on our 
highways budget is about $300 million and the amount that 
goes through to municipal government for road improvements 
is, I’m told, about $34 million. Strikes me that’s 334 million — 
just slightly over what we collect in fuel tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few facts of my own. 
Five years ago the people of southwest Saskatchewan were so 
frustrated by the state of their highways they undertook to fix 
them themselves. North of Val Marie we had patching crews. 
East of Climax, No. 18, we had patching crews. A constituent 
of mine sent pieces of pavement to the minister on a weekly 
basis from the community of Burstall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week I called every administrator from each 
community along Highway 32 from Leader down to Cabri and 
here’s what the administrators along that piece of road had to 
say. 
 
From Sceptre the administrator said, it’s deplorable. I don’t 
know what else I can say. From Abbey, it’s absolutely 
dangerous. From Lancer, the administrator there said, the area 
between Lancer and Abbey is atrocious. The children riding the 
school bus shouldn’t be allowed on that road because it’s so 
dangerous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the minister continue to allow these 
dangerous road conditions to exist? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we have the economy 
humming and again the only thing that is depressing in this 
province of ours is the members opposite in opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member refers back several years ago . . . and 
there will always be challenges as I’ve indicated. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there have been significant improvements in our roads 
in the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. We have taken many 
of those thin membrane surface roads that have seen significant 
shift from rail to road, significant pressures on those thin 
membrane surface roads. Mr. Speaker, we have converted now, 
Mr. Speaker, roughly 1,750 to 1,800 kilometres to structural 
pavement, Mr. Speaker. Those have been upgraded to structural 
pavement and I think that’s something we should be proud of. 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to fix the roads here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 



May 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3119 

Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Highway 32 is no longer 
primarily a grain road. Mr. Speaker, the town administrator in 
Prelate won’t drive down Highway 32. She won’t drive family 
members down 32; she won’t let them on the road. And she 
says that people are choosing not to do business in that area 
because of the poor condition of the highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the town administrator from Cabri won’t take the 
highway to her ranch even though it’s the closest route to that 
destination. The highway is simply too rough for her ranch 
vehicles. 
 
All the while, Mr. Speaker, this government will potentially 
take a windfall of profit out of the Shackleton gas fields that 
will present about 20 per cent of the province’s resources to this 
government’s budgetary requirements. Mr. Speaker, all that 
money coming out of that area and no money for Highway 32. 
Mr. Speaker, why will these dangerous conditions continue to 
exist under this administration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Look I’ve said 
we recognize the need for infrastructure and we need to keep 
working on the roads, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, let me 
ask this question. If those members opposite — the 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker — if those members opposite 
would have us take money from someplace else, Mr. Speaker, 
please to tell us where that money should come from, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve increased . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they say gas. I listened 
to the Finance critic a couple of days ago, Mr. Speaker, talk 
about the price of oil, Mr. Speaker, set at . . . he pegged it at 
$54, projected apparently that it was going to stay there forever. 
I don’t think it’s there any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, you need to be responsible when you put 
your budgets together. That’s what we’ve done. We’ve 
increased the budget by $5 million. We’ll continue to fix the 
roads here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Lake Diefenbaker is 
a tourism gem in southern Saskatchewan but its potential has 
not been realized and development around Elbow, Mistusinne, 
and Douglas Park is pitifully slow despite a world-class golf 
course, marina, and a beautiful, clean lake. The main reason 
seems to be the lack . . . for the lack of development around 
these communities seems to be Highway 19 from Highway 42 
to the community of Elbow. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those driving on Highway 19 have a difficult 
decision to make. They can dodge the deer or they can dodge 
the potholes. The highway is a major route to recreational areas, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s not a back road. Mr. Speaker, why is Highway 
19 perpetually in such poor condition? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, let me first of 
all say that in case members are not aware, last year and this 
year, it’s the first time it’s ever happened that we’ve had the 
most extreme weather conditions as it relates to freezing and 
thawing in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Well you hear them hooting from their desks, Mr. Speaker. But, 
Mr. Speaker, professionals have been talking about this for 
some time. In Western Canada we’ve had two years of extreme 
weather conditions. Mr. Speaker, let me say this, let me say this 
to the Conservative . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order please. The 
Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — . . . when you get into the fact that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I want to be able to hear the responses, 
members. The Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if they 
don’t want to listen to the facts I guess I’ll say this for the 
public across the province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
encourage those members to support this government and 
support this budget. I encourage those members to support . . . 
to contact their cousins in Ottawa as well, those Conservative 
members from Saskatchewan, our MPs [Member of 
Parliament], as well to support the budget to deliver even more 
money here to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this month the Canadian 
Automobile Association released the results of a survey that 
said Canadians are more concerned about highways than any 
other part of public infrastructure. Roads in Quebec and the 
Prairies are seen as the poorest in Canada. And Saskatchewan 
roads are certainly the poorest in the Prairies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has an obligation to its citizens to 
maintain basic services like roads. Mr. Speaker, why is this 
minister shirking that responsibility? Why isn’t Highway No. 
19, from Highway 42 to Elbow more of a priority with this 
NDP government since it is the only access to one of southern 
Saskatchewan’s main tourist attractions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



3120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well each one 
of the questions that have been asked they identify an area of 
the economy that are doing well, Mr. Speaker. They talk about 
first of all the oil and gas. We see significant oil and gas 
development in the province. While certainly that is something 
that we desire, we’ll continue to promote and develop in our 
province, Mr. Speaker, it continues to put pressure on the 
infrastructure. 
 
They talk about tourism, Mr. Speaker, another area of the 
economy that’s doing very well, Mr. Speaker. And we see year 
over year, Mr. Speaker, increases in the number of tourists that 
come to visit this beautiful province of Saskatchewan. I know 
that’ll happen in even greater numbers this year during our 
centennial year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize, we recognize the importance of 
infrastructure and that’s why we’ve increased our budget this 
year during this spring’s budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I recently 
received an email from a constituent who is very concerned 
about the condition of the highway that has been in a terrible 
state of disrepair for the last five years. Mr. Speaker, this 
constituent was driving on the section of Highway 22 between 
Earl Grey and the junction of 20 when she was . . . met an 
oncoming vehicle and was unable to avoid a large pothole and 
sustained significant damage to her vehicle, Mr. Speaker. But 
that was only part of her concern, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 
quote from her email . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, order please, order please. I’m 
just having a difficult time hearing the member and that’s 
because there are too many other people talking at once and I 
would ask members to come to order. The member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I said, 
damage to her vehicle was only part of her concern and I’d like 
to quote from her email. She says and I quote: 
 

My deepest concern is what could have happened 
considering my two children, ages five and three, were in 
the car with me. If the . . . [oncoming car] . . . I could have 
hit the oncoming car, and/or the ditch, or worse. I . . . 
[don’t] feel safe driving on this . . . piece of pavement. 
 

End of quote, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Highways: when is he going to fix Highway No. 
22? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the 
members have forgotten, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has more 
roads than Alberta and Manitoba combined, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a huge challenge for a province like ours where 
you see significant transfer of goods and services from rail to 
road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me just say for the Conservative Party opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. What we did last year, Last year alone, the department 
improved over 600 kilometres of provincial highway system, 
including resurfacing 281 kilometres of pavements and 
upgrading 154 kilometres of thin membrane surface highways 
to a paved standard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is lots to do. There will be lots happening this summer, 
Mr. Speaker. And we will continue working on our roads and 
fix them up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister said there 
would be lots happening. Well nothing’s happened on that 
section of highway in the last five years except it’s getting 
worse every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Coincidentally I received another e-mail dealing with that 
particular section of highway from an alderperson from the 
village of Earl Grey. The community of Earl Grey and the 
surrounding RMs [rural municipality] have been in discussions 
with the officials from the Department of Highways, Mr. 
Speaker, about getting their highway fixed. And I’ll quote from 
this e-mail, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A number of meetings have been held with representatives 
from the Dept of Highways — but no action has been 
forthcoming. At the last meeting, it was fairly bluntly 
stated that the RM and/or the Village of Earl Grey needed 
to step up to the plate with an offer to “partner”, otherwise 
that portion of highway . . . will be turned back to a gravel 
surface. That is quite [an] ultimatum — put up or shut up! 

 
Mr. Speaker, will this minister quit playing games with the 
people of this province and just fix their highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as I travel around the province we recognize there is 
work to do. But we are fixing the roads, Mr. Speaker. There 
have been significant improvements in the quality of roads 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. We have taken significant 
numbers of thin membrane surface roads as I’ve indicated, 
something over 1700 kilometres, Mr. Speaker, and moved that 
into a paved structure, Mr. Speaker. 



May 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3121 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased with the contribution from the 
federal government as it pertains to the national highway 
system, Mr. Speaker. We have accelerated the twinning of our 
national highways of Nos. 1 and 16 where they will be 
completed now by the year 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the roads are being fixed. We’re proud of that. 
And we should all be celebrating this year, 2005, here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Recommendations for Development of the Rural Economy 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our rural economy is 
like our highways, it is in need of repair. The Saskatchewan 
Party has given this government numerous ideas to fix this 
problem. Mr. Speaker, from One Hundred Ideas to Get 
Saskatchewan Ready for the Next 100 Years, idea no. 32, 
support the expansion of career training; idea no. 10, create 
Enterprise Saskatchewan, a one-stop agency for developing the 
economy; idea no. 21, establish new growth tax incentives to 
spur private sector investment. And from our policy book, 
eliminate corporate capital tax on new investment. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, when will this government implement these ideas so 
Saskatchewan families can have a better economic future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer this 
question by responding to what the Leader of the Opposition, 
the Conservative Leader of the Opposition said about a month 
and a half ago, Mr. Speaker. This is quote, he says: 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we don’t really care whose ideas 
they are. 

 
And he was talking here about ACRE [Action Committee on 
the Rural Economy], Mr. Speaker. And today, Mr. Speaker, I 
get a . . . Today, Mr. Speaker, I get a response, Mr. Speaker. 
Today, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The 
member for . . . Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I get a fax from Audrey 
Horkoff who is the Chair of the ACRE committee, and she says 
this, Mr. Speaker, about the question that the member opposite 
asked me about his ideas, and she says this: I know that they 
say they were first when they released their ideas, but they were 
not. 
 
We released the ideas first, Mr. Speaker, is what she said. And 
then she goes on and says this, Mr. Speaker, both Dick and I 
are, she says this both Dick and I are insulted by what the 
committee reference as their material, Mr. Speaker. I know it’s 
just politics, but we don’t play that game and don’t appreciate 
anyone else using it, Mr. Speaker. 

Apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Arm-River Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you one thing. 
This government is not first on anything that’s for sure. ACRE 
has asked the minister for more funding for entrepreneurs, a 
one-window contact for business approval in the start-up 
process. A PST [provincial sales tax] exemption on 
manufacturing equipment, and finally the systematic 
elimination of the corporate capital tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are great recommendations. At the same 
time they match the ideas we’ve been asking this government to 
implement for some time now. Mr. Speaker, will this 
government show some vision and implement these 
recommendations from ACRE now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me 
here, Mr. Speaker, the news story from the The StarPhoenix on 
Thursday, November 25, of which the Leader of the 
Opposition, Conservative Leader of the Opposition was talking, 
Mr. Speaker, about their tax policy changes, Mr. Speaker. And 
there was absolutely no mention, no mention of the PST 
adjustment, Mr. Speaker, at that time anywhere. 
 
And I’ll tell you why they didn’t mention it, Mr. Speaker, 
because the policy draft recommendations by ACRE, Mr. 
Speaker, were released the following day, Mr. Speaker. They 
were released the following day. And lo and behold what we 
see, Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatchewan Conservative Party’s 
new 100 ideas that they allude to is the policy from the ACRE 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we see. 
 
If the Saskatchewan Conservative Party members, Mr. Speaker, 
would at least, Mr. Speaker, give credit to those people whose 
ideas they are instead of adopting them as their own, Mr. 
Speaker. Just give those Saskatchewan people their ideas back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the minister 
opposite to table that letter, that fax. If the government will not 
use the Saskatchewan Party ideas, they should at least 
implement ACRE’s recommendations and implement them 
quickly. It’s been far too long since this government showed 
some serious commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister stand here today and guarantee that he is 
doing everything in his capacity to make rural Saskatchewan 
more prosperous? Can rural Saskatchewan trust this 
government to bring in ACRE’s recommendations so rural 
Saskatchewan will once again have a strong and vibrant 



3122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting today that the 
member from Arm River would stand up and quote information 
and that of the ACRE report, Mr. Speaker. Because I have here, 
Mr. Speaker, a number of quotes that the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party has been using over the last little while. And 
I want to quote this one, Mr. Speaker, from the member from 
Saltcoats-Melville and he says this, quote: 
 

ACRE members are being paid a per diem to find more 
ways to drive [a] . . . nail into the rural Saskatchewan 
coffin. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s his quote. He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that: 
 

One ACRE member [has said] . . . Rural Saskatchewan is 
going to die anyway [Mr. Speaker]. 
 

That’s the quote from the representative from 
Melville-Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker. Then he goes on to say, Mr. 
Speaker, and the most recent quote Mr. Speaker, from the 
member from Arm River who says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I’m afraid [that] the government will take . . . the wrong 
way and they will cut the infrastructure in many towns. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is what they’re quoting, Mr. Speaker. The 
member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Saskatchewan Business Council 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Labour has a good working relationship with 
organized labour, but I wonder about her relationship with the 
men and women who create jobs in this province. I would ask 
her to explain her letter to Warren Michelson, past president of 
the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, dated May 11, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tone of this letter is snarky, unprofessional, 
rude, contemptuous, and unbecoming a minister of this 
government. In this letter the minister states, and I quote: 
 

. . . the Business Council’s unending stream of public 
statements, news releases, open letters and advertisements 
contribute nothing of value. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is that what this minister thinks of the men and 
women who create jobs, that they contribute nothing of value? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just to point out that 
in the ad that was in the paper last night, and it talks about the 
proposed changes and myself saying that the proposed changes 
are the same as in other provinces. Then the Business Council, 
the Saskatchewan Party Business Council, stands up and lists 
five things, only one of which has any changes proposed to it. 
The other four, Mr. Speaker, the other four, as the same as the 
Saskatchewan Party has done over the last number of years, 
cherry-picked the items out of The Trade Union Act that they 
don’t agree with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
said, the Saskatchewan Business Council represents over 51 
organizations and the majority of businesses in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, the tone of this letter is unprofessional and 
scathing at best. The letter is full of condescending attacks on 
the very men and women who create jobs and opportunities for 
our young people. The minister goes as far as to categorize the 
concerns of these men and women as input. Mr. Speaker, input 
is in quotation marks. This suggests the minister thinks very 
little of what the men and women who create jobs in the 
province have to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the minister hope to build a positive 
working relationship with the job makers of this province when 
she ridicules their concerns and advice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite wishes to quote from letters, I would like to quote 
from a letter December 14, 2004 to Mrs. Pollon at the CFIB 
[Canadian Federation of Independent Business]. This letter 
came from Brad Wall, Leader of the Official Opposition, and at 
the end of the letter it says, and I quote: 
 

I would also like to offer my co-operation and any 
resources which may be of assistance to the Saskatchewan 
Business Council in opposing this policy of government 
directed hours. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve been behind this from the very beginning 
and they haven’t got the nerve to stand up on their own feet and 
do it. They hide behind the Business Council and, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier of 



May 17, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3123 

this province. Not a moment ago his Minister of Labour stood 
up and wrote off all of the businessmen and women, all of the 
co-ops, SIGA[Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority], all of 
the members of the Business Council, by calling them the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, she just wrote off all of the 
members of the Business Council. She called them the 
Saskatchewan Party Business Council. Universities, Mr. 
Speaker, municipal organization, co-ops, small-business men 
and women, larger businesses to be sure — she, Mr. Speaker, 
insulted them all, calling them all, writing them off as a partisan 
organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is clear. Will he ask 
that minister to stand in her place and apologize to the business 
community for those remarks? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. The Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
supported the economic development within this province and 
believes in the business community in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when we look at the Saskatchewan Party front of the 
Saskatchewan Business Council — when the Saskatchewan 
Party has offered their co-operation and any resources to help in 
this — Mr. Speaker, I guess the big question here is that caucus 
resources they’re offering that are paid for by the taxpayers of 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company Launches 
Special Youth Pass 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
certainly pleased, was pleased to announce that Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company earlier today launched a special 
centennial program that will allow Saskatchewan youth to see 
their province during this historic centennial year. The 
Celebrate Saskatchewan youth pass is an excursion pass for 
summer travel during 2005. 
 
The Legislative Secretary for the Centennial, the member for 
Moose Jaw North, joined me and many youth representatives 
from SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology], the First Nations University of Canada, and the 
University of Regina, along with officials from STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], Tourism 
Saskatchewan, and the Centennial Office this morning to unveil 
this exciting youth excursion bus pass. 
 
For a one-time cost, Mr. Speaker, of $75, Saskatchewan 
residents between the ages of 15 and 25 have unlimited access 

to STC bus service throughout the months of June, July, and 
August, Mr. Speaker. It’s important during the celebration of 
our 100 years as a province that our young people have the 
opportunity to see as much of the province as they can. We 
want to have as many young people as possible sample our 
province’s beauty, Mr. Speaker, during this our centennial year. 
 
The passes will be available starting Friday, May . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, members. Order. 
The Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The passes 
will be available starting Friday, May 20, at any STC depot or 
agency throughout the province. Starting June 1 they can be 
used as often as desired on any routes that STC travels in our 
province. The Celebrate Saskatchewan youth pass is an 
affordable way for young people to enjoy travelling right 
around Saskatchewan. A person would only have to use the 
pass once, Mr. Speaker, for a Regina to Prince Albert return bus 
trip, and the pass will have paid for itself for the rest of the 
summer. 
 
With STC serving 275 communities throughout Saskatchewan, 
this youth bus pass is a great opportunity for young people to 
see a great deal of our province. Whether they are using it to 
attend homecoming celebrations, visiting family and friends, 
catch some of the action at the Canada Summer Games, go the 
beach, go to a concert, cheer on our Riders, or just to explore 
the province — our young people will have affordable travel 
with the STC Celebrate Saskatchewan youth bus pass. 
 
And I am pleased that here in Saskatchewan we have a publicly 
owned bus company that is available . . . that is able, I should 
say, to provide this great centennial opportunity for 
Saskatchewan youth. We hope hundreds of young people take 
advantage of this great deal this summer to discover all the 
wonders that there are here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
and respond to the ministerial statement on the centennial youth 
pass announcement that the Minister of Highways just rose in 
his place and presented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a rare occasion perhaps today in this Assembly — 
at least of late — where you may see the opposition, the official 
opposition saying to the government, good idea. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, in fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s such a good idea that I’m 
surprised it’s not in the Sask Party’s book of 100 new ideas. It’s 
a good idea. Mr. Speaker, obviously the government is taking 
some direction from the philosophy of the Saskatchewan Party 
in implementing something that is of some value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a good thing that we as a government 
and STC would want to carry a bigger passenger load than 
normally might be the case on their regular routes throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. My thinking being that if the buses 



3124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2005 

are running anyway, we might as well run them full as well as 
partially full. The downside of course, Mr. Speaker, was 
highlighted during question period today was the fact that — 
and we talked about this last week in question period — one of 
the STC buses chose to take a detour on a side road in order to 
avoid the poor piece of highway that it would normally travel 
over. That is the real disappointment and the downside of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps this idea might want to be considered 
down the road as something that STC would want to implement 
every summer. Of course we know that this summer is special 
with our centennial, but it’s the kind of program that I believe 
will increase the opportunity for young people to see the 
province first-hand, as some people that don’t ever get a chance 
to see the perhaps the farther remote parts of the province. 
 
Perhaps it could be in fact extended to include seniors or 
perhaps low-income earners, Mr. Speaker, who maybe don’t 
have the opportunity to get out of the cities of Saskatoon or 
Regina and get the opportunity to travel throughout the 
province at a reasonable cost. And it’s something that maybe 
STC may want to consider — should — in the future. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, with tongue-in-cheek just a bit, 
perhaps we ought to . . . we know that we have a tremendous 
drain of young people throughout Saskatchewan going to other 
provinces and to United States. Perhaps we ought to make this 
program so that the buses stop within 100 kilometres of any 
border of Saskatchewan so that young people from this 
province aren’t tempted to leave Saskatchewan under the heavy 
oppression of this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion all in all I want to say to STC, good 
job on this particular program. I look forward to many young 
people travelling the buses of the province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
I’m extremely pleased to stand on behalf of the government and 
table responses to written questions no. 1,250 through 1,270 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,250 to 1,270 
inclusive have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, both the Crown and 
Central Agencies Committee and the Human Services 
Committee of the Legislative Assembly have a very heavy 
workload. To enable them to do their work, I move the 
Assembly do now adjourn. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Tuesday next, 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:45.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3109 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3109 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................3109 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................3109 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3109 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3109 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................3110 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................3112 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 104 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
 Bill No. 105 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2005 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................3111 
 Bill No. 106 — The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................3111 
 Bill No. 107 — The Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur les modifications corrélatives découlant de la loi intitulée The Municipalities Act 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................3111 
 Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3112 
 Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................3113 
 Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................3113 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3112 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................3113 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3113 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3114 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................3114 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................3114 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................3114 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3114 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................3115 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................3115 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3115 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Dragoons Celebrate 100th Year of Service 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................3115 
 Herb Sparrow Charity Roast in North Battleford 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3115 
 Norwegians Celebrate Constitution Day 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3116 
 University of Saskatchewan Female Athlete of the Year 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3116 
 Statue of Her Majesty and Burmese 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3116 
 Saskatchewan Beef Industry 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3117 
 Great Excursions 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3117 
 



 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Condition of Provincial Highways 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3117 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................3117 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3118 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................3119 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3120 
 Recommendations for Development of the Rural Economy 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3121 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................3121 
 Saskatchewan Business Council 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3122 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................3122 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3122 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Launches Special Youth Pass 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................3123 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................3123 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................3124 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3124 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




