















































Hansard: May 06, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 107A  FRIDAY, MAY 6, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2887 
 May 6, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the condition of Highway 32 has 
deteriorated significantly in the last year, especially the stretch 
from Leader to Cabri. I present a petition on behalf of 
constituents from the community of Sceptre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these two or three pages of petitions are signed by 
students who ride the school bus over that treacherous road. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of residents of Swift Current, Saskatchewan, and 
the Southwest who are concerned about the lack of residential 
spaces for citizens with lifelong disabilities. And the prayer of 
their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petitioners come from the community of 
Wymark, just south of Swift Current, and the city of Swift 
Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the spread of crystal 
meth. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Radville, 

and Gladmar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned parents in the constituency of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore the petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today live on Guenter, Wright, and Lashyn 
Crescent, and Bourgonje Drive in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
that citizens want to improve SaskTel cellular service in rural 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Saskatoon, Jansen, Lanigan, and 
Wynyard. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents opposed to the possible 
reduction of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 



2888 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions, being 
sessional paper nos. 666, 715, and 730. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise this morning on behalf of government but also as the 
Minister of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker and colleagues, I had the pleasure of 
welcoming the safety patrollers to the legislature here in 
Regina. This weekend they are celebrating the 15th jamboree 
safety patrollers, and SGI is a proud sponsor of that. 
 
You will notice obviously the very many young people in our 
galleries, mostly with the lime-green shirts. And I assure folks 
they have not joined the green team In Motion in the legislature 
building. Those are safety patrollers. 
 
I think what we’ll do, Mr. Speaker, first of all is I’d like to 
welcome from the Canadian Automobile Association, first of 
all, Maureen Murray. I believe she’s in one of the galleries. 
Maureen, if you could just give us a wave. She may be out 
organizing yet. Oh she’s in the Speaker’s gallery. Okay 
Maureen, I can’t see you. And also with her is Louise 
Houldsworth. And thank you very much to the two of you who 
have organized this wonderful event. So let’s welcome the two 
of them first. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Now I would like to if I could ask the 
indulgence of colleagues in the legislature here and ask each 
one of . . . when I introduce the safety patrollers, would you 
please stand or give a little wave. And then the MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] for the area, if they would also 
wave back so those safety patrollers would know who their 
MLA is. 
 
First of all from The Battlefords we have five safety patrollers. 
If you’d give us a little wave from The Battlefords. Where are 
we? There we are. Okay and your MLA down here. 
 
From Big River we have three safety patrollers and two 
chaperones. The Big River MLA. 
 
And from Creighton we have two patrollers and one chaperone. 
Okay. Your MLA. There we are. 
 
From Estevan we have six safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
And the Estevan MLA, there we are. 
 
From Gravelbourg two safety patrollers. There we are. 
 
From Hudson Bay six safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
Okay. 
 
From Kindersley two patrollers and one chaperone. All right. 
Enthusiastic. 

From Lanigan two patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Maidstone four patrollers and one chaperone. There we 
are. 
 
From Maple Creek seven safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Martensville two safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
Okay. 
 
From Moose Jaw four safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Nipawin two safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Nokomis two safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From North Battleford four safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
Okay. 
 
Get ready. From Prince Albert 24 safety patrollers and two 
chaperones. Okay. They must be good kids because every other 
community has two or three safety patrollers and one 
chaperone. These 24 have only 2 chaperones, so they must be 
very good kids. 
 
And from Regina we have 19 patrollers and 1 chaperone. Wow. 
Okay. Regina MLAs get up and wave. 
 
From Rosetown four safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Rouleau two safety patrollers and one chaperone. All 
right. 
 
And from Saskatoon 23 safety patrollers and 5 chaperones. 
Saskatoon MLAs, get up. 
 
Okay. From Spiritwood four safety patrollers and one 
chaperone. Welcome. 
 
And from Turtleford eight safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Unity three safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Warman two safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
From Watrous four safety patrollers, period. Those are really 
good kids. 
 
And from Weyburn — finally from Weyburn, I should say — 
four safety patrollers and one chaperone. 
 
Once again please join with me in welcoming all these young 
folks who are role models in their community, leaders in their 
community who help serve the communities and sure . . . and 
ensure, I should say, the safe delivery of kids, young children to 
and from our schools. So thank you very much for the good 
work you do and welcome to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2889 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join 
with the minister. Through you and to you to the rest of the 
Assembly, I join with the minister in welcoming the school 
patrol workers from around the province. 
 
Certainly I won’t go through the procedure that the minister 
did; we all had our exercise standing and waving. But I will 
admit that you add a lot of colour to the building which is nice 
to see. 
 
I also would like to introduce in the Speaker’s gallery Maureen 
Murray and Louise Houldsworth from CAA [Canadian 
Automobile Association]. I believe both of them are — I know 
Maureen is for sure — and helping put this together. Maureen 
and I had worked many years ago in the safety area, so I know 
she does great work in that area. 
 
But I would like to especially thank the school patrollers for the 
work that they do through the school year helping your 
colleagues get to and from school safely. That is a huge job, and 
you know the one thing that we always say about safety is that 
you never know how good of a job you do because when you 
do a good job there are no incidents. And that’s certainly the job 
that you’ve been doing for the province of Saskatchewan, for 
the kids in our school system. So thank you on behalf of official 
opposition for the work you do in some very inclement 
conditions at times. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce two 
very special people. Behind our bar is the MLA from Red 
Deer-North, Mary Anne Jablonski. Mary Anne has the distinct 
honour of introducing Bill No. 207, the Protection of Children 
Abusing Drugs which was passed unanimously in the Alberta 
legislature. In fact the Speaker of the House in Alberta said of 
her Bill when it passed in one day: 
 

[It] has never . . . [before happened] in the history of 
Alberta in 99 years . . . it’s a wonderful example of 
parliamentary cooperation, [and] the highest form of 
democracy. 
 

Also in your gallery is her husband, Bob Jablonski. Mr. 
Speaker, politics does make good friends, and I ask everyone to 
welcome these two people into the Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome Mrs. 
Mary Anne Jablonski and her husband to the legislature today. 
She has such a fascinating resumé that a person could really 
enjoy introducing her. You could have a lot of fun with this 
resumé. But I’m not surprised that she achieved the work she 
did in the House, having won an international speech 
competition in Kobe, Japan. So welcome to the member today. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Celebrating VE Day 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this Sunday, May 8, is the 
60th anniversary of the end of the Second World War in 
Europe. All across Canada and overseas there will be parades 
and celebrations to commemorate both the VE day and 
liberation of the Netherlands. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there will be ceremonies of remembrance to 
honour the Canadian men and women of all races and walks of 
life who took part in the great and terrible struggle against 
fascism. We recognize the extraordinary challenges and 
hardships they faced on our behalf, and we acknowledge their 
valour and the high price they willingly paid to ensure that we 
could live in peace and security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the war years, Canada was a nation of just 
11 million people. But between 1939 and 1945, Canada enlisted 
more than 1 million men and women in its Armed Forces. Mr. 
Speaker, whether it was training Allied air crews, producing 
war material, protecting Atlantic convoys, or fighting in Italy, 
the Netherlands or the Rhineland, Canadians both home and 
abroad were a vital part of the Allied war effort and contributed 
in no small measure to the final victory. But that contribution 
came at no small cost — 45,000 Canadian dead, 55,000 
wounded, and many others changed forever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the 60th anniversary of D-Day, both the valour 
and the cost must be remembered. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to join my 
colleagues in the Assembly today in recognizing the 60th 
anniversary of VE day. On May 5, 1945, German forces 
surrendered in northwest Europe. Victory in Europe or VE day 
was celebrated three days later. 
 
The war in Europe was fought hard, claiming the lives of 
45,000 Canadian soldiers. It was their sacrifice and the efforts 
of more than 1 million Canadians who served during World 
War II that will be commemorated this weekend with public 
ceremonies and celebrations including parades and events to be 
held in cities across the world. 
 
While this weekend’s events cannot hope to match the 
celebration that took place 60 years ago when thousands took to 
the streets to celebrate the victory, it will be a fitting tribute to 
the Canadian veterans. My dad was a veteran and was in 
Holland for over a year, and we always wondered about the 
Christmas cards that came to our home for a number of years 



2890 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

after that. 
 
In this national Year of the Veteran, it is fitting that we pay 
tribute to the accomplishments of the women and men who 
helped to liberate Europe and build the country we love today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Regina YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure last night of 
attending the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] 
Women of Distinction Awards dinner held at the Centre of the 
Arts. 
 
It was indeed an honour to be in a room with such 
accomplished and distinguished women who have unselfishly 
demonstrated their leadership and dedication to various life skill 
areas toward the betterment of their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the nominees were winners, and all should 
be commended for their contribution to our province. But the 
chosen winners were: for the young woman of distinction 
category, Phoebe DeCiman; for the arts, Robin Poitras; for 
business and trades, Valerie Overend; for community leadership 
and enhancement, Marion McBride; for education, Ruth 
Robillard; for health and wellness, Velda Clark; for lifetime 
achievement, Laura Balas; for science, technology and 
environment, Dr. Mhairi Maeers; and for sports, recreation and 
active living, Shari Mostaf. 
 
I congratulate all of the winners and the nominees and thank the 
YWCA for not only this important event but for all of the great 
work that they do for the women and children of our province. 
We truly appreciate it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Recognition of Mother’s Day 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Sunday is Mother’s Day. One day is not enough to properly 
thank our mothers for all they do for us in the course of our 
lifetime, but the day does provide us with an opportunity to 
reflect on how they guide and nurture us and how they create 
the foundation of our society one individual at a time. 
 
It’s a weighty responsibility, one we too often take for granted. 
Mothers are the ones who, when they aren’t at work, are driving 
their children to sporting events or arts activities. When they 
aren’t paying bills, they are doing beadwork or sewing for 
traditional costumes. When they aren’t keeping our homes safe 
and predictable, they are helping with homework. A mother is 
the ultimate multi-task worker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is worth remembering that for the first years of 
our lives our mothers are the centre of our universe. And truth 

be told, no matter where we go or who we become, they are 
never far from the centre of our universe. We always carry their 
lessons with us. They guide us, nurture us, and love us. We may 
make decisions they don’t agree with, but they will still support 
us. They can be our greatest critics and our greatest confidantes. 
They can be our strongest ally, our most formidable adversary, 
and our best friend all at the same time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have this opportunity to honour 
my mother and all mothers for their gifts and unconditional 
love. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
will always be someone in everyone’s life that is your softest 
place to land and yet is the strongest person you know, someone 
who knows your shortfalls but will defend you because of your 
strengths. They are our firmest hand of discipline yet our 
strongest pillar of support. Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about the 
unconditional love of a mother. 
 
Mothers are those that we often take for granted because we 
know that no matter what, they will be there for us. I’m sure we 
do not truly realize the sacrifices and dedication our parents 
have made until we ourselves became parents. Mr. Speaker, this 
Sunday is Mother’s Day, a day set aside to show our 
appreciation to our mothers, which by the way we should be 
doing every day. 
 
On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, my mom lives in her own 
home in Estevan. And I know she’s watching this now, as she 
watches us every day. So Mom, thank you for everything you 
have done and still do for me. And I love you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in wishing moms — 
all moms — a happy Mother’s Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Regina YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I and 
several of my colleagues had the pleasure of attending the 
Regina YWCA Women of Distinction Awards. Since 1911 the 
YWCA of Regina has been encouraging and supporting women 
through the programs and services they offer and by inspiring 
women to set goals and pursue their dreams. All the women 
who were nominated are among south Saskatchewan’s most 
dynamic, talented, and dedicated leaders. 
 
This year’s awards recipients are, for the arts, Robin Poitras. 
The winner in the business trades category was Valerie 
Overend. For community leadership and enhancement, the 
winner was Marion McBride. The recipient of the Education 
Award was Ruth Robillard. And in the category of health and 
wellness, the winner was Velda Clark. Laura Balas won the 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2891 

Lifetime Achievement Award, and Dr. Mhairi Maeers was the 
recipient of the Science, Technology and Environment Award. 
And Shari Mostaf won for sports, recreation and active living. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipient of the Young Woman of 
Distinction Award is Phoebe DeCiman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our congratulations to all of the nominees and 
award winners. Their commitment, dedication, and 
accomplishments have contributed to the well-being of our 
communities, and each one is deserving of our admiration and 
utmost respect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatoon Silver Springs Constituent Receives 
Principal Appreciation Award 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when going to school we all learned about the three R’s — 
reading, writing, and arithmetic. But a principal in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs has been honoured 
with the Saskatchewan Principal Appreciation Award for 
following the three C’s — commitment, collaboration, and 
celebration. 
 
Donnalee Weinmaster is the energetic and enthusiastic principal 
at Silverspring School. The award was presented by the 
Saskatchewan Association of School Councils and recognizes a 
principal who creates a learning environment that supports 
children and their families. The Saskatoon The StarPhoenix 
quotes Donnalee as saying, and I quote: 
 

“ . . . I was certainly very surprised, honoured and at the 
same time humbled because certainly I share this award 
with the entire Silverspring school and community 
because we are a team . . . it’s not about me, it’s about us.” 

 
Donnalee Weinmaster has been an educator for 21 years. She 
became principal two years ago and works on the principle that 
any type of parent involvement in our schools is critical. At 
Silverspring School, parents, staff, and students are committed 
to work together as a team and set goals to increase learning. 
Collaboration involves developing good communication 
between staff and students. The students’ growth, teamwork, 
and achievement of goals for student learning are celebrated 
often. 
 
Silverspring School is a shining example of a culture of trust 
because of the relationships that have been built between 
parents, students, staff, and the community. Parents volunteer 
through advisory councils, in the classroom, by distributing the 
weekly newspaper, hosting coffee times, and an annual pancake 
breakfast that recognizes parents. The school has a welcoming 
environment, and parents are encouraged to be supportive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may just for a couple of extra seconds with the 
safety patrollers in the audience, Donnalee, in January when it 
was minus 40 degrees, she went out there and took their job, 
sent the kids inside, and urged her staff to do the same thing. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all my colleagues to 
congratulate Donnalee Weinmaster on receiving the 
Saskatchewan Principal Appreciation Award at Silverspring 
School. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug-Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, joining us in our Assembly today 
is Mary Anne Jablonski. She is the member of the Alberta 
Legislative Assembly for Red Deer North. Mrs. Jablonski’s 
sponsored legislation protecting young children from drug 
addiction. Mrs. Jablonski is living proof that politicians can 
work together and give parents the tools they need for the 
protection and safety of their drug-addicted children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my private member’s Bill is modelled on the 
Alberta legislation that passed unanimously. This morning the 
national stats on drug addiction shows that Saskatchewan has 
the highest increase in meth seizures of the drug meth. That 
increase is 857 per cent between the years 2001 and 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government support my Bill? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I said earlier, I wanted to do two things. One was to test the 
provisions of section 18, which already exists, of The Child and 
Family Services Act to see if we had fuller powers under that 
Act than we’ve exercised. We have done that, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ve determined that we do have that additional ability to 
apprehend youth who are 16 and 17 years old and we have 
proceeded to use those powers. 
 
The second question of secure custody is a larger question 
because it involves both having secure custody and then 
committing resources to fund the treatment programs and 
whatnot at those secure custody facilities. 
 
So it’s still going to take some time to go further on this. But I 
think we have the provisions under section 18 of The Child and 
Family Services Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mary is a 17-year-old whose case 
was highlighted in our Assembly last week. She is in detox 
right now. But the only reason she’s in detox is because she 
volunteered to go in. 
 
Can the minister tell us what would have happened to Mary if 
she had not voluntarily agreed to go into treatment? 



2892 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE 
[Community Resources and Employment]. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it has been the 
practice for many years that for youth 16 and 17 that you still 
meet with them, you assess their situation, you offer them help. 
But certainly in the past they’ve been able to refuse that help. 
 
One of the things that I’ve got on my schedule to do, I want to 
meet both with the Children’s Advocate office and her youth 
advisory panel. I want to meet with the Aboriginal groups who 
expressed serious concern during the child prostitution 
discussions regarding the incarceration aspects, the forced 
treatment aspects of this Bill. 
 
But I assure the Assembly and the member opposite who has 
been very steadfast on this issue that I’m working as quickly as 
we’re able to move all the various parties, and we’ll come to a 
resolution soon on this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, for parents of children with drug 
addiction, moving quickly right now, this isn’t quick enough. 
We need something right now. We need something today. 
 
The government says it’s currently testing to see whether the 
short-term apprehension by police is actually a successful 
intervention strategy. The parents of these children who have 
drug addictions don’t need more testing. They need a law that 
will help them protect their children from drug abuse. 
 
If we pass the Bill, we’re sending a signal. We can even delay 
the proclamation like Alberta did so that the treatment facilities 
and resources for parents and courts can be prepared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mary Anne Jablonski and all members of the 
Alberta legislature know what politicians should do. The 
parents of drug-addicted children in Saskatchewan know what 
politicians should do. Does this government know what 
politicians should do? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I believe we’re 
moving in the same direction. I have used the powers under 
section 18 to apprehend. I will use them again if the need arises. 
 
We’re talking specifically here about the issue of compulsory 
closed custody. I think that’s a very serious step. I think that 
certainly in my discussion with parents, every time I meet with 
someone, Mr. Speaker, I ask them what do you think about this. 
And I think the opinion is weighing in fairly heavily that 
parents do need more tools in a modern society to intervene. 
And so certainly I’m working as quickly as I can to put those in 
place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 

Head-Milestone. 
 

Celebrating Community Centennial Grant Program 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have in my hand here the application guide for Celebrating 
Community centennial grant program. This program is for 
projects providing legacies of collaboration and understanding 
between diverse people in communities. Projects are to increase 
awareness and applications to this should also move towards 
diverse cultural heritage, respect that. Mr. Speaker, it also talks 
about bringing an . . . Aboriginal people and youth are 
especially encouraged. 
 
The Indian Head centennial flag project met all of this criteria 
and more. My question to the minister is, why was it rejected? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
for that question. The purpose of the Celebrating Community 
centennial project like you say is to promote cross-cultural 
understanding amongst communities — between Aboriginal, 
between youth, elders, and so on. 
 
This particular question that you raise, the application from 
Indian Head was a capital application. It was based on capital, 
and in the form it clearly states that this is not for capital 
projects. And based on that criteria, the project was rejected. 
But there’s also room for appeal. 
 
I also want to say that this is an arm’s-length organization that 
determines the rejection and approvals of these projects. And I 
want to say that these board of trustees continue to do good 
work based on the criteria that they have to deal with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when the project was rejected, 
the people of Indian Head asked me what they should do next. I 
did say that perhaps if they had a picture of Tommy Douglas 
and could get Kevin DeWalt to make a film on that, maybe they 
would be approved. Because it seems like this government has 
$600,000 to glorify Tommy Douglas out of the centennial fund 
but it doesn’t have money . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
has more than $600,000 to put towards the Tommy Douglas 
movie, but it can’t cover the projects that are put forward by 
communities around this province that want to celebrate the 
centennial. Mr. Speaker, the minister was correct when she said 
that the committee rejected it because it was a capital project. It 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2893 

does not build any buildings. It doesn’t cover any of the areas 
that the application form said it would reject on, and capital 
projects. 
 
This project is not a capital project. In fact the people that 
reviewed this project missed the whole intent. It brought 
together Métis, First Nations, and the community of Indian 
Head on one project that would have created a lasting legacy, 
Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t a capital project. It was a lasting legacy 
for the community, bringing forth all the diverse cultures in that 
area. Mr. Speaker, will this committee review and change its 
decision if it has to take a mere pittance away from its Tommy 
Douglas movie? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources, pardon me, for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say once again that 
I appreciate the good work that the board of trustees continue to 
do in allocating these dollars for our centennial. There is 
tremendous projects out there that are going out all over the 
province. And like I’ve said before, there is a basis, there is a 
process where they can appeal the grant and that process is 
available for them. And like I’ve said before, the board of 
trustees, you know, continue to do good work and they’re arm’s 
length from government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this Indian Head project uses 
a teepee as a symbol. It would celebrate the centennial in a very 
unique and creative way and create a lasting legacy, Mr. 
Speaker. It bridges the gap between peoples in that area. It does 
everything that this grant project was set up to do. But for some 
reason, because they’re short of money, they don’t have money 
to fund this, probably, and many other programs. 
 
We do now see the priorities of this government. It isn’t 
creating a legacy in communities about the centennial, it’s 
creating a NDP [New Democratic Party] legacy of Tommy 
Douglas. Will the minister reconsider the budget items that they 
have in front of her and put money, some of the money that 
they’ve put towards Tommy Douglas towards centennial 
projects around the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
acknowledge and I appreciate the work that goes out in the 
communities, that goes around the communities. And I also 
appreciate the work that is done by the board of trustees. And 
sometimes it’s not an easy job to do when you’re working with 
limited dollars. And I urge the member opposite and this group 
from Indian Head to file an appeal . . .  

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The Minister 
for Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to urge the 
community from Indian Head to follow the process. Like I said, 
there’s clear criteria in the application of the grant and there’s 
also a process for an appeal. And I’ve urged the member 
opposite to recommend — and we’ve done the same thing for 
this community — to appeal the application because there is a 
process in place. And like I say, this is an arm’s-length 
organization that determines whether a community is approved 
or not approved for a project. And I applaud the good work that 
goes out there in the communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are many faults with this 
project and one of them is the whole appeal process. It will be 
at least another six weeks before they have any sort of an 
answer. When you’re trying to put a project together for this 
summer — which this project is, would be for attracting tourists 
to the community, they can’t wait until August before they start 
on the program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But my question to the minister is: is $600,000 towards a 
Tommy Douglas movie — a movie — not a capital project? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, like I’ve said before, there is 
criteria and there’s a process in place and it’s arm’s length from 
government. There’s only so much dollars that we have to work 
with and I thank the board of trustees for the continued good 
work that they are doing. And sometimes it’s not any easy 
decision but there is clear criteria and it’s transparent, Mr. 
Speaker. And I urge the members from, or the group from 
Indian Head to go through the process that’s there for them to 
use. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Legislation Regarding the Labour Relations Board 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s 
review what the Minister of Labour said this week about Bill 
No. 87. First the minister told us that Bill 87 would give the 
Labour Relations Board the power to seize information from a 
workplace. Then a day later the minister told us that no, the 
board could not seize information. Then yesterday the minister 
says the legislation will allow for documents to be copied and 
removed from the premises. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, seizure or copying and removing documents 
— really, what’s the difference? 



2894 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, when anyone does business 
in a regulatory environment or an industry that is regulated, you 
need to abide by the regulations. If an inspector or an 
investigator went in on behalf of the Labour Relations Board to 
view relevant documents to an application before the board, 
there would need to be a copy of those documents or the 
information referred back to the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a big difference between access and 
seizure, and the member opposite should know that and stick to 
the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
facts of Bill No. 87 is that they give the Labour Relations Board 
the same powers as a Court of Queen’s Bench justice. Earlier 
this week on numerous occasions the Minister of Labour told 
this Assembly that Bill 87 was no different from the legislation 
in six other provinces. To my knowledge, giving the Labour 
Relations Board the same powers as a Court of Queen’s Bench 
justice is not common practice. 
 
Can the minister tell this Assembly why the LRB [Labour 
Relations Board] in Saskatchewan needs such powers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, when you look at many 
pieces of legislation, tribunals, and other boards, there is 
protection for the people on those boards — personal 
protection. It depends on the good intent of decisions, the 
information that is there, but that protection is afforded to other 
boards. And also, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was within the last 
year that we afforded this protection also to voluntary boards.  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
ask the minister to clarify. Let’s say the Labour Relations Board 
request documents from a business owner and that business 
owner refuses to give up those documents. Because the LRB 
will have the same powers as a Court of Queen’s Bench justice, 
does that mean the LRB will not have to get a court order and 
can do whatever it wants in this respect? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, in this instance the party 
that was . . . if the board was refused access to information that 
was requested on behalf of the board, the other party would 
have to proceed through the court process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, prior to the introduction of Bills 
86 and 87, which occurred on November 19, 2004, I want to 
read from yesterday’s Hansard the comment made by the 
minister, and I quote: 
 

 . . . when we look at bringing forward any legislation, we 
take into consideration the views of all stakeholders right 
across the province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, question to the minister, prior to November 19, 
2004, can the minister indicate the number of meetings that she 
had with businesses, individual business owners, or associations 
of business representing this province, before the draft 
legislation was prepared? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I know there’s very few of 
us in this House who hasn’t received a call at our constituency 
offices, and I know as Minister of Labour responsible for The 
Trade Union Act and the Labour Relations Board that I have 
received a number of inquiries into my office — letters, emails, 
phone calls — people that are distressed at the time it takes to 
receive a decision on their application before the Labour 
Relations Board. Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing here is 
section 18 being defined. The broad powers that the Board 
currently enjoys and has the power to deal with the cases that 
are before it, we are defining those powers. Mr. Speaker, these 
are similar powers that are held across the country. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we will continue to deal with issues that are brought 
forward by constituents, and we will continue to deal with 
stakeholders and have consultations with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board Claimant 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Gerald 
Prokopetz is a 46-year-old man from White City who used to 
run his own excavation business and was injured on the job. 
The Workers’ Compensation Board is refusing to provide 
further therapy and benefits to Mr. Prokopetz because he 
refused to attend what is a work-hardening program. And 
according to his doctor the treatment could be dangerous, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is: why has Mr. Prokopetz been cut 
off from WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] benefits? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
raised this situation with me and what I’m working on is what 
we can do in this environment. And certainly in this kind of a 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2895 

circumstance if the person qualifies for assistance, which may 
well be the case, there is a potential of 250 travel and I’ve also 
gotten the information from an organization called Hope Air 
that provides flights for people in these kinds of medical 
situations. 
 
So although I can’t speak to the WCB part of this question, I’m 
certainly working on getting a quick response to the other 
problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Prokopetz’s wife has terminal 
cancer and is undergoing an experimental procedure in Calgary 
as a last-ditch effort to prolong her life for a couple of months. 
He cannot afford to be there, Mr. Speaker, and he cannot afford 
to take his 10-year-old son. This man is in a desperate situation 
and although the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment is trying to do something for Mr. Prokopetz, Mr. 
Speaker, I was told that the earliest that they can deal with this 
situation is Monday at 11 o’clock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his 10-year-old son, this may be the last day, the 
last Mother’s Day that his son has to spend with his mother. I 
would urge this government to do whatever they can to help 
Mr. Prokopetz in his situation. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, again without getting into 
any personal details, I would just say that even in the quickest 
of circumstances one day’s notice is not a huge amount of time 
to work through a fairly complicated situation. But I promise 
that in the interests of compassion, certainly in any case that the 
members opposite bring forward to us, I’ll do anything I can to 
respond as quickly as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Nurses at the Cypress Regional Hospital 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses reports that over the last four years it has 
received numerous calls from nurses at the Cypress Regional 
Hospital in Swift Current asking for help on nursing practice 
issues. This in itself isn’t necessarily uncommon, but in a letter 
I received dated April 29, ’05 SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses] reports, and I quote that: 
 

In recent months the number and urgency of these calls 
has escalated, especially in regards to RNs’ concerns about 
their ability to maintain their professional practice 
standards and code of ethics. 

 
Nurses are concerned about being able to deliver the kind of 

quality care they want to. Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Health 
aware of the situation at the Cypress Regional Hospital, and if 
so, what’s he doing about it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware of some of these 
issues. And as the member knows, I was in Swift Current a 
couple of weeks ago with him when we had the groundbreaking 
for the new facility. And I did talk to some of the people at that 
particular point. 
 
There are some issues around the old facility and how some of 
the work areas are redone. It’s one of the reasons frankly that 
we’re going ahead with a new building, but it also relates to 
how the work has been structured there. And I know that senior 
management and the board have been working very diligently 
around this I know. And they’ve assured me that there are some 
very strong difficulties but that they are clearly working on 
them and have them on the top of their agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are concerns. The minister is 
right about the level of management versus the level of nurses, 
front-line people helping people in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of particular concern to SUN is the fact that the 
number of work situation reports which of course are incidents 
that would involve patients, the people of this province and of 
this Swift Current area, that detail any nursing practice concern 
related to patient care have increased significantly in the last 
few years. SUN’s executive director, Karl Austman, writes, 
quote: 

 
It is the opinion of SUN staff as well as the [opinion] . . . 
of SUN Local 69 that the nursing practice environment of 
the Cypress Hills Regional Health is at a crisis point. If 
interventions are not instituted quickly several RNs are 
considering leaving the hospital as they do not wish to risk 
their professional license. 
 

That sounds pretty serious. That should have more attention 
from the minister than a passing conversation with officials in 
Swift Current. What is he doing about this situation in Swift 
Current? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are processes to deal 
with these particular kinds of concerns around employee 
concerns that are raised by the union with management. And 
those processes are in place and people are working very 
diligently about this. And I am kept informed as to the overall 
situation. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a very good practice to get 
involved into these management decisions even though the 
members opposite seem to want us to do that on a regular basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 



2896 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when the health of Saskatchewan 
people, of our constituents, is at risk, yes we want the Minister 
of Health and this NDP government to get involved with that, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s his job. That is their job. Mr. Speaker, 
article 58.04 of the current SUN/SAHO [Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations] collective agreements 
says this, and I quote: 
 

“If a nursing professional association wishes to audit the 
nursing practice environment at the operations of an 
Employer, the Employer shall disclose the information 
relevant to the nursing issues to be reviewed.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of audit, the nursing audit that SUN has 
requested would be facilitated with the approval of the 
employer and certainly Sask Health and the Minister of Health 
could make that happen. Will he do that? Will he co-operate 
with the nurses of Swift Current and facilitate a nursing audit in 
the Cypress Hills Regional Hospital in Swift Current? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Appropriate procedures are being 
followed. But I would like to point out in this House that we 
have had consistently, yesterday and today, talks about how 
politicians should interfere with processes that have been set up 
in appropriate fashions.  
 
We have questions yesterday about the Chief Electoral Officer. 
Today we had questions about an independent, arm’s-length 
committee on centennial projects. And, Mr. Speaker, here 
they’re asking the Minister of Health to intervene in 
management-labour issues. And Mr. Speaker our job is to make 
sure we have the appropriate processes to solve these so that 
citizens of Saskatchewan can get very good health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for P.A. [Prince Albert] 
Northcote has requested leave for introductions. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
House three gentlemen who hail from Prince Albert. They’re 
down here today attending to a conference, and I understand 
that they’re heading back to the conference right after viewing 

question period this afternoon. And I also understand that today 
is somewhat a par for the course day for them, and so I’m 
assuming they’ll be enjoying that. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you Dion Furber, Don Goertz, and Clint 
Risling, and ask you all to give them a warm welcome to the 
legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly to 
move to private members’ public Bills and orders, second 
reading of item no. 6, Bill No. 207, The Protection of Children 
Abusing Drugs Act. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it has been 
requested by the member for Kelvington-Wadena that leave be 
granted to proceed directly to second reading of Bill 207, The 
Protection of Children Abusing Drugs Act. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 207 — The Protection of Children 
Abusing Drugs Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
members of the House for allowing me to stand and talk about 
this Bill today, give second reading for the Act for the 
protection and assessment of children who are abusing drugs. 
 
I’d like to start this morning by first of all thanking my 
colleagues to allow me work on this issue, something that’s 
very important not just to me but to every member of this 
House and to the families whose children are abusing drugs. I’d 
also like to thank the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy who 
has worked very hard with me on this issue. 
 
And today in our Assembly we have a very important guest that 
came to us from Alberta, the member from Red Deer North, 
Mary Anne Jablonski. Mary Anne worked very hard this year to 
involve every member of the Legislative Assembly in Alberta 
to support the Bill that would allow parents the right to help 
children overcome their dangerous drug addiction. This Bill 
introduced gave parents and provincial authorities the power to 
place their children that were under the age of 18 into 
mandatory drug treatment. 
 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2897 

Mr. Speaker, in the past year since we’ve been speaking about 
this drug in the House — I guess it’s been nearly a year when 
we first brought the issue up — it was disheartening at first to 
hear the members opposite think that the drug that we discussed 
most frequently, the drug crystal methamphetamine, was 
something that wasn’t a big issue. 
 
Personally I got involved in this when a family member just 
about a year ago called me to their home and asked me to come 
and talk to them about their son who had a problem. In fact he 
was incarcerated at the time. When I went to that home that 
evening, I had no idea how much my life was going to change 
when I saw what could happen to a family that’s an ordinary 
family like mine and every member of this House. 
 
They have a son who was nearly 20 years old. He was a 
good-looking young man with a good education, a good job, a 
nice car. He was engaged. And he had his whole life ahead of 
him. And then the family missed him. For two weeks they 
couldn’t find him. And when they did find him, they found that 
he had lost not only his job and his car and some of his good 
looks, but he’d lost hope for the future because he was involved 
in the drug known as crystal meth. 
 
I found him . . . The next time I spoke to him he was actually 
incarcerated. I went to the correctional centre in Saskatoon and 
talked to him. And he told me how that drug had taken over his 
life; how after the very first time he used it, he had no desire to 
go home. He had no desire to go back to the life he knew and 
the family he knew. He had no control over his life. He didn’t 
even know that he was down to actually trafficking the drug to 
support his habit. 
 
We’re not talking about some child of a family that doesn’t love 
him. We’re not talking about some child who is economically 
deprived. We’re not talking about a child who had no hope. 
We’re talking about ordinary kids. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we in this legislature are 
supposed to be doing. We’re supposed to be helping the 
children who are our future, the ones that are our hope for the 
future. The reason why all of us are in this House today, the 
reason why every one of us got elected is so that we could make 
this province a better place for our children. 
 
So we started bringing this out in the House. And I was 
disappointed — as was all of my colleagues — to find that the 
government didn’t think this drug was anything more than a 
flash in the pan. But I guess I’m given some hope when in 
today’s newspaper I see that our Premier is actually bringing 
this up on the Western provinces’ agenda. In fact the word 
crystal meth is in the headline. And nobody wants to take credit 
for anything — well except for maybe doing the right thing for 
our children. 
 
We introduced this Bill based on the Bill that the member from 
Red Deer-North brought forward. She was at a conference that 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy and I were at last year 
in Red Deer when we heard these stories from many, many 
families whose lives are being destroyed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was at the correctional centre, I learned 
from my relative . . . from the young man that over 80 per cent 

of the young people that were in jail at that time, that were 
incarcerated, were there because of an addiction — 80 per cent. 
And the addiction, many of them were to drugs, and that 
addiction to drugs was mostly crystal meth. 
 
And I learned at that time that there was no treatment for him in 
the jail. He didn’t come in at the right time to actually get into 
the treatment. By the time that process would have been in 
place for him, he would have been ready to be discharged so he 
couldn’t do it. 
 
Many of the families that come to talk to us right now say, you 
know what, the only hope we have for our children at this 
moment is to get them incarcerated, to have the police pick 
them up for possession or for trafficking so they can get into a 
place where they can actually get treatment. The very last thing 
that any parent wants is to have their child part of the criminal 
justice system. Not only does it affect them for their whole life 
because of the record they’ll have, but it affects them 
emotionally because they’re not getting the help that they need. 
 
I think as we stand in the legislature every day, we’ve got to 
question why we’re here. Every one of us have that 
responsibility and we have . . . and the parents out there have 
the right to expect that of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, parents and elected people have an obligation and 
a duty to help our young people by whatever manner we can. I 
was encouraged when I read the government’s crystal meth 
strategy last year and when they made the statement they were 
open to exploring new and innovative approaches. 
 
When I read the Bill that the member from Red Deer-North 
brought forward that was passed unanimously in one day, April 
14 of this year, I was very excited because I really believed the 
members opposite would see this is an open, as a new and 
innovative approach. When it was passed, the Speaker 
congratulated all members of their House and said, “let me . . . 
tell you how proud I am of all of you for being true 
parliamentarians.” Everybody in that legislature knew that this 
Bill was brought forward for the parents, parents that needed 
help, parents that knew that their drug addicted children needed 
help. 
 
And we — every one of us — have a responsibility to our 
children. Saskatchewan, the province of Saskatchewan, the 
province of Alberta, the country of Canada signed on to the 
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. And I’m 
going to read you some of the articles in this convention 
because I think they mean something to every one of us. 
 
Article 33 says you have the right to be protected from 
dangerous drugs. Article 36 says you have the right to be 
protected from any form of exploitation. Article no. 24, you 
have the right to be the best . . . to have the best health possible, 
and medical care and information that will help you to stay 
well. Article 19 says you have the right to be protected from 
being hurt or badly treated. And article no. 5 says you have the 
right to be given guidance by your parents and your family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the people of the province of Alberta 
said to their legislature, and that’s what the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying to us. They’re also saying that there is 



2898 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

a difference between voluntary and involuntary treatment, and 
as parents they have a right to make that decision. 
 
[11:00] 
 
We give parents in our society a lot of responsibility. We expect 
them to know what’s best for their children when they’re living 
under their roof till they’re 18 years old. We have laws that 
protect our children to make sure that the parents do as they’re 
supposed to do. And yet there is some times when the child 
doesn’t . . . can make a decision that they’re . . . our laws are 
saying, well the child is smarter than the parent. The child 
knows better than the parent at this time. 
 
A child whose mind is being taken over by drugs doesn’t know 
that. In fact it wouldn’t matter if you were 18 or 25 years old 
when you have . . . when your mind is clouded by a substance. 
It is abused. It cannot function in a way that we would expect 
someone to make the right decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, voluntary treatment is . . . or compulsory 
treatment is better than no treatment. We have doctors in the 
UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] said that. 
We’ve had some of our people on our addictions council here in 
Saskatchewan say that. We know that involuntary treatment 
isn’t always going to work. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, neither 
does voluntary treatment always work; in fact less than 50 per 
cent of the time does it work. 
 
But we have to have the child . . . give them the opportunity to 
have that treatment. Sometimes he might have to go in two or 
three or four times. But every time they go in, it is one step 
closer to the chance that they’ll never do that again. And then 
those kids that come out of it are the, they’ll be the role models. 
 
Those of us sitting in this room can go and speak to children all 
we like. We can have the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] go speak to them. We can have their church counsellors 
go speak to them. But you know who makes the biggest impact 
on them? The recovering addicts. The ones who have recovered 
from an addiction. They can say to their peers, this is what 
happens to you and this is what can happen to you, and this is 
how you can avoid it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to take that responsibility. We’re asking 
the government to work with us. We’re proposing a 30-day 
period of mandatory treatment. And every parent that has a 
child involved in drug addiction — and especially crystal meth 
addiction — knows that 30 days isn’t long enough, but it’s a 
start. 
 
The Supreme Court of Canada has ruled that limits on rights is 
acceptable if a limit deals with a pressing and substantial social 
problem and that the government’s response to the problem is 
reasonable and justifiable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we do have adult detox centres. 
But I think that every one of us should be ashamed to admit that 
we don’t have a youth detox system here in Saskatchewan. In 
fact there are not enough beds anywhere in Western Canada. 
But we should take a leadership. We are supposed to be the 
birthplace of medicare. We have a opportunity here to take a 
lead and say, in Saskatchewan our children are our most 

precious resource and we’re going to give them every facility 
we can. We’re not going to worry about . . . We’re going to 
worry right now about putting the child first. If we pass a Bill 
like this we are saying we are putting our children before 
anything else because that is what our future is all about. 
 
On a ruling concerning a child’s Charter of Rights, a Supreme 
Court justice said: 
 

Children, especially young children, are unable to assert 
their rights to health and life. These rights are to be 
balanced in a child protection context of parental liberty. 
By abusing drugs, a child is already giving up their rights.  
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1997 Colin Powell launched America’s 
Promise by making this speech, and I’d like to quote to this 
Assembly. He said: 
 

“Every child should have a Little Red Wagon . . . A Little 
Red Wagon to pull around the heavy load of life . . . A 
Little Red Wagon to pull around your dream . . . and a 
Little Red Wagon has a long black handle so that an adult 
can come along and help when [that] road is particularly 
difficult or rocky. So please put in your heart the image of 
the Little Red Wagon. Remember that every child has [a 
right] to have one.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, while our Premier was in opposition he called for 
action on youth addiction but rather than studying the problem 
he said, let’s do something right now. He said, and I quote: 
 

The time for delay is long past. The time for action is now. 
We cannot rest while a whole generation is lost. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill I’m talking about would allow a parent to 
apply to a court for an apprehension and confinement order. 
The child would need to be assessed by the director responsible 
for the judicial interim release program. And the child could be 
confined for up to 30 days. We know that more days would be 
important, but let’s start there. This Bill sets out provisions for 
review of the order, for hearing procedures, for public bans, for 
witnesses, for confidentiality, for treatment options, and for safe 
houses. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is a start. I know that more needs 
to be done. We have to have an education system. We have to 
change some of the laws that govern not only our province but 
our country. We have to have youth facilities. But I ask this 
government to work with us to ensure that parents have the 
tools necessary to protect their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Red Deer spoke to her 
Assembly just less than a month ago when she brought forward 
this Bill. And the day that she came to the House, she was given 
a book from a parent who gave her pictures of her child from 
the time the child was born to two weeks before when that child 
left home and hadn’t been seen from since. And I’m sorry to tell 
this Assembly, but that child has still not been seen. But Mary 
Anne was given this book and she was given this letter from the 
mother, and I’d like to read it. 
 

This is my daughter Sara, my love. She is my heart. I want 
to thank you with all . . . [my heart] for helping us with 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2899 

[this] Bill . . . 
 
Along with the petitions, I would like you to have this 
little album. It shows my daughter’s progression with 
crystal meth. If you were here in front of me [right] now, I 
would get on my knees and I would beg you: please don’t 
give up. Please help us. I miss her so [very] much [and] I 
love her so much. What would I do without my Sara, my 
love? Please don’t give up. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot give up on our children. We can have 
all kinds of excuses why Bills shouldn’t be passed or why we 
should delay. By passing this Bill right now, we’re sending a 
very clear signal, not just to everyone in this Assembly but to 
every parent in Saskatchewan that, although we may not have 
everything in place right now, we have the burning desire to 
make the change that we know is necessary. We’re sending the 
message to everybody in Canada that Saskatchewan is standing 
beside Alberta, and in this area of the country we are doing 
what we can. As our centennial gift to our children that we’re 
going to put forward every method we can to help our children. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this moment I ask this whole Assembly 
to join with me, with the parents of Saskatchewan in doing what 
we can to help our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. It is 
my great pleasure and my great privilege to . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I stand to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. It is 
my great privilege and honour to participate in the debate 
surrounding Bill No. 207, moved by the member. And I have a 
number of points to make briefly as the Legislative Secretary on 
substance abuse to the Premier. 
 
I think everyone in this House can agree that our intent is to 
protect children in Saskatchewan. That is our number one 
priority as a province, and I don’t think anyone in this House 
disagrees that. I don’t think anyone in this House disagrees that 
children should be our number one priority. 
 
We have to make sure however . . . In my tour of 
Saskatchewan, I’ve started in January and I’ve toured North 
Battleford, Prince Albert, La Ronge, Yorkton, a week in 
Saskatoon, a week in Regina, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, toured 
a drop-in centre in Alberta, conference calls in Alberta, in 

Manitoba . . . and surrounding people around Saskatchewan. 
 
And in my consultations with parents and children and teachers 
and principals, the police, addiction workers, recovering people, 
doctors, nurses, politicians, mayors, councillors, MLAs, as well 
as workers in drop-in centres and treatment centres, what I have 
learned in the four months that I’ve been doing this is there’s no 
easy answers. There’s no silver bullets that we can just 
implement one thing and the problem will go away. 
 
We have to also make sure that there’s no unintended results 
when we pass legislation, that we may intend to protect a 
certain segment of society but we have to be sure that that does 
not have unintended negative consequences. 
 
I do note that the Bill in Alberta covers five days. The one that 
we’re contemplating today is 30 days which is six times as 
long. We need to know why that is. We also know that the Bill 
in Alberta won’t be coming into effect for another 14 months or 
so, July 2006. That does give us an opportunity to make sure 
that our Bill or our way of dealing with this issue can be 
operationalized in a way that is successful and that actually 
achieves the intended goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my consultations with the Canadian Centre for 
Substance Abuse, he did advise to be very careful that we don’t 
just do something for the sake of doing something — that what 
we’re advocating is what’s called evidence-based best practice, 
that it’s shown to work, and that it actually does work. We all 
agree we want to protect kids. We all agree that children are our 
number one resource. But we have to make sure that there are 
no unintended results. 
 
I have spoken to some recovering young people, and one of 
them was 17. One of them actually is 19. And they both left 
home at the age of 15, 16, and they did what’s called couch 
surfing, where they crash at a friend’s place, stay there for a few 
weeks, move on to another friend’s place. And then they 
progressed on to actually living in an apartment with people 
that are in their 20s and in some cases later 20s. 
 
And the question I had is, if this legislation were there, would 
that have helped you? And their, both of them, their response 
was absolutely not. What they would have done is that . . . In 
the small community where they were living and where they 
were couch surfing, there were neighbours that were keeping an 
eye on them. The parents generally knew where they were. But 
they said that if this legislation were in place, they would have 
left Saskatchewan. They would have gone to Calgary. They 
would have gone to Vancouver. And I guess we as legislators 
want to make sure that when we do pass or when we do bring in 
measures in this area, that in a year or two from now we’re not 
hearing from parents that says, because we had this legislation, 
my daughter or my son fled Saskatchewan, and now I don’t 
know where they are and that they’re dying on the streets in 
Vancouver. 
 
So I think everybody in this House and everybody in this 
province knows that children are our number one resource. We 
have to make sure that as we make laws that those laws have 
the intended results. 
 
The other aspect, Mr. Speaker, we do have time. We do have 



2900 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

time to look at this issue seriously. We can consult with the 
Children’s Advocate office. We can consult with the human 
rights office. We can consult widely with community leaders 
and with children. We can also watch to see what Alberta is 
doing between now and July ’06 when it becomes operational, 
the number of treatment centres that we would need to increase, 
those sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, to do all of those things — to ensure that we 
protect children and we protect children in the way that actually 
does have the most positive impact for all kids — I believe that 
the legislature and politicians and society does require that time 
to achieve those results. We still have time in this session. We 
have a legislative calendar which allows us to meet in the fall, 
and there’s plans to do that. And we also have a spring session 
coming up next year. 
 
And I think we can take the pregnant pause. We can take the 
time to do this right, to protect our kids in a meaningful way. 
We can still have this implemented before Alberta implements 
it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s my goal, is to make sure that we do 
achieve the results that we intend. Alberta’s the first province in 
Canada to do this. There’s a few states in the US [United 
States], but it’s not widespread. This is something new. This is 
something that deserves our respect, that deserves the proper 
review. And, Mr. Speaker, to do that I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Carried. I recognize 
the member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move to item no. 7, Bill No. 208, The Tommy 
Douglas Day Act, followed by item no. 2, Bill No. 203, The 
Recognition of John George Diefenbaker Day Act, under 
second readings of private members’ public Bills and orders. I 
ask for leave. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — Carried. 
 
[11:15] 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Iwanchuk): — I recognize the 
member from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real honour to 
rise today to speak to this Bill and to speak to the person that it 
focuses on, the person of Thomas Clement Douglas. And in 
setting the context for this, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just quickly 
refer to the preamble in the Bill. It really lays out the case for 
such a Bill. 

WHEREAS Thomas Clement (“Tommy”) Douglas served 
as Premier of Saskatchewan from 1944 to 1961; 
 
AND WHEREAS, while Premier, Tommy Douglas was 
instrumental in the creation of Crown corporations to 
benefit the people of Saskatchewan, including Canada’s 
first publicly owned automobile insurance agency; 
 
AND WHEREAS Tommy Douglas sought to improve the 
living standards and working conditions of rural 
Saskatchewan through rural electrification, building a 
modern highway system and support for the rural 
economy; 
 
AND WHEREAS the government under Tommy Douglas 
used careful financial management to pay down the huge 
public debt and left a legacy of prudent financial 
management; 
 
AND WHEREAS Canada’s first provincial Bill of Rights 
was enacted in 1947 to protect against discrimination and 
to ensure that each person had the right to fair treatment; 
 
AND WHEREAS the government under Tommy Douglas 
created the Saskatchewan Arts Board in 1948, the first arts 
support agency of its kind in North America; 
 
AND WHEREAS the government under Tommy Douglas 
introduced measures to modernize the rights of working 
people, including the introduction of a labour relations 
board and the creation of a professional, independent civil 
service; 
 
AND WHEREAS the government under Tommy Douglas 
diversified Saskatchewan’s economy through support for 
new enterprises, the development of a steel industry and 
the growth of mineral exploration and extraction; 
 
AND WHEREAS Tommy Douglas was instrumental in 
establishing Canada’s first public hospitalization program 
in 1947 and the creation of Canada’s first Medicare 
program; 
 
AND WHEREAS Tommy Douglas sought to serve all 
people with compassion and fairness, displayed humour 
and honesty and conducted his government with principle, 
boldness, optimism and vision; 
 
AND WHEREAS Tommy Douglas has been recognized 
as one of Canada’s greatest citizens [in fact the greatest 
Canadian, Mr. Deputy Speaker]; 
 
AND WHEREAS October 20 is the anniversary of 
Tommy Douglas’ birth; 
 

The motion that I’ll be moving at the conclusion of these 
remarks is: 
 

Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Legislative Assembly, enacts as follows: 
The Tommy Douglas Day Act. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I was asked to do this, to sponsor this Bill, by the 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2901 

Premier. And I believe he asked me for two main reasons. One 
is that I’m the youngest, I’m the youngest MLA in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I’m a student of history. As well, 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency, we’re very proud have in it 
Tommy Douglas House. So in that regard I like to think that 
Tommy Douglas House is a part of the constituency I represent 
in this Assembly. 
 
And certainly you know, Mr. Speaker, I can think back to the 
day when I signed the roll when I took my place in this 
Chamber. And certainly no small part of the thrill I felt on that 
day was the fact that I was signing the roll that Tommy Douglas 
had signed, that I was entering into a Chamber as an elected 
representative in a place where Tommy Douglas had served as 
premier from 1944 to 1961. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, as a student of history, I think it 
. . . to know where you’re . . . to know your past is to better 
inform where you’re going to go in the future. To know what 
has happened in the case of Saskatchewan I think gives us some 
good insights as to where we should be taking this province in 
the future. 
 
And I guess you know as we’ve made the case in the preamble, 
Douglas was party to doing so much for this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know not just Saskatchewan of course, but 
his contribution to public life and to improving the quality of 
life for all Canadians has been recognized from one coast of this 
country to the other and to the other. 
 
When Canadians think about what makes them uniquely 
Canadian, medicare comes up time and time again as something 
that Canadians prize as being a uniquely Canadian institution. 
And of course Tommy Douglas was hugely instrumental to the 
implementation of medicare here in Saskatchewan but also in 
the ’60s in the Pearson minority governments, in making sure 
that it came in as a national program. 
 
Douglas was many things, Mr. Speaker. He was a printer, a 
preacher, a politician. In fact Douglas used to describe his 
career trajectory as the descent of man, moving from the 
illuminated profession of printer through to preacher and then 
into politician. 
 
He was wickedly funny and a very compelling speaker. 
Certainly the “Mouselands” and “The Cream Separator” are two 
political parables that have entered into the common usage in 
Canada and still thrill crowds to this day. 
 
He had a great mind. He had a command of the poetry of 
Robert Burns; he was a proud son of Scotland. He had a great 
command of the scripture, and he had a great command of 
poetry from all different stripes at well. So he had this great 
information stored in his mind and a great way of delivering it 
and thrilling crowds. 
 
And I guess it’s one of my regrets, Mr. Speaker, that I was too 
young to really, to see him in his prime. I’ve certainly seen 
depictions or I’ve seen video tapes of different speeches that 
Douglas has given. I’ve heard audio recordings of different 
speeches he’s given. He was a heck of a speaker. He had the 
ability to break down complex issues in a way that all sorts of 
different people could understand and to make people think 

they wanted to do something about it, to bring them on-board. 
 
And I guess it’s another thing that was remarkable about 
Douglas was, he was a small fellow. He was slight of stature 
but of course he was very strong. He was a Golden Gloves 
boxing champion out of Manitoba. And even into his senior 
years, there’s the story of the fellow that tried to steal his wife 
Irma’s purse and got a thumping from Douglas for his troubles. 
He was pretty feisty. He was a fiery person. 
 
And he brought that passion, he brought that intelligence, he 
brought that commitment into the public arena and advanced 
the social and economic well-being of the people of 
Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan people. He was a real 
pioneer in terms of working to bring First Nations to a rightful 
place within the mainstream of Saskatchewan society. 
 
He was a great defender of civil liberties and in the FLQ [Front 
de Libération du Quebec] crisis of 1970 took a very hard 
position in the House of Commons for which he was roundly 
condemned. But as history I think has borne out it was the right 
thing to do. And he stood with the courage of his convictions 
with his colleagues in the federal NDP caucus, and they made 
that stance. And I think, you know, as politicians and people 
that pay attention to where we’re at with our principles, the 
example of Douglas is tremendous. 
 
He was also very practical, Mr. Speaker, and I wouldn’t want to 
deny that for a second. But he was that rare dynamic tension 
between principle and practice — putting his ideals into reality. 
 
Now Tommy had his enemies to be sure, Mr. Speaker. And you 
know from time to time in this Assembly we have . . . certain of 
the members opposite like to refer to the master’s thesis that 
Douglas wrote in the early ’30s that was based on eugenics. 
And again you know, I bring this up, Mr. Speaker, because 
Douglas wasn’t perfect. He wasn’t perfect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think in the case of this, this exact example, I think 
something that has to be taken into account was what he wrote 
in the early ’30s he had every opportunity to implement when 
he became premier and minister of Health in 1944. Eugenics 
thought was fairly prevalent in that day. Our neighbours to the 
west of us, Alberta, had eugenic law on their books from 1928 
to 1972. But when the Sigerist commission reported on the state 
of health care in Saskatchewan, Douglas had a chance to move 
forward with some eugenic proposals, and he didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker, because he had had more time to think about the issue. 
 
And I think that’s also a mark of the man’s greatness in that he 
wasn’t dogmatic. He wasn’t so concerned with . . . He was 
more concerned with being right and doing the right thing than 
he was with carrying through with something that would have 
been wrong. So I think that has to be taken into account by 
those that would like to use that for some kind of partisan 
debating point. 
 
And I guess you know just to say, Mr. Speaker, Douglas wasn’t 
perfect, but he did so much for the people of Saskatchewan and 
the people of Canada that . . . when I hear people criticize 
Tommy Douglas, it’s like that old story about the doubter who 
saw Jesus walking on the water, and then went away 
complaining about how Jesus couldn’t swim. You know, he did 



2902 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

so much and yet there are people that will attack him and try to 
tear him down. And I guess that is as it should be. Douglas 
always had his enemies, his opponents. I think he certainly 
treated them with respect and with a fair measure of 
compassion, but the enemies will treat him as they will, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Anyway it’s an honour to raise this in the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, to speak to this motion. And I guess I wanted to close 
off my remarks with the recitation of a poem from Blake that 
was read at Douglas’s funeral in ’86 and at different memorials 
for him. And I have a copy of the program from that from my 
grandmother, from her papers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly when I think of the people that were there with 
Douglas, that saw him go through his struggles and fight on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada, I think 
very much of my grandmother and people of modest incomes 
and, you know, pretty modest life circumstances — the little 
people Mr. Speaker. And I think Douglas was there. He was . . . 
that’s who he was fighting for. They knew he was on their side. 
So anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to reference this poem: 
 

And did those feet in ancient time 
Walk upon England’s mountains green? 
And was the holy Lamb of God 
On England’s pleasant pastures seen? 
And did the countenance divine 
Shine forth upon our clouded hills? 
And was Jerusalem . . . [built] here 
Among these dark satanic mills? 

 
Bring me my bow of burning gold: 
Bring me my arrows of desire: 
Bring me my spear: O clouds unfold! 
Bring me my chariot of fire 
I will not cease from mental fight 
Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand, 
Till we have built Jerusalem 
In England’s green and pleasant land. 

 
Douglas always counselled that the new Jerusalem was just 
beyond the horizon, that it was our lot to keep pushing it 
forward, to keeping making that progress, to keep bettering the 
lives of ordinary people. And I think in this, the hundredth year 
since Douglas was born in Falkirk, Scotland, I think Douglas 
would be looking on saying, you know the new Jerusalem lies 
ever beyond the horizon and keep struggling onward to make it 
there. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I will move the second reading 
. . . or I will conclude my remarks on this, the second reading 
debate, and will move that Bill 208, The Tommy Douglas Day 
Act, be now read a second time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone that Bill No. 208, The Tommy Douglas Day Act, 
be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Mr. McCall: — I move that Bill No. 208, The Tommy Douglas 
Day Act be referred to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone that Bill No. 208, The Tommy Douglas Day Act be 
referred to Committee of the Whole. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George 
Diefenbaker Day Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
honour and a privilege today to speak today about a great man 
in the history of Canadian politics, the Rt. Hon. John George 
Diefenbaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — As we all know, the Saskatchewan son was a 
prime minister of Canada from ’57 to ’63. During his . . . 
[inaudible] . . . as Canada’s top leader, many firsts were 
accomplished. Indeed Dief the Chief, as he became to be known 
to the average Canadian out there . . . [inaudible] . . . what the 
average Canadian was about. 
 
Before I get into talking about the many firsts that John George 
Diefenbaker did at that, I’d like to talk a little bit about the 
personal . . . his life. He was born in 1895, and there his family 
shortly after moved to Saskatchewan which he called home 
with that end of it, Mr. Speaker. That’s where he got his pioneer 
and his humble roots that he carried through as prime minister. 
 
And with that at the beginning of his political career, he was . . . 
I can remember a couple of personal connections, one that he 
came through the town of Bladworth when he was campaigning 
on the train then. That’s how they campaigned back then. And 
naturally all the local farmers, they shut down. The local people 
came to meet and see this new man that was running for the 
prime minister at that time. It was in the ’50s. And I know that 
my dad had went and met him, and he was very impressed with 
him. 
 
But a friend of my dad’s, his father had met John I think in the 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2903 

’30s. And John was known for an excellent memory, at that end 
of it, and he remembered this person. If you shook John’s hand 
and said your name, he would remember where he met you 10, 
20 years later. He was well known for that. I remember it being 
mentioned a couple times. And I remember a friend of my dad’s 
was very, very impressed, and he still talked about that late . . . 
even up to a few years ago, that a person could remember 
somebody’s name, for that end of it. 
 
Another personal connection is John Diefenbaker also ran in the 
constituency of Arm River, of which I hold now. He ran at the 
provincial end at that time. Although he wasn’t quite successful 
in it, it was his first taste of politics. And I also know the 
member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, his father, Gilbert 
Allchurch, was a very, very close friend of Mr. Diefenbaker. I 
didn’t realize that until I introduced the Bill and the member 
from Rosthern came and we talked a little bit about that, and 
said that John used to come and visit his dad quite regularly 
when they were young. 
 
And that’s just part of the personal history of this man, that he 
always had the humility and that he never forgot where he came 
from. He never forgot his roots, at that end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
And he was a very determined man. He was a very, very good 
lawyer. I can remember cases that they still talk about in . . . 
that he was well respected in the P.A. area, and ran. But always 
his heart I think was always in politics, with Mr. Diefenbaker. 
He was also very fond of the Canadian-British parliamentary 
system. He defended that rigorously. And also a great defender 
of the monarchy and the Queen. He always respected that 
institution and that system of it. 
 
In 1940, Mr. Speaker, he finally . . . he won a seat. He was 
successful in winning a seat in 1940. And there he was a 
champion of the cause, the average Canadian, and numerous 
minority causes. He stood strongly for the rights of the 
Canadian workers and farmers. I know in 1942 he criticized the 
federal government on their treatment of Japanese-Canadians 
during World War II, and later had great success in putting 
down the governing Liberals in 1956 throughout the great 
pipeline debate. He was also known as a great debater of that. 
 
And that was also the same year he was elected as leader as the 
federal Conservative Party. And there he attained many, many 
goals. One of the most important, by allowing, when he became 
elected in 1957, he allowed Canada’s First Nations people the 
right to vote federally for the first time in Canadian history. In 
addition, Dief would appoint Senator James Gladstone as the 
first Native ever to attain such a high office. 
 
Another first was the appointment of Ellen Fairclough, Ellen 
Fairclough as Canada’s first woman to the federal cabinet in 
Ottawa. Most importantly though, John always remained loyal 
to the province. His foundation and hard work and caring for 
others remain part of our Saskatchewan heritage today. 
 
Some of the other firsts he did during his six years — he passed 
the Agriculture Rehabilitation and Development Act, and also 
was very instrumental in bringing China into the wheat sales 
end of it. I can remember in ’72 that that was very good. He’d 
opened the borders, which opened up a huge, huge market to 
the western grains, of it, and really helped things back then. I 
know back in the late ’60s grain movement was very, very slow 

and bringing in China as a market, as a new market really, 
really helped the West out here. 
 
He strongly supported human rights abroad by supporting the 
independence movement of the non-white countries throughout 
the British Commonwealth. He even supported the then small 
anti-apartheid movement in South Africa, at that end of it. 
 
One of the things that John will always be remembered for was 
the way he fought for the West. And that’s partly remembered 
in the way they honoured him with the Lake Diefenbaker dam. 
Mr. Diefenbaker also pushed for that, at that end of it. He had 
the foresight to know that a huge dam, the potential on the 
South Saskatchewan River, and so it’s aptly named afterwards, 
Lake Diefenbaker. 
 
Another first that he had pushed through was the Hall 
Commission on expanding medicare across Canada. He was 
very instrumental in doing that. He was very, very conscious, in 
that end of it. 
 
So today when we’re recognizing John George Diefenbaker 
Day, I would like to make September 18 of each year declared 
as John George Diefenbaker in Saskatchewan. And I would like 
to read the Bill into the record, that we’re presenting today. 
 

WHEREAS John George Diefenbaker served as the 
Prime Minister of Canada from 1957 to 1963; 
 
WHEREAS John George Diefenbaker’s family 
homesteaded in Saskatchewan and he made 
Saskatchewan his home; 
 
WHEREAS John George Diefenbaker was instrumental 
in passing the Agriculture Stabilization Act . . . in 1958; 
 
WHEREAS the First Canadian Bill of Rights was 
introduced in Parliament by John George Diefenbaker 
and subsequently passed in 1960; 
 
WHEREAS in 1960, during John George Diefenbaker’s 
Administration, the Canada Election Act was amended 
to enfranchise First Nations people; and 
 
WHEREAS September 18 marks the anniversary of the 
birth date of John George Diefenbaker; 

 
THEREFORE HER MAJESTY, by and with the advice of 
consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: 
 

September 18 of each year is . . . declared as “John 
George Diefenbaker Day” in Saskatchewan. 
 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would also — contrary to a 
popular poll that was out there — I would have to say that John 
George Diefenbaker is the greatest Canadian out there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When he passed on in 1979, a special train was ordered to bring 
his body home. And thousands and thousands of people lined 
the tracks. Farmers shut down for harvest. And I can remember 
that wherever that train went there was thousands of people 



2904 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

lined the tracks of it, in towns people would come. But as it 
passed through the countryside, people would, the farmers 
would line the tracks. And that was very impressive. That 
shows what the people of Saskatchewan thought of the first 
prime minister that ever came out of Saskatchewan. 
 
And Mr. Diefenbaker never ever forgot where his roots were. 
They were always here in Saskatchewan and they were for 
Western Canada. Even though he was elected as prime minister 
and he looked after the whole country which, I mean, shows 
when he expanded medicare across Canada. He was very 
instrumental in doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that I would like to move, I would like to move second 
reading, that the John George Diefenbaker Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that Bill 203, The Recognition of John George 
Diefenbaker Day Act, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move that Bill 203, The Recognition of John 
George Diefenbaker Day Act, be referred to the Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — It is moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that Bill No. 203, The Recognition of John 
George Diefenbaker Day Act, be referred to Committee of the 
Whole. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — This Bill stands referred to Committee of the 
Whole. The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move to Committee of the Whole to consider Bill 
208, The Tommy Douglas Day Act, followed by Bill 203, The 
Recognition of John George Diefenbaker Day Act. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the Assembly to convene into Committee of the Whole 
to consider Bills 208 and 203. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I do now leave the 
Chair for this Assembly to convene into Committee of the 
Whole. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
 
[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 208, An Act to acknowledge the contributions 
of Thomas Clement Douglas. 
 
Preamble, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the member to move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. I recognize the 
member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the member that this Bill 
be reported without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. Just for clarification’s sake, if 
the member could move that the committee report the Bill 
without amendment. 
 
Mr. McCall: — I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you very much. The member has moved 
that the committee report the Bill without amendment. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George 
Diefenbaker Day Act 

 
The Chair: — The next item before the committee is Bill No. 
203, An Act to recognize the contributions of John George 
Diefenbaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
[Preamble agreed to.] 
 
[Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2905 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
enacts as follows: Bill No. 203, An Act to recognize the 
contributions of John George Diefenbaker. 
 
And I would invite the member for Arm River to move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
203 move without amendment, be now read a third time and 
passed under its title . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I report to this Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The member has moved that the committee 
report the Bill without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I move the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The member for Regina Dewdney has moved 
that the committee rise, report progress, and asked for leave to 
sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 
to report Bill No. 208, The Tommy Douglas Day Act, without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone that Bill No. 208, The Tommy Douglas Day Act, 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair of committees is recognized. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed again by the 

committee to report Bill No. 203, The Recognition of John 
George Diefenbaker Act, without amendment and to ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George 
Diefenbaker Act 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that Bill 203, The Recognition of John George 
Diefenbaker Act, be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move to Government Orders. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move to Government Orders. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF FURTHER ESTIMATES 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
submit further estimates accompanied by a message from Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Assembly please rise for a 
message from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is dated 
May 5, the year 2005: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits the further estimates of 
certain sums required for the service of the province for 
the twelve months ending March 31, 2006, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
[Signed] Hon. Dr. Lynda M. Haverstock, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 



2906 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

Please be seated. The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today I am tabling a 
further estimate to increase the Department of Agriculture and 
Food’s budget, and the Department of Learning’s budget for the 
2005-06 fiscal year. 
 
We are increasing the Department of Agriculture and Food’s 
budget by $732,000. This increase is to fund the administration 
of the Canadian agricultural skills services program, CASS. The 
federal government will reimburse this cost. CASS will help 
eligible farmers and their spouses increase family income by 
improving farm practices or to gain access to training for 
alternate sources of income. CASS is a national program 
completely funded by the federal government. The 
administration funds will be paid out of the General Revenue 
Fund with the federal government repaying the GRF. 
 
The Department of Learning is requesting an additional $29.5 
million dollars for 2005-06 to provide for cost of the collective 
agreement with teachers. A contract agreement was reached on 
May 4, 2005, between the government trustee bargaining 
committee and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. The 
plan is to offset the expenditure with a drawdown of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. This would result in no change to the 
surplus in 2005-06 but would reflect a $29.5 million increase to 
the GRF debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Regina 
Dewdney: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the further estimates be 
referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the further estimates be 
referred to Committee of Finance. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 86 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 86 and speak to 
some of the issues surrounding this Bill. 

Mr. Speaker, there seems to be two main components to this 
piece of legislation. The first component which we are in favour 
of . . . in fact it is modelled on legislation or a private member’s 
Bill that was introduced by the member from the official 
opposition and was moved to second reading on April 16, 2004. 
And it had to do with The Whistleblower Protection Act which 
was moved and provided a framework of protection for 
individuals in the workplace who were protected if they brought 
forward, to the proper authorities, individuals who were 
breaking the law, and that there could be no circumstances 
where there could be retaliation taken against that individual for 
bringing to light this sort of information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall that some time ago, I believe it was in 
SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority], where there 
was an employee dismissed for bringing this kind of 
information forward. And they were dismissed because, it was 
stated, that they hadn’t followed the proper lines of command 
and authority in order to report this kind of an issue. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this legislation, Bill No. 86, 
provides a framework of protection to workers so that they do 
not have to fear retaliation in the event that they bring forward 
information that might be a indication of wrongdoing by other 
persons in the workplace or management or any other 
individuals involved with this legislation. And I think that 
component of the legislation is extremely useful and important 
to make sure that in addition to the whistleblower protection 
legislation that there already is, is that in this province we send 
a clear message that wrongdoing and inappropriate actions are 
not going to be tolerated and accepted. And that we have to 
send the message that workers who indeed bring forward this 
information are going to be looked after in an appropriate way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other component of this legislation though that 
does create a fair bit of concern and difficulty is under the 
complaints section that can be brought forward. Mr. Speaker, 
workplaces are always interesting places that have a dynamic of 
their own in many instances. In some cases, there is not the 
harmonious kind of workplace situation that you would like to 
have as an employer and suggest that that would be ideal. 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, there are rivalries and jealousies 
between employees and things of this nature that have nothing 
particularly to do with the workplace but have an agenda 
outside of the actual workplace. 
 
And in this legislation, there is the ability for individuals to 
lodge complaints against an employer and against a workplace, 
and they don’t have to disclose who they are. They can be 
anonymous, Mr. Speaker. They are also envisaged in this 
legislation that it isn’t just a worker that’s affected in the 
workplace that can bring forward this complaint, but a third 
party can bring forward this complaint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that these complaints can be brought 
forward both by third parties and anonymously create a great 
deal of possibility for abuse, Mr. Speaker. And that abuse may 
take a dimension that has nothing at all due or related to the 
situation in the workplace but could be as a result of rivalries, 
jealousies, and hard feelings that have no relationship to the 
workplace at all. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a problematic situation 



May 6, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2907 

that certainly is creating a great deal of concern by employers 
and employees in the workplace, that this legislation potentially 
could be taken beyond what is I believe intended, and actually 
become an opportunity for abuse and misuse of this legislation. 
And that the people that are going to be damaged by this are the 
employers but also the workers in the workplace who have a 
loyalty and a desire to make sure that their workplace is 
performing to its best potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the kinds of concerns that we’re hearing 
from workers and employers in this province. They have been 
pointing out the concerns that they have, and we need to have 
time to make sure that we listen to these issues that are raised 
by the people involved in the workplaces. And to that end and 
allow this consultation to occur, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 86 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 87 — The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to rise today and talk on Bill No. 87, An Act to amend 
The Trade Union Act. This Bill was introduced back in 
November 19, and there wasn’t a lot of talk on the Bill at that 
point. But certainly over these last couple of weeks or months, 
month and a half since we’ve been in session, we’ve been 
hearing more and more feedback on this Bill. And it certainly 
hasn’t been positive. There’s been a lot of feedback coming 
regarding Bill No. 87, and some of the ramifications of Bill No. 
87 that it will have in the business community and for workers 
around this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would submit that it isn’t just the business community 
that has some questions regarding this Bill No. 87. I would also 
say that there are a number of employees that would have 
question regarding Bill No. 87 and some of the changes that 
Bill No. 87 purports to make. 
 
Some of the issues regarding Bill No. 87, I guess the main issue 
that . . . and we have been asking the minister over and over, 
over the number of days, is how much consultation has been 
done regarding this Bill? Has the minister met with the different 
organizations, whether it’s business organizations or employee 
organizations, and gone over the Bill prior to it being 
introduced? 
 
When we asked the minister, I know she mentioned that they 
had met once on December 4. That’s hardly consultation when 
the Bill was introduced on November 19. The Bill was 

introduced for a month prior to having any consultation with 
business stakeholders or perhaps even employees. We asked the 
minister numerous times, who asked for this legislation? Who 
asked for this legislation to come forward? And to this date we 
haven’t heard a word from the minister. She has refused to 
answer the question, who asked for this particular piece of 
legislation. Because we don’t believe that it had been business, 
and I do question even that it was some employee groups that 
would have asked for this piece of legislation. 
 
[12:00] 
 
It seems like it’s a bit of a piece of legislation that will make up 
for some of the issues that her department has been facing over 
the last number of months — this past winter, fall and winter. 
Of course we all know the hours of work issue, whether they 
were going to proclaim that legislation, and the groundswell 
that rose up against that piece of legislation. 
 
And it almost seems like . . . because you know the minister had 
lost that battle that perhaps she would introduce some other 
legislation to make up for that. And certainly if that’s the reason 
for the legislation, it’s all been driven by the wrong reasons. 
This legislation, if it is been reviewed by business and 
employees . . . think that it’s a good idea and has some good 
merit, I can see it moving forward. But to this date, we haven’t 
heard from the minister who asked for this Bill and the 
consultation that had been done prior to the Bill being 
introduced because there was none. So, Mr. Speaker, the whole 
issue around consultation causes us some great concern. 
 
But also this past week, as we’ve asked questions regarding Bill 
No. 87 and some of the issues around what the powers that are 
granted to the Labour Relations Board — whether they can go 
into businesses and simply just inspect; whether they can go 
into businesses and seize; whether they can go into businesses, 
inspect, photocopy, and then take the photocopies — there just 
seems to be a lot of grey area around this whole issue. 
 
It shouldn’t be grey. I mean the minister should be able to stand 
in her place and answer it the first day — this is what the Bill 
means — and we go forward from that point. We can debate 
whether that answer is just or not and whether that should be 
the policy of the government. 
 
But what really causes grave concern is when we ask the 
question and the media asks the question one day, we get an 
answer one day. We get a separate, a different answer the next 
day. And for two days since then, we haven’t got one clear 
answer that this is exactly what this piece of legislation means. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there is no opposition and no government 
frankly that should move forward on a piece of legislation until 
you know the exact ramifications that it will have in the 
business community and with employees across the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a number of other areas in this Bill, there are a number 
of clauses in this Bill that cause grave concern. And I just want 
to highlight one because I have a number of . . . a few 
constituents that are in this situation. They’re employees of a 
company that has asked to decertify to the Labour Relations 
Board. I think they’ve been in front of the Labour Relations 



2908 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2005 

Board four or five, six times I believe. And every time, the 
Labour Relations Board has said, has denied the decertification. 
And talking to the employees, it was truly driven by the 
employees. 
 
Now the argument by the Labour Relations Board is, is that 
somehow the employer is having an influence on the 
employees, having talked to a number of the employees. And I 
think they’re voting at 85 per cent to decertify, but the Labour 
Relations Board won’t allow them to decertify. They’ve been in 
front of the Labour Relations Board, and they’ve been in front 
of the Labour Relations Board and they’re trying to get through 
to the Labour Relations Board that they want to decertify. 
 
This Bill talks about that whole process and how often they can 
go in front of the Labour Relations Board. They’re denying 
access of employees to voice their opinion regarding 
certification or decertification in their job site. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I say, there are grave concerns from the 
business community with this Bill. There are grave concerns by 
employees and employee groups with this piece of legislation. 
Employee groups that have been in front of the Labour 
Relations Board that have asked for decertification and been 
denied will no longer have the opportunity to resubmit their 
decertification wishes to the Labour Relations Board without 
waiting a certain period of time. 
 
I mean, the window to apply for decertification is very narrow 
as it is. And then when you look at this piece of legislation that 
denies them an extra year, it could be up to three years before a 
employee organization has the right or ability to go in front of 
the Labour Relations Board to decertify. So, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said, it’s not just business that we’re hearing concerns from. 
We’re hearing concerns from employee groups as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think the biggest issue though, on this piece of legislation, is 
the fact that we don’t know who’s calling for it. The minister 
won’t stand in her place and tell us who’s wishing for this Bill 
to go forward. 
 
We talked to labour groups and we talked to businesses, and 
neither have said that they had any consultation with this 
government prior to this Bill being introduced in November, 
Mr. Speaker. And I don’t believe that this Bill should go any 
further until proper consultation has taken place. 
 
And until the employers and employees of this province know 
the impact that this Bill will have on their work sites, Mr. 
Speaker, I would, pursuant to rule no. 74, I hereby request that 
proceeding on Bill No. 87, An Act to Amend The Trade Union 
Act be suspended for three sitting days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. At the request of the official 
opposition under rule 74, proceedings on Bill 87, The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004, are hereby suspended for three 
sitting days. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:07.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2887 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2887 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2887 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2887 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2887 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2887 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2887 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2888 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2889 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2889 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2889 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2896 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Celebrating VE Day 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2889 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2889 
 Regina YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2890 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2890 
 Recognition of Mother’s Day 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2890 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2890 
 Saskatoon Silver Springs Constituent Receives Principal Appreciation Award 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2891 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug-Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2891 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2891 
 Celebrating Community Centennial Grant Program 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2892 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2892 
 Legislation Regarding the Labour Relations Board 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2893 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2894 
 Workers’ Compensation Board Claimant 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2894 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2894 
 Nurses at the Cypress Regional Hospital 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2895 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2895 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 207 — The Protection of Children Abusing Drugs Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2896 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2899 
 Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2900 
 Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George Diefenbaker Day Act 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2902 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2904 
 Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George Diefenbaker Day Act 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2905 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2905 
 



 

 Bill No. 203 — The Recognition of John George Diefenbaker Act 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2905 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
TABLING OF FURTHER ESTIMATES 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2905 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2906 
 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2907 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




