















































Hansard: April 01, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 83A  FRIDAY, APRIL 1, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2301 
 April 1, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this morning to present a petition regarding forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I have in my hand and present to the 
Assembly this morning is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Montmartre, Glenavon, Kendal, Kelliher, 
Wishart, and Leslie. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of 
Cabri and Abbey. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
constituents concerned about the deficiency in residential 
support for citizens of my hometown who have lifelong 
disabilities. And the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today hail from the communities of 
Wymark, Rosenhof, Swift Current, and Schoenfeld. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are concerned about the plague that’s 
sweeping our province. That plague is crystal meth. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine, its education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from the town 
of Wadena. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition signed by people who are concerned that recent 
changes to the crop insurance program result in large premium 
increases for insured farmers, while overall coverage is reduced. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
communities of Loreburn and Outlook. And I’m pleased to 
present them on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of the citizens of the 
province regarding the Claybank Brick Plant. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider a decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on these two pages of petitions are 
from Moose Jaw, Rocanville, Calgary, Regina, Lethbridge, and 
Avonlea. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to stand again on behalf of constituents of mine 
who are opposed to the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Midale. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am presenting a 
petition on behalf of constituents who are very concerned about 
the forced amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of the school divisions on a 
strictly voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Oungre, Tribune, 
Torquay, and Bromhead. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
concerned parents in my constituency of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs regarding the much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area. The prayer for the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement the allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

The petitioners today live in Buckwold Cove, Sears Cove, 
Peters Cove in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I have a petition 
here with citizens that are against forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Hanley, Hawarden, and 
Kenaston. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to present to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Delisle and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on behalf of citizens 
in the western part of the province who have concerns with 
regard to Highway No. 32. I’d like to read from the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Cabri and 
Pennant. And, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a number of petitions on behalf of 
citizens that are very concerned with this government’s plan to 
force the amalgamation of school divisions. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse the decision to force the amalgamation of school 
divisions in Saskatchewan and continue reorganization of 
school divisions on a strictly voluntary basis. 
 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signatures to these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from a number 
of communities including Melville, Esterhazy, Langenburg, 
Goodeve, Qu’Appelle, Edgeley, Vibank, White City, and 
Edenwold. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning a dialysis unit for Broadview Union 
Hospital; sessional paper no. 727. 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 72, 83, 637, 638, 640, 715, and 720. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — According to order the following petitions 
for private Bills are read and received: 
 

Of the Concentra Financial Services Association in the 
province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to appoint 
Concentra Trust a successor trustee to Concentra Financial 
Services Association; 
 
Of the Saskatoon Foundation in the province of 
Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to change its name, to 
receive and distribute funds for environmental purposes in 
Saskatoon and area, and to distribute non-endowed funds 
to other charitable organizations; and 
 
Of the Soeurs de la Charité de Saint-Louis in the province 
of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to repeal its Act of 
Incorporation and to transfer all rights, assets, and 
liabilities to the Sisters of Charity of St. Louis of Calgary, 
Alberta. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 89 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: please provide a detailed 
breakdown of how funding for the gambling addictions 
programs and services is spent. 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to give 
notice that I shall on day no. 89 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: please provide a 
copy of the SaskTel business plan entitled SaskTel growth 
committee option review. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the same minister to 

table plans for a modified Navigata, for the Navigata 
stand-alone plan, for the identified third party SaskTel Navigata 
strategic overview, for the Mergeco plan, for the NewCo 
communications, a strategic option for SaskTel and Navigata, 
for financial model for Mergeco, for initial assessment after 25 
days, for financial model follow-up, for Quo Vadis, stage 2, 
charting Navigata strategy update, and finally, for the rapid 
turnaround strategy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 89 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: of the 57 kilometres of road improvements 
to be done under the forestry commitments, what is the 
cost per kilometre? What is and are the locations of these 
kilometres of highway improvement? How often are these 
road transportation agreements under forestry commitment 
agreements renegotiated? And what is the length of time 
that these agreements will exist? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it’s very much a pleasure for me 
today to introduce to you two individuals who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery and they are from the CSG Midwest — the 
Council of State Governments. Welcome to Ohio State Senator 
Kevin Coughlin and Ms. Cindy Andrews. They’re in Regina 
today helping us to prepare for the 60th annual meeting of the 
Midwestern Legislative Conference. This conference will be 
held in Regina from July 31 to August 3. We will be welcoming 
all the elected representatives and senators from the Midwestern 
states as well as provincial parliamentarians from 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario. It’s also open to 
industrial sponsors and the media. 
 
Saskatchewan is pleased to be the first affiliate to hold the 
annual meeting for the MLC [Midwestern Legislative 
Conference]. It’s usually held in the US [United States]. It’s a 
very fitting time for our province’s centennial being this year 
that we will open our doors and welcome our neighbours from 
the Midwestern states. It’s an opportunity for us to build a 
foundation of long-lasting relationships that will help us move 
forward together in accomplishing our goals. 
 
It’s a conference that truly no one should miss so I would ask 
members . . . and if Cindy could give a wave. Cindy is the 
assistant director in charge of marketing and administration of 
the CSG . . . pardon me, Midwest office in Chicago. 
 
And Senator Coughlin is the Ohio state senator from Cuyahoga 
Falls. One of his interests is to sponsor legislation to promote 
healthy lifestyles and curriculum in elementary schools. He is 
also the Chair of the 60th annual meeting of the MLC. He is 
seated with Linda Spence of the Speaker’s office and the 
protocol office and Debbie Saum, who is the conference 
coordinator from the protocol office. 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

Welcome to Senator Coughlin and Cindy Andrews. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the House a group of Scouts sitting up in your gallery. The 
eight Scouts are from the Glencairn 79th Scouts group here in 
Regina. And they’re accompanied today with their leader, 
Jordan Kreuger and George Emery. 
 
And I understand that the Scouts are going to take in part of the 
proceedings of the House. Then they’re going to tour the 
legislature, and then we’ll have the opportunity to get together 
later on for some refreshments. And, Mr. Speaker, because 
some of the Scouts are actually from Regina Dewdney 
constituency, I’ll be asking the member from Regina Dewdney 
to join us for the refreshments, and he can pay for them at the 
same time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to offer our Scouts a very 
warm welcome to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would want 
to have all members this morning welcome to this House a 
former member of the legislature who is seated behind the bar 
on the government side. I want to welcome Judy Bradley back 
to the legislature this morning. 
 
Judy served in this House as the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. She served in our caucus as caucus Chair. She served 
the people of Saskatchewan as minister of Highways and 
Transportation and through Judy’s stewardship in that portfolio 
many of the area transportation committees that are at work 
today were established. A great deal of work was done around 
establishing the short-line rails, producer carloading, and she 
has played a significant role in the very good news that has 
recently been announced by the federal government that 
producers of Western Canada will have opportunity to work 
with the grain cars. 
 
So I want to welcome Judy back to the legislature, and I’m sure 
all members will want to do the same. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with the Premier in welcoming Judy Bradley back to the 
Assembly. I remember as a constituent of mine . . . She lives in 
Milestone now and is the principal of the high school there and 
does great work there. 

I do want to remember back a couple of weeks ago when Mr. 
Ron Osika was in the House and I had welcomed him here and 
was thanking him for the fact that he was going to put a lawn 
sign up for me in the next provincial election. I was talking to 
Mrs. Bradley, and she had said the same thing. Mind you, it is 
April 1. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Royal Canadian Air Force Celebrates 81 Years 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was very pleased and honoured last night to attend the 81st 
anniversary dinner of the Royal Canadian Air Force. It was 
hosted at 15 Wing Moose Jaw by Colonel Boyer, and the 
special guest of honour was Major General (Ret.) Richard 
Rohmer, who happens to be Canada’s most decorated citizen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RCAF [Royal Canadian Air Force] was 
founded on April 1, 1923, when King George V promulgated 
the prefix royal to then the Canadian Air Force. It had some 
pretty meagre beginnings, Mr. Speaker. The original 
establishment of the air force was 68 officers and 307 airmen. 
During the next decade and a half, the RCAF was unique 
because most of its work was in non-military roles. However 
during the Second World War, the RCAF expanded into the 
fourth largest air power of the Allied forces. In Canada a vast 
training organization was formed to put over 80 operational 
squadrons in the field on coastal defence, shipping, and 
overseas duties. 
 
Although there have been many changes to the 80 years, the 
mission of Canada’s Air Force remains the same as it was on 
April 1, 1924 — to generate and maintain combat-capable, 
multi-purpose air forces to meet Canada’s defence objectives. I 
would like to congratulate the RCAF on its 81st birthday today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana. 
 

Community Living’s Spring Fling Fundraiser 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow evening I, along with a number of other government 
members, will be attending the Regina and District Association 
for Community Living Spring Fling. 
 
This event is a fundraiser for the association’s ongoing 
programs that provide support to and advocacy on behalf of 
people living with intellectual challenges, and their families. 
Some of the programs that will benefit from the Spring Fling 
include a Regina respite registry that gives access to qualified 
respite care providers and best buddies program, a program that 
fosters friendships between student volunteers and people with 
an intellectual disability. 
 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

Mr. Speaker, every one of us deserves to be treated with dignity 
and respect and to have equal access to services. The Regina 
Association for Community Living makes it their mandate to 
ensure that individuals with disabilities can participate fully as 
valued citizens of our community. 
 
As always, Spring Fling 2005 promises to be a spectacular 
event. Following dinner there will be a silent auction in the 
evening and entertainment provided by Wascana Jazz. 
 
I ask all my colleagues to join me in recognizing the 
commitment and dedication of the board of directors and staff 
at the Regina and District Association for Community Living as 
well as organizers Peter and Voula Danakas. And I encourage 
everyone to take the opportunity to attend this Spring Fling. It’s 
a fun event and a very worthy cause. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

High School Basketball in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
member for Meadow Lake in members’ statements 
congratulated the Meadow Lake senior girls high school 
basketball team for winning gold at Hoopla. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too would like to echo those congratulations. I’m 
very familiar with the long and strong tradition in Meadow 
Lake in high school basketball — both in boys and girls. And in 
fact, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, the person who is the instigator 
behind starting basketball in Meadow Lake was Mr. Ron 
Dosdall, many, many years ago. I’m very familiar with him. 
And it’s also of note that he was the candidate for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the last election. So again, 
congratulations. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s another team that I want to 
congratulate for their success at Hoopla and that’s the Kenaston 
senior girls high school team. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t win the 
gold medal. They got silver, and that’s silver twice in a row, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the point I’m trying to make here today is that I want to 
congratulate all the teams and all the coaches and all the 
officials and the organizers for making high school sports truly 
what it is. 
 
I have a close connection with the Kenaston girls’ team. I’ve 
got three girls on that team, Mr. Speaker, two that play and one 
that coaches. So in our house from about November until the 
end of March we talk not about politics but mostly about 
basketball, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to congratulate everybody who goes to Hoopla 
because it is a very few people who ever get to play at that high 
level, and I’m very proud of everybody who has done so well. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Golden Opportunities Fund Wins Award 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, back in 1999, Grant Kook, a 
Saskatchewan booster who grew up in Outlook and who clearly 
believes that this province has a lot to offer, launched Golden 
Opportunities, the province’s first labour-sponsored investment 
fund. 
 
The idea was to provide Saskatchewan investors with an 
investment vehicle where they could invest their money here at 
home to maximize shareholder returns and to provide venture 
capital for Saskatchewan’s small and medium-sized businesses 
to grow and expand, and so create new job opportunities here at 
home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kook and the Golden Opportunities 
Fund have been enormously successful. To date, one in every 
seventy-five Saskatchewan taxpayers is a Golden Opportunities 
Fund shareholder. Companies the fund have invested in 
generate more than $50 million in economic activity annually in 
Saskatchewan and supported some 1,500 jobs in urban and rural 
communities. And it is the top performing fund of its type in 
Canada, based on both three- and five-year returns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recognition of this stellar performance, Golden 
Opportunities Fund was chosen as the Labour Sponsored 
Investment Fund of the Year at 2004 Canadian Investment 
Awards. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Mr. Grant Kook, 
the CEO [chief executive officer] and chairman of Golden Fund 
Opportunities; the fund’s Saskatchewan investors; and board of 
directors. This is one more way that their faith in Saskatchewan 
has been rewarded. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Wynyard Student Wins Heritage Poster Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pride in the 
student’s achievements that I rise in the House today to honour 
Lisa Smith of Wynyard Composite High School. On February 
21, Lisa Smith received the 2005 Youth Heritage Poster Award, 
as presented by the Lieutenant Governor and the Minister of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
The Youth Heritage Poster Contest is a province-wide 
competition open to all students of all ages. The contest seeks to 
engage our youth with the history and heritage of 
Saskatchewan. Lisa’s art teacher, Cindy Horvath, immediately 
urged Lisa to enter the contest. 
 

“She is very talented and I knew she could do it. She’s a 
wonderful student, creative, talented and very innovative,” 
commented Lisa’s teacher. 

 
There were over 300 posters submitted, and Lisa beat out many 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

entries in her category. Lisa’s painting of the family farm 
vividly portrays the beauty of a Saskatchewan farm set against 
the wide prairie backdrop. Lisa’s very proud of her family’s 
history and put all of her considerable artistic talent into her 
painting. I would like to ask all the members to join me today in 
personally congratulating Lisa Smith of Wynyard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan’s 2005-2006 Budget 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan budget for 2005 and 2006 is a budget to build 
Saskatchewan for the next century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An intercity comparison of taxes and household charges shows 
Saskatchewan is already one of the most affordable places in 
Canada to live. Based on a strong economy that is setting job 
records in Saskatchewan, the centennial budget reflects 
significant actions to ensure Saskatchewan continues to be an 
affordable place to live and raise a family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This includes $85 million in revenue sharing continued for 
municipalities. It includes over $110 million in the next two 
years for education property tax relief. There’s an almost $2 
million increase for social and human service community-based 
organizations, Mr. Speaker. We have committed to 600 new 
affordable housing units for 2005, with a goal of 2000 new 
units by 2008. Affordable, quality housing is a priority for 
families and this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are investing in Saskatchewan children by developing a 
new provincial plan for early learning and child care. This will 
build on the Child Care Saskatchewan initiative that creates 250 
new child care spaces this year and a total of 1,200 by 2007. We 
are investing $6 million to provide further resources for 
low-income families and individuals to improve their ability to 
work and become independent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the second year of a four-year budget plan 
— a plan that continues on a path of sound and responsible 
financial management, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Students’ Centennial Quilt Project 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first centennial 
project was recently completed at Lord Asquith School. The 
grade 9B home economics class designed and sewed a beautiful 
school quilt wall hanging, the students all participating in a 
design contest. There was a very specific criteria set up, and the 
design had to include detailed instructions for making the wall 
hanging. All of the students presented the designs to the class, 
and each class member evaluated each presentation. Megan 
Dagg was the official winner. 
 
That is when the real work began, as they all had to work to 

make the wall hanging. The design called for a handprint for 
each grade and colourful borders for each quilt square. The quilt 
was made from jeans donated to the school. They used fabric 
paint, fabric markers, and embroidery to make the wall hanging 
look terrific. A large thanks goes out to Janice Brotzel from 
Express It. Megan did the embroidery using her mom’s 
equipment. 
 
The students were asked to include a motto for their design. The 
motto on the finishing wall hanging is, “We cannot hold a torch 
to light another path without brightening our own way.” The 
students are very proud of their work which is now hanging up 
in the front entrance of the school. Please join me in 
congratulating Lord Asquith School. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Saskatchewan Economy 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, 
the Minister of Industry and Resources almost dislocated his 
shoulder patting himself on the back, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately, Saskatchewan business owners don’t share his 
view of the job that the NDP [New Democratic Party] is doing 
with respect to the economy. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business has just 
released its national survey on business confidence. Where does 
Saskatchewan rank, do you think, Mr. Speaker? Dead last. Dead 
last in the country, Mr. Speaker, and way beyond any other 
province in Western Canada. Saskatchewan businessmen and 
women have the least amount of confidence for the future of all 
of their counterparts from across Canada. 
 
The question to the Premier is simple: how can he justify, how 
can he explain this in terms of his economic policies when 
businesses in this province, the men and women who create 
jobs for Saskatchewan families, have the least amount of 
confidence of any of their counterparts in Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that question is 
obviously an April Fool’s joke because, you know, how you 
measure investors’ confidence, Mr. Speaker, you measure 
investors’ confidence by the indication of what investors are 
actually going to do and invest in your province. 
 
And according to Statistics Canada, Mr. Speaker, contrary to 
what that member says, the private investment, capital 
investment in Saskatchewan is expected to grow from $7.5 
billion last year, Mr. Speaker, to $8.5 billion this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

[10:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — A 13 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. The 
national average increase is 6 per cent. We are going to grow in 
investment in this province at twice the national average. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister ought to be 
careful or he’s going to dislocate something else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to the minister, I would say this, the 
Chamber of Commerce of this province has indicated and 
measured the amount of investment in our economy and they 
find, unfortunately, that the only investment that’s growing is 
public sector investment. 
 
The minister asks about how do we measure confidence. Well I 
would say actually asking businessmen and women in the 
province of Saskatchewan as to whether they are confident is a 
pretty good measure of how confident they are. And the results 
are in. The results are in. 
 
Saskatchewan businessmen and women feel the least confident 
of all their counterparts in the country, and it’s hard not to fault 
them. They have a government, they see a government that 
would impose ridiculous measures like government-directed 
hours. They see a government that imposes on them the highest 
business taxes in all of the country. Mr. Speaker, no wonder 
they lack confidence in that minister and that Premier. 
 
Won’t he stand up and give the businesses of this province a 
reason to have some confidence in a bold future for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the results are in. The 
results are higher investment in Saskatchewan. The results are 
right now, over last year, 11,400 more jobs. Those are the 
results. But it doesn’t matter what the results are, Mr. Speaker, 
because the wailing wall of Conservatives over there, Mr. 
Speaker, wants to paint their picture of doom and gloom. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, people who actually invest in the economy 
and create jobs aren’t buying it because the people of this 
province, the business community, the working people, and all 
the people that create jobs, Mr. Speaker, are going to continue 
to build notwithstanding the negativity and doom and gloom we 
hear from the wailing wall of Conservatives over there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, the results are 
in. The results are in. Despite record commodity prices in the 
province of Saskatchewan, despite all of the amazing potential 
of this province — home to a third of the world’s supply of 
potash and a third of the world’s supply of uranium, Canada’s 
second largest producer of oil and third largest producer of gas 
— despite all of that, the results are in. This government’s 
posted the worst job creation record in the country over the last 
four years. Its population record is second worst in all of the 
country, exceeded only by Newfoundland. Manitoba grows at 
100 times faster than our province. 
 
The results are in. They are an indictment of this government’s 
policies, of a lack of vision for the future by this Premier. Why 
won’t he stand up and explain to Saskatchewan businesses why 
they should have any confidence in his government or his 
policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting to watch what the Leader of the Opposition does 
because when it suits his purpose, as in yesterday, he goes back 
three months to look at population figures and says it’s gone 
down, even though in the last year the population had gone up. 
When it suits his purpose to use a four-year period to say jobs 
haven’t gone up, he does that, Mr. Speaker, because the reality 
is, he will manipulate the figures to say what he wants them to 
say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition this, Mr. 
Speaker. Canada is the world’s leader in only two areas of 
mineral production. They are potash and uranium. The only 
areas where Canada leads the world, and they’re both located 
right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So when that member 
and that wailing wall of Conservatives . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would like to bring to the member’s attention that I believe that 
he is using a figure of speech in an indirect way to do 
something he should not do. And that is to indicate a name of a 
member in the Assembly, and I ask him to refrain from that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 
the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Funding for Additional Police Officers 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the 1999 election campaign, 
the NDP promised to create 200 brand new additional police 
officer positions in this province. In a press release last week, 
the Justice minister stated that since 1999 his government has 
increased provincial funding for police officers, including 169 
additional policing positions. Can the Justice minister tell this 
Assembly how many of these positions are brand new police 
officers and how many are simply backfilling for retirees, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — One hundred fifty-one new police 
officers since 1999 and no backfilling for retired officers, and I 
take with some amusement being requested questions on math 
by the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we would like to question them 
on some of their math. We’ve got math questions for them 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week our office contacted the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Police Officers. According to that organization, Mr. Speaker, 
since 1999 the NDP has only provided funding for 81 brand 
new additional police officers. In last week’s budget the 
minister announced 18 new positions. Are these brand new 
positions? Will that take us up to 98? Or are they simply more 
backfilling retiree positions? Which is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
When will this minister start providing this Assembly with 
accurate figures? And I’d encourage him to do some math. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast rose yesterday and in his speech in 
response to the budget, requested that we provide new funding 
to this project in Saskatoon, and new funding to this project in 
Saskatoon, and new funding to this project in Saskatoon. And I 
was shouting across the way, Mr. Speaker, how much, how 
much? And I wonder if the member opposite would like to say 
how much he wants to add to the billion dollars that the Finance 
critic has spent in about five minutes on the radio the other day. 
 
There are 18 new police officers in this, in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. The officers that the federation doesn’t want to count 
are RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers, Mr. 
Speaker. The RCMP counts them, Mr. Speaker. We count them, 
151 officers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it now appears that the NDP are 
not keeping their promise. The answer that I heard the minister 
give was 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen crime continue to grow in this 
province. We have an enormous problem with violent crime, 
with property crime, youth gangs, break and enters, home 
invasion, and a variety of other crimes. If we want to turn the 
tide on the epidemic of crime in this province we must ensure 
that we put more front line police officers on the street. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when will the NDP government finally live up to 
this six-year-old promise? When can we expect them to deliver 
on their promise of 200 new police officers? Eighteen is not an 
acceptable answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, 18 new police officers 
takes the number from 151 to 169. Included in the 18 police 
officers are two new police officers, two new investigators for 
the safer communities and neighbourhoods initiative. That is an 
initiative that has shut down gang houses in Regina. It has shut 
down gang houses in Saskatoon. It is cutting into drug dealing 
and drug manufacturing in both these cities. In response to a 
question from the member opposite, last week I referred to a 13 
per cent decrease in break and enters in Saskatoon. We are 
working at this problem in partnership with the police. We are 
having an effect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Contract for Printing New Saskatchewan Health Cards 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister responsible for Property Management 
Corporation. It appears ISM [Information Systems Management 
Corporation] Canada is on the verge of getting the contract to 
print the new Saskatchewan health cards from June of this year 
to the spring of 2010. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how was 
this contract awarded and how much is it worth? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
contract that relates to the issuance of new health cards. The 
process normally goes ahead through notifying people when a 
single provider has been selected. What’s happened here is that 
that information has been put up on the SPMC [Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation] website according to proper 
procedure. The deadline for other companies to put in their 
suggestions about how they might do this was 2 o’clock 
yesterday afternoon. Another company has put a suggestion in 
and so now they’re reviewing the strength of both of these 
proposals and the normal procedures that are used for tendering 
will be followed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in the past there was some security concerns with ISM. The 
NDP government vowed to re-evaluate their relationship with 
ISM. Mr. Speaker, what has this government done in the last 
two years to re-evaluate that relationship to ensure that the 
security concerns have been addressed to the government’s 
satisfaction such that this NDP government is ready to accept 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

the full responsibility for the privacy concerns? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Information Technology. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to advise the Assembly that, as a result of the theft of the 
hard drive that had happened some time ago at ISM, there was 
in fact a security review undertaken by Deloitte Touche on what 
was going on at ISM. They have provided us with a report. We 
are satisfied that the security measures that were stepped-up at 
ISM as a result of that provide for a secure environment and 
allow them to conduct business in a world-class environment. I 
would also indicate that that report found that the primary 
reason that there was an issue at ISM was a result of a criminal 
act by a particular employee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
since the minister says that he has received a report from ISM 
on those security concerns, is he prepared to table that 
document in the Assembly such that everyone can feel secure 
that their private information is indeed going to be secure, and 
that the minister assures the people of Saskatchewan that that 
will indeed be the case, that their privacy information is secure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Information Technology. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly prepared to 
provide to the Assembly the details of what we expect from 
third party groups in terms of security provisions. That’s 
provided within the report that we had, I think made public 
some months ago, about the need for government to change its 
security parameters. I can certainly re-table that in this 
Assembly and I am prepared to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Revenue-Sharing Agreements with Municipalities 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the chickens have come home to roost. There’s no new 
revenue sharing for municipalities in the provincial budget. The 
cities said they needed it or property taxes were going up. Well 
guess what, Mr. Speaker? Taxes in Saskatoon are going up by 
almost 5 per cent because of this NDP government’s refusal to 
enter into a meaningful revenue-sharing formula with the 
municipalities. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very direct and to the point 
as I can. To the Minister of Government Relations, can he 
explain himself to the ratepayers of Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the ratepayers of Saskatoon, as other ratepayers in other 
municipalities know, that this is the time of year when 
municipal councils sit down and review their costs, their 
revenues, their expenses, the services that they provide to their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think members know that I sat on a municipal 
council for three years, I did municipal budget planning, just as 
I’ve sat on this side of the House doing provincial budget 
planning. We evaluate our needs against our ability to raise 
revenues, Mr. Speaker. And the municipalities right now are 
undertaking that. The proposal in Saskatoon at the end of the 
review period for municipalities could very well be within the 
. . . meet the needs of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just 
Saskatoon. It’s Regina as well. The cities of this province are 
begging for an end to the downloading. Regina says property 
taxes will be going up as well. Mr. Speaker, it’s very plain. This 
government has failed to do enough . . . to negotiate meaningful 
change to the revenue-sharing formula. The NDP gets richer so 
it can blow money on silly investments like we heard yesterday 
— about $72 million. The property tax payers of Saskatchewan 
are the ones that are footing the bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is this minister going to enter into serious 
discussions over meaningful reform of the revenue-sharing 
formula? When? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
direct answer to the question is of course we’ve already begun 
that. That process of serious review with the municipalities 
began at the municipal forum about three and a half weeks ago, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that we have to keep in mind in all of this, Mr. 
Speaker — and the members of the opposition should be very 
much aware of this — is that the municipalities, particularly the 
city of Regina, wants us to go back to the revenue-sharing 
formula that was put in place in 1980, Mr. Speaker. After two 
years of Conservative government in this province, they had to 
change the revenue formula because it was so unsustainable that 
it was unworkable, Mr. Speaker. As a result of that, as a result 
of that, Mr. Speaker, this government has over the last . . . over 
the last three years, Mr. Speaker, started to increase revenue 
sharing back to the provinces. And this year we now see $90 
million more than was in the budget four years ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s pretty obvious that the minister doesn’t understand 
much about the date times because he said 1980. And guess 
who was government of this province in 1980? It was his own 
NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, how this government operates . . . 
they asked for and received a report last year, and it called for 
an increase to the PST [provincial sales tax] for meaningful 
property tax reduction. The NDP’s very good at taxing so we 
get the dirty end of the stick as taxpayers of this province. But 
still, no meaningful tax reform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this minister stop letting down the 
property tax payers of this province and get on with the job that 
needs to be done? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 
member’s appointment as the new critic for Municipal Affairs 
and I can’t wait for the day when he actually catches up to 
what’s going on within the department and within 
municipalities across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on property tax relief, on the education side, this 
government has already committed $110 million; property tax 
payers this year will see an 8 per cent reduction on their 
property tax on the education side when that Bill is issued. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, through the municipal forum in 
consultation with the urban-rural governments, school boards, 
Government Relations, and the Dept. of Learning we’ve put in 
place a working group, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to take a look 
at the long-term sustainability of education property tax, Mr. 
Speaker. When we’ve got our equalization issues worked out 
and the working group reports, we’ll have a long-term answer, 
sustainable answer, for the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 

Investments in Navigata 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister for SaskTel said that the RBC [Royal 
Bank of Canada] report on Navigata said that they were . . . 
took it in a positive light and that they could break even or 
make a profit if they refocused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read the report. I did not see that in this report. In 
fact what it says, and I quote that: 
 

Navigata needs to be stabilized to a cash flow break even 
level in the very near term before . . . [building] for future 
internal growth . . . 

 
It also goes on to say: 
 

It is also recognized that . . . [it] will require additional 

operating capital until cash flow break even is achieved 
. . . 
 

How much more, Mr. Speaker? My question to the minister is, 
will he table all 13 business plans for this House in the very 
near future so that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan can see 
exactly what is in those business plans? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, he identified, I think correctly, obviously read the 
report as well, but the report that RBC . . . the point I should say 
that RBC makes is that indeed in the investments, whether it’s 
this company, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s any other 
telecommunications company, voice over Internet protocol, as I 
indicated outside of the legislature as well, is indeed there is 
some risk in it. And there is still some risk in this company. 
We’ve said that all along. But every telecommunications 
company is making these investments in voice over Internet 
protocol, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with respect to the additional investment, how much more 
have we invested? Well that was the basis for which we had our 
RBC do the independent third party analysis. The answer is 12 
million. That’s what we have put in. The amount is 60 million; 
there is an additional 12 million that has been allocated for 
potential investment and that’s what SaskTel is now analyzing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 13 
business plans in five months — $72 million pumped down a 
deep hole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me put that into perspective — $72 million is 
about two SPUDCOs [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] and throw in a Clickabid. That’s about 
what it comes to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is, exactly how much 
more money is the government prepared to put into Navigata in 
the short term and in the long term until this company makes a 
turnaround or in fact goes under, which is the long tradition of 
this socialist government in business? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, let me 
ask this question. Let me ask this question. When every other 
telecommunications company in North America is making this 
investment just think what the opposition would ask. Just think 
what the opposition would ask if SaskTel were not to do this. In 
three or four or five years when the rest of the world is using 
voice-over Internet, and SaskTel would have taken the advice of 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

the Saskatchewan Party — those Conservatives — and not 
made this investment, what would they say? They would say 
that SaskTel was as narrow in their vision, had no vision. But, 
Mr. Speaker, no, they’d rather criticize SaskTel, they’d rather 
criticize them. Why don’t they criticize the private sector who 
knows that this is the way to go into the future, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Support for Budget 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been almost a 
week — it’s been over a week — since the Finance Minister 
rose and delivered the budget in this Assembly and I think 
there’s a consensus in Saskatchewan that the budget was a 
disaster for the province. 
 
They had $1 billion in extra revenues, Mr. Speaker, and they 
blew it. They didn’t cut taxes for Saskatchewan families, they 
didn’t index the food allowance, they did nothing to attract new 
investment to the province. They didn’t keep the promise on 
police officers, Mr. Speaker, they did nothing to attract more 
health care workers. They didn’t abandon the 0, 1, and 1 wage 
mandate. They didn’t address the concerns of municipalities 
like Saskatoon. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker, it’s Friday, we’re in a good 
mood, it’s April Fool’s Day. We’re prepared to give the NDP a 
mulligan because they need a do over. Will the minister simply 
rise in his place today and say that this has just been an April 
Fool’s week and he’s prepared to start over on a provincial 
budget that will work for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — Before I . . . before . . . Order, please. Once 
again I see what has been used on one side is also being used on 
the other and that is an indirect way of naming a member. I 
would ask members to just take it easy on this, and I recognize 
the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not about to name any 
member across the way. As I repeat again, there seems to be 
some real confusion in the province whether it’s April Fool’s or 
not about who is the leader over there, and we’ll let them sort 
that out. It is peculiar, Mr. Speaker, I note that the finance critic 
is not asking the questions about the budget. In fact I haven’t 
heard a question from the finance critic all week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition members have a weekend to think 
it over because on Monday we’re coming to vote on a budget in 
this House. They have a weekend to think it over and I’m going 
to ask each and every one of those members to think these 
questions over this weekend. 
 
Are they going to come into this House on Monday and vote 
against, and vote against, an increase in the basic allowance for 
social services? Are they going to do that? Are they going to 
come into this House and vote against a $192 million increase 
for the Department of Health? Are they going to come in and 
vote against $55 million in property tax relief? Are they going 
to come in and vote against the budget that brings more 

resources to the education of Saskatchewan young people, more 
resources to the building of Saskatchewan’s future, or are they 
going to vote for that budget, Mr. Speaker? The credibility of 
that party and those members is on the line. They’ve got the 
weekend to think about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 

SaskTel Wireless High-Speed Internet Service 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize, I 
was unable to hear. First of all, thank you, it gives me great 
pleasure to announce today that SaskTel has launched SaskTel 
wireless high-speed Internet service in the first six communities 
in Saskatchewan to receive wireless high-speed through our 
government’s CommunityNet, through our government’s 
CommunityNet II initiative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As of today, rural residents in areas 
around Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Hague, Rosthern, and 
Aberdeen — residents who live within approximately 30 
kilometres of the Internet provision tower in these locations — 
will be able to receive SaskTel’s wireless high-speed Internet 
service. 
 
Thanks to CommunityNet II at least 71 communities in the 
province will enjoy access to a very valuable educational, 
communications, and entertainment service sooner than many 
urban centres in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel wireless high-speed Interest service will provide great 
benefits to farmers, business people, school students, seniors, 
and others. SaskTel wireless high-speed Internet service will 
greatly improve economic, social opportunities to people in vast 
areas of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This initiative, Mr. Speaker, follows on the heels of the award 
winning CommunityNet initiative which has already provided 
high-speed Internet across all the province. SaskTel and 
CommunityNet is currently providing high-speed Internet 
service, Mr. Speaker, to public institutions in 366 communities, 
linking 834 educational facilities, 310 health care facilities, 86 
First Nation schools, 256 government offices, and 162 libraries 
across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Upon completion of the $34 million 
CommunityNet II program, more than 86 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s population will have access to high-speed 
Internet service. And upon completion of the second phase of 
our CommunityNet program, rural Saskatchewan will be the 
most connected rural area in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, will have 
invested $173 million to bring a high-quality, priced 
competitive, high-speed Internet service to Saskatchewan 
residents and businesses. Initiatives like CommunityNet II 
demonstrate that Saskatchewan is a technology leader. SaskTel 
is extremely pleased and proud to be delivering this latest 
technology to rural Saskatchewan residents and building a 
better life for Saskatchewan citizens. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today and respond to the minister’s statement. Obviously the 
minister and myself, our paths have crossed on a number of 
times in the last 24 to 36 hours in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to congratulate the fine folks at 
SaskTel for the good job that they do providing these kinds of 
services and core services to the people of Saskatchewan, right 
here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is another example, 
another example of the fine level of technology that the good 
folks over at SaskTel have been responsible for over the last 
number of years. 
 
It’s interesting to note as well, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
minister’s statement he talked about having invested $173 
million to bring this high-quality, price competitive, high-speed 
service to Saskatchewan. Of course he is correct. He is correct 
. . . He is not completely correct, Mr. Speaker, in his assessment 
of the Internet service that is available to rural customers in 
Saskatchewan. I do believe that there is much more that can be 
done in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to briefly draw a quick comparison to 
that $173 million that the minister talked about. And I’m 
wondering in my mind how much more could have been done 
quicker to provide not only Internet service but cell service, 
cellular service, to rural parts of Saskatchewan had we been 
better managers of out-of-province investments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
But at the end of the day, after having read and heard this 
statement, again I want to congratulate those people at SaskTel 
because they do, do an excellent job providing that front-line 
core services to Saskatchewan in spite of — in spite of, Mr. 
Speaker — what the government across the way and their 
management practices have forced SaskTel to do over the last 
number of years. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We look forward to more 
announcements like this and more good things for the people of 
Saskatchewan right here in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Northern Affairs, the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, again it’s nice to see that 
the Conservative Party across the way muzzle their Finance 
critic, and this is only — what? — less than a week past the 
budget. This is supposed to be all about the budget week, Mr. 
Speaker, and the Conservatives muzzled the billion dollar 
Finance critic. Because why? Because the message got back to 
them is, hey guys stop spending money. Stop spending money 
because the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs, I think, he’s 
been spending money all over the place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would point out, it’s good to see that the message we’ve 
been telling people time and time again on this budget is, stop 
spending. Stop spending like the way you’ve been spending 
because had you kept on spending, we would’ve been déjà vu 
back to 1982 when the Conservatives . . . which you are a 
member of, when you’re a member of, when you ran of course 
to . . . trying to impress people throughout the province of how 
you can spend all this money, yet lower taxes, yet balance the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the popular programs on TV, one of the 
popular programs on TV in the home garden television, is the 
Holmes on Homes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this is where this 
fellow by the name of Holmes goes in there and looks at all 
these different houses. And he says, oh my goodness what 
shoddy work in this house. And what he does, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is he prepares to dismantle this house or dismantle this 
addition or this renovation and show what went wrong with the 
project. And that’s what I kind of think happens over there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think we should bring Mr. Holmes from 
HGTV [Home & Garden Television] and tell him, look, there’s 
some structural problems over there. 
 
The Conservatives are trying to hide what they are. So what 
they do, they took a couple two-by-fours. They took a couple 
Styrofoam panels. They put a little bit of wiring here. They put 
a light over there, put a little bit of paint, put a bunch of 
wallpaper all over it. And yet the wallpaper’s kind of thin, and 
then you put some more wallpaper over this. And then people 
say, well what’s wrong with this? This looks okay. No, no, no. 
Let’s take the wallpaper off, let’s take that two-by-four and see 
what’s structurally wrong there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget talked about a balanced 
approach as opposed to what the opposition is offering, which is 
the Conservative style of managing à la 1982, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So I want to point out, you can get Mr. Holmes here. 
And I want to ask him, can you dismantle that Saskatchewan 
Party, the so-called Saskatchewan Party, and see what’s really 
underneath and behind that wallpaper? 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

Oh they got some position on the Crowns. Oh we’d better not 
take that because Saskatchewan people love their Crowns. Let’s 
put some wallpaper over that issue. Oh they don’t want to see 
. . . they want to see less business in the province. Oh no, no, 
no. Let’s be business friendly; that’s supposed to be our mantra 
because that’s the Conservative way. Let’s put some wallpaper 
over that. 
 
Oh let’s see. Now let’s try and be more friendly to the people. 
Oh no, no. They don’t want a hard approach like the former 
leader did where he said, $50 million cut for social services. 
That was done last year, what the leader of the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party said. And he said, $50 million cut to the 
social services budget. 
 
And you know what? The difficult part that we have on this 
side, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . and this minister, the current 
Minister of Community Resources and Employment have 
nailed that point down time and time again is . . . you say, well 
first of all, we’re trying to help the low-income people. So if we 
help them out, then you say, well we don’t like that. So how 
about if we train them? Well they don’t like that too. Well you 
can’t just simply cut the people off at low income and say 
you’re not getting any more; we’re taking $50 million. You 
have to have the road to independence. 
 
As the Minister of the Community Resources and Employment 
Department often speaks about, you got to show people and 
help people, give them the helping hand up as opposed to the 
backhand that that former leader of the Saskatchewan Party was 
proposing several years ago in his plan to deal with social 
services, Mr. Speaker. We want to see the whole notion of 
fairness, equality, and respect for all the people that are out 
there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s only year two of our four-year mandate. 
We’re going to fight every inch of the way. We’re going to 
fight every inch of the way. We’re going to show people out 
there that when they come knocking on your door, you say, no, 
the NDP haven’t delivered as much as we would like, but we’re 
going to be patient with them. You tell them that. We don’t like 
your 1982 style of managing. You spend that $1 billion 10 
different ways to Sunday already. We’re not going back there. 
And besides all the things that you guys have been promising, 
we don’t trust you. We don’t trust you because we don’t know 
who you guys are. 
 
We’re staying the course with a proud government, a rich 
history of course of what we’ve been doing in terms of 
managing and building this province over the last 100 years. 
And we’re going to stay with the government that is fiscally 
responsible, socially aware, and economically striving for that 
strong economy throughout the province. And that’s what you 
tell them. 
 
My final point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is I would say . . . I told 
the folks yesterday at home I’d give them a list of where the $1 
billion went — promise made, promise kept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where’s the new money being spent? Well take 
your pen and paper: $110 million on property tax relief, and 
that’s 30 per cent of the $367 million federal transfer that we 
got; $54 million on utility rebates to meet this government’s 

commitment to provide the lowest utility bundle in Canada; $40 
million BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] top-up; $66 
million in new health funding for a number of initiatives — 
including expansion to the MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] 
and CT scan [computerized tomography] services, replacements 
of some of the diagnostic imaging equipment, and purchase of a 
new linear accelerator for the Saskatoon Cancer Centre, and 
efforts to retain health care providers; approximately $80 
million to address third party capital and infrastructure 
commitments — notably outstanding municipal infrastructure 
commitments as well as post-secondary education capital; 
approximately $110 million for government-owned capital 
acquisitions, including a new provincial lab, replacing the 
Regina jail, the renewal of the forest firefighting air fleet; $179 
million to be used to permanently reduce the government debt, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And of course that brings us up to 714 million, the balance of 
which is $890 million surplus we had last year, not what 
they’ve been saying. That has been used for allocation of 
ongoing operating spending such as the province’s share of 
cleaning up the northern uranium mines, IT [information 
technology] technology, and the list kind of goes on. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to point out that that’s where our money went. 
It was 890 million, not one and a half billion as they proposed. 
 
And I would say that as a member of northern Saskatchewan 
and a member of this government, we stand in proud support of 
this budget and reject their notion of how they would managed 
the future of this province and of this legislature. And to point 
out my final argument is that I tell the people back home, look 
at what they’ve done in the past; they are doomed to repeat it. 
Mr. Speaker, I stand in proud support of this budget and will 
continue doing so. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a relatively 
busy day on my feet here this morning. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
actually pretty glad that I have the opportunity to speak on the 
budget on this particular day, it being April Fool’s. In fact I am 
quite glad that I get the opportunity to speak prior to 12 noon 
because traditionally most people think that it’s okay to play an 
April Fool’s joke up until that time of the day on April Fool’s 
Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was thinking about what I was going to say here 
today. The thought ran through my mind to stand in my place 
over on this side of the House and talk about all the good merits 
of the budget and go on at length about how well, how good a 
job the government has done at managing the province’s 
business. But after I thought about it a bit, I thought I could not 
bring myself to do it, to do that. And of course my colleagues 
on this side of the House would have had to leave to get 
physically sick if I were to speak that way. So I didn’t. 
 
I changed my mind and I decided, I decided to go back to my 
original line of thinking and talk about the budget for what it 
really is, which is a non-item. And that is a non-item. 
 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

I’ve listened a bit to some of the other members’ speeches from 
both sides of the House about this budget. And what I’m, what 
I’m hearing more than anything else is it’s almost like a 
desperate attempt from the NDP side of the House to try to 
convince people out in Saskatchewan . . . Maybe they’re trying 
to convince themselves. Maybe they’re trying to convince 
themselves that this budget has something worthwhile in it. The 
Government Whip, for instance, the last two days has stood up 
in member’s statements and talked about what he thinks are the 
merits of this budget, and it doesn’t sound like they’re 
convincing anybody. In fact, I don’t even think they’re 
convincing themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday, in fact, the member for Regina Coronation Park — 
and other members by the way, but I want to single him out 
because I heard him say it in his speech on the budget — he 
talked about being 11 and oh, I think were his words as far as 
balanced budgets go. He said 11 in a row; 11 balanced budgets 
in a row. He said, Mr. Speaker, he said we’re 11 and oh; we’ve 
balanced 11 in a row. Mr. Speaker, I’m shocked. I’m shocked. I 
can’t imagine, I can’t believe, I can’t understand how members 
from that side can stand up and make that statement. Because 
they’re the only ones in the province that maybe could believe 
it. 
 
Saying that this government is 11 and oh in balanced budgets is 
sort of like saying, it’s sort of like saying that the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders have won 11 straight Grey Cups. It’s a great idea, 
it’s a nice thought, it’s a wonderful goal, but there isn’t anybody 
in the province that believes that — especially Henry Burris 
now that he’s decided to go to Calgary. 
 
So nobody can honestly believe that this could be reality. In fact 
when you look at the government and they talk about using 
funds from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, they talk about using 
funds from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund in order to balance the 
budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask somebody from that side of 
the House to stand up and tell me, where is that account? 
What’s the number of that account and what financial 
institution is it in? So that I could . . . some of us, or the 
taxpayers, or the people that have their money in the fiscal 
stabilization account could actually go down to the bank — 
maybe it’s the credit union, Mr. Speaker. Could be. That’s all 
right; that’s good by me. Tell me which credit union it is and 
what’s the bank account number so we can all go down and 
check that balance. Because in fact as a taxpayer of the 
province, we should have the right to know exactly how much 
money is in that particular fiscal stabilization account. And if 
the government, if one person, if just one person from that side 
could tell me that information, I’ll stand corrected. But I doubt 
that there’s one that could tell me that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Athabasca who spoke just before 
me in his remarks yesterday and then he finished his remarks 
just today, talked about when he goes home he tells his people 
— his constituents — he tells them, he said, don’t believe the 
Saskatchewan Party, don’t. They’re going to make promises 
and they can’t keep them, and he says don’t believe them 
because they can’t deliver on their promises. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we just recently came out with 100 ideas for 

the future of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, you know — 
and I’ll be honest with you — that maybe, maybe if we were 
the government of the day, we couldn’t do all those 100 right 
away. What it is, it’s a plan; it’s a big plan. It’s a big picture 
plan for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to get into exactly how we think, how we 
think we could pay and how the province could do a better job 
of managing so that those ideas or maybe others could, could 
actually be done in this province. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And I want to talk about something that’s in my critic area 
that’s pretty important to me. I want to talk about the waste and 
the mismanagement of taxpayers’ dollars outside the province 
of Saskatchewan. That is not going to cover everything that we 
would want to do. It wouldn’t cover everything that the 
government would like to do if they had a wish list, but let’s 
just have a look at some of those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last few recent years this, this 
government has lost . . . I’m not talking about invested; I’m 
talking about lost. Those are funds that you threw away, that are 
gone. They no longer exist. We can’t have them in the fiscal 
stabilization account because they don’t exist. We spent them. 
They’re gone, they’re history — of about $200 million, Mr. 
Speaker — $200 million. 
 
Let’s just look at some of them. SaskTel’s bad investments, 
$113.8 million. SaskWater, $35 million, and that’s the 
SPUDCO obviously. SaskPower’s investments — and they go 
back, it goes back a couple of years — it’s $17 million. SGI’s 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] is 16.1, and others, 
which include the mega bingo, Pangaea — which is just a 
recent one, Mr. Speaker. And then we can also talk about the 
imaginary Belle Plaine ethanol deal that cost the taxpayers of 
the province $750,000. That’s about $194.2 million. Mr. 
Speaker. That doesn’t even count the 100, the roughly $100 
million that we blew on the ISC [Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] fiasco. I didn’t even count that. 
So if you counted some of that because not all of it is a total 
loss of course, but let’s cover 50 million. That’s about $250 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that goes a long way. You take that $250 million 
and you manage it wisely and you spend it wisely and you 
invest it right here at home in the people, in the people of 
Saskatchewan, that is a tremendous step forward to paying for 
some of those kinds of things that we’ve talked about. In fact it 
would be a great step forward in doing some of the things that 
even the NDP government talks about. 
 
They say, oh we haven’t got any money for farm programs. We 
don’t have any money. We don’t have any extra money to settle 
with teachers and nurses in Saskatchewan. We don’t have any 
money to help out other jurisdictions — municipal jurisdictions 
— so consequently the city of Saskatoon has just increased its 
tax rate because they had to. Other cities, other communities, 
other RMs [rural municipality] in the province will have to do 
the same thing because they’ll be forced to. The government 
says, well, we don’t have any more money for that. They say 
we don’t have any more money for hospitals, a children’s 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

hospital in Saskatoon, and they say we’re tapped out. We’re 
committed. Everything is earmarked and we just don’t have any 
more money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to you that if we had a government, if 
we had a government that was adept at all at management, there 
would be $250 million — $250 million, extra — to put into 
those kinds of programs. Would it fix all the programs in 
Saskatchewan? No, it wouldn’t fix everything. Of course not. 
But $250 million in my mind would be far better spent right 
here at home in Saskatchewan on the people of Saskatchewan 
rather than blowing them on haphazard deals like a Ag Dealer 
for $8.9 million, like a Clickabid, Mr. Speaker, for $1.9 million. 
$1.9 million on Clickabid. That’s a similar type of a company to 
eBay. Everybody knows what eBay is. 
 
And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that after the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the NDP, the socialist 
government, got a hold of Clickabid, there was not one sale 
made. Not one sale was made on Clickabid — not one — 1.9. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I’ve always said this and I had somebody else 
tell me this the other day, somebody in my constituency said 
that this government couldn’t manage a good trip to the 
outhouse. And you know what? They’re right, Mr. Speaker. 
They have the ability, the great ability, to put the kiss of death 
on probably some very good businesses. 
 
And of course we talked about Navigata in the last couple days 
in question period. We talked about . . . In fact, just this week 
SaskTel bought a telephone book company in Alberta that I 
understand is doing pretty well. They have done well and they, 
at first blush, looked like they could be, should be a good 
investment for the people of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
would say to you that I would suggest and I would submit to 
you that with the government’s long, inglorious track record in 
investments outside the province of Saskatchewan, I would 
expect to see that particular company go into financial 
difficulties very, very quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week a news release was sent out from the 
NDP caucus office to Missinipi Broadcasting company, which 
does a lot of very good and excellent work in northern 
Saskatchewan. And in that particular news release they talked 
about the member for Carrot River Valley, which of course is 
me. And they wondered why I wouldn’t vote in favour of the 
budget; why I would not vote in favour of the budget when 
there was 42 million extra dollars earmarked in this budget for 
firefighting aircraft by the province of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, the $42 million wasn’t necessarily the issue there as 
far as I was concerned. What was the issue, was how we would 
best look after firefighting in northern Saskatchewan in the 
forest areas. 
 
And I know our critic for Environment has looked into that 
issue closely in the last while. And he’s done some studying in 
Manitoba, for instance — which by the way is another NDP 
government — have done a pretty new way of approaching the 
firefighting equipment that they use in their province. They 
actually have on retainer, they have on retainer, private carriers. 
And when there is a fire — and of course there are years when 
there are more fires than others — they then pay that 
firefighting equipment on a case-by-case basis, which makes a 

lot of sense to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You take that $42 million that the government earmarked for 
aircraft and use it, invest it in having these private carriers on 
retainer perhaps. Might make a lot of sense. But of course that’s 
not the way that the socialist government thinks. They think that 
well, we have to own our own, and we’re going to maintain. 
And $42 million, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you is not going to buy 
many firefighting aircraft. And that’s the bottom line. So if 
we’re going to continue to have a firefighting fleet, it’s going to 
cost far more than $42 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was on the phone doing an interview with 
Missinipi Broadcasting last evening, the reporter asked me, she 
said well, she said you’re obviously not going to vote for the 
budget. And I said, no, I won’t be voting for the budget. I said 
that there were just . . . it was a non-item. It was a non-event. 
There was nothing in the budget that was good. 
 
I said in my years of being in politics, both federal and 
provincial, almost every budget, almost every budget that 
comes down the pike, there might be something that you could 
say, okay it’s good; I like that. You might not vote for the 
budget, but you still could say, well that was a good step. It 
might have been, didn’t go as far as we would have liked to 
have gone, but at least it was a step. And I told the reporter last 
night, I said that there was not one thing in this particular 
budget that I could say was a good, solid step for the future and 
for the second 100 years of Saskatchewan. And so how could 
one even consider voting for it? 
 
She then asked me, she said, well what would your party do? 
What would your party do for people in northern 
Saskatchewan? If you were the government of the province, if 
the Saskatchewan Party was the government of the province, 
what would you do in your budget to make things better for the 
people of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Well I said to her, okay, I said, there’s two or three items off the 
top of my head that work. Obviously the first one is tax breaks. 
And tax breaks for individuals, but also tax breaks for business. 
And that’s an issue that works good for wherever you live in the 
province, but obviously that includes the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. We talked about lowering the education portion 
of taxes on land that’s owned. Mr. Speaker, I talked about 
things like a children’s hospital that’s in our plan. And I think 
it’s idea no. 9, if I’m . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s no. 9. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Is it no. 9? My colleague from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs agrees that it’s item no. 9 in those 100 ideas for 
the next 100 years of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I said, it’s a children’s hospital. I said, you know what? I 
said, I know that where you live it’s a long ways from 
Saskatoon. But I said, think about this and think about the good 
things it would do for the children of northern Saskatchewan, 
the children of everywhere in Saskatchewan — everywhere. 
 
And she said, well how are you going to pay for that? And I 
said, I told her exactly what I just told this Chamber. I won’t go 
into that again, about the $250 million that we should have for 



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

projects like the children’s hospital. So I said to her, I said, that 
has to be a priority for everyone. That’s good for your children. 
It’s good for those people that live in La Ronge or Estevan. It 
doesn’t really matter; it works for everybody. 
 
Then I also said, there’s lots of other items that, you know, 
when we talk about what we could do to help northern 
Saskatchewan. There’s roads, of course. 
 
There’s power. We are short of electricity, hydroelectricity in 
the northern part of the province. That’s a given. Everybody 
knows that. In fact some of the lumber mills and other projects 
up there have to run at night in the wintertime because the load 
is not nearly so great on the electrical system. We need more of 
those kinds of things. 
 
One of the members in the House the other day talked about 
this new ethanol plant, new technology ethanol plant that the 
people of Nipawin are undertaking. It’s a great idea, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a wonderful idea, not only for the people of 
Nipawin but for all of northern Saskatchewan, because we’re 
going to be able to use forest waste to produce an energy that 
you can use to burn in your car or to produce electricity. Either 
way, it’s a win-win for northern Saskatchewan and for the 
entire province. 
 
So I said to her, I said, those are the kinds of things that we 
could and would do had we the opportunity to do that. But it 
doesn’t start with, it doesn’t start with saying, well we’re going 
to make 100 promises to you because that’s what those folks 
over there did. They promised the world to everybody and they 
can’t produce. They couldn’t produce. They never have. But the 
minister . . . the member for Athabasca, just in his remarks just 
before I got up, talked about . . . he said what he tells his people 
when he’s at home. He said, look at the Sask Party and their 
long record; look at their long record of failure. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn the tables and I’d like to say 
to the people of Saskatchewan, look at the record of these 
people. That’s the record that needs to be scrutinized. It’s the 
government of the province, it’s the government of the province 
that would say publicly, have the nerve, the audacity, to stand in 
their place and say, we’re 11 and oh on balanced budgets. 
We’re 11 and oh, 11 in a row. The fiscal stabilization plan, the 
account is in place. And that’s, I don’t know what . . . as I said, 
I don’t know which financial institution. I’d like to know the 
account number. But they got the audacity, they’ve got more 
nerve than Dick Tracy, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing that the 
people — anybody — could stand in their place in any 
Legislative Assembly or place of government in this country — 
or in North America or in the free world — and make those 
kinds of statements. It’s unbelievable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to finish up by saying that this kind 
of budget and the budgets that have preceded this one really 
ought not to be scrutinized by the opposition and ought not to 
be scrutinized perhaps even by the media. What it ought to be 
scrutinized by are the people of this province. Because at the 
end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are the 
people that have ownership, and they are the real stakeholders 
in this province. They’ve been the stakeholders for 100 years. 
They were the people that built this province and they have the 
right to know where our money is spent, why it’s spent. And 

when we make mistakes and when we have those kinds of 
losses like I have just talked about here today, they have the 
right and they have the responsibility to know why and where 
and who’s responsible. And, Mr. Speaker, to this point I have 
not heard those kinds of answers from the government opposite. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion obviously . . . I mean I guess 
there’s no guesswork around the fact that I will be voting 
against the budget when that comes to a vote before this 
Assembly — next week, I believe. I’m actually looking forward 
to voting against it. And I’m encouraging, encouraging that 
everyone out there who pays attention to politics in 
Saskatchewan and who pays taxes — which is everybody, of 
course — will have a good, hard look and scrutinize this 
government for what they didn’t do, what they had the 
opportunity to do last week in the budget. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, they had — I stand corrected if I’m wrong — but 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $1 billion. Mr. Speaker, we 
had, we had one of the best revenue years that we’ve had in a 
long time, maybe ever, as far as additional revenue goes. It 
didn’t come from all sectors of our province. We all know the 
agriculture sector is suffering, but the oil industry’s done 
extremely well, the energy sector’s done extremely well. And 
that’s great; that’s a wonderful thing. 
 
We had $1 billion that we could have said to the province, to 
our province, to the people, the 1 million people that live here, 
here’s the plan for . . . We’re going to put this province on the 
road to the second century. So here’s the plan. We’re not going 
to get them all done in the first year, we might not get them in 
five years, or even ten years, but here’s the long-term plan. 
 
We did that, Mr. Speaker, when we came out with our 100 
ideas. We said we have some ideas. Will they all work? Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to think they would, but maybe they won’t. 
And could they all be afforded? Maybe they could, maybe they 
couldn’t. But at least there’s a plan there. There’s a basis for 
hope, a basis to move on to the next 100 years. 
 
The socialists on the other side had the opportunity to take that 
$1 billion and to do something with it, to say here’s our present, 
here’s our birthday . . . our 100th birthday present to the 
province of Saskatchewan. Here’s the future. I’m giving you the 
future. That’s what they could have said. Mr. Speaker, they 
failed. They failed . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And my 
colleague, the critic for Finance, the member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs, just said it right now — and I heard him say in 
his speech, in his response to the budget — and it’s really the 
key words to this budget. He said never, never has a 
government done so little with so much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege to enter into this budget debate. And I 
want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by responding to some of the 
remarks of the member opposite, the member for Carrot River 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

Valley. Let’s review what he’s just said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, he’s arguing that we ought to have 
taken the $1 billion in one-time revenue that this government 
has received through hard negotiations with Ottawa, recouping 
clawbacks, Mr. Speaker, excess clawbacks on oil and gas 
revenue over the last 15 years. And he’s arguing, Mr. Speaker, 
that we should spend all that money this year, Mr. Speaker. 
Well that’s just part of the folly, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Conservative government entered into in the 1980s when I sat 
in this legislature — and that the Sask Party, the Conservative 
Sask Party, would do all over again if they ever got the reins of 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want 
nothing to do with that kind of plan. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
why this government has received four consecutive mandates 
from the people of Saskatchewan. The member opposite 
suggests, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan don’t 
support our budgeting process. Well maybe he’d like to explain, 
Mr. Speaker, why it is that the people of Saskatchewan have 
re-elected this government on three consecutive occasions after 
our first election in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I tell you why it is, Mr. Speaker: because they have confidence 
in our budget plan, and they reject the big spending plan of the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker — the big spending plan that 
leads to big debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to, I want to review the record of 
the Conservatives when they were in office with respect to debt, 
because I heard the member from Silver Springs take five 
minutes on the radio to spend $1 billion. Well, Mr. Speaker he 
reminded me of the Finance minister for the Conservatives in 
1986 in this House, Mr. Gary Lane, who ran up $1 billion 
budget, Mr. Speaker, who ran up $1 billion deficit — $1 billion 
deficit — and hid it from the people of Saskatchewan until after 
the 1986 election, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that 
many members of the province listening today will recall that 
event, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then what did that Conservative Party go on to do, Mr. 
Speaker? They ran up a deficit every single year of more than 
$1 billion, Mr. Speaker. In 1987, 1988, 1999 . . . by 1990, Mr. 
Speaker, it was exceeding a billion and a half dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. They left us, Mr. Speaker, $14 billion in debt. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? The interest rates when they had 
finished running up that debt, the Conservative Party’s debt, 
Mr. Speaker, the interest on it — I want to tell the member for 
Silver Springs — was $890 million each and every year, Mr. 
Speaker. The kind of money, Mr. Speaker, that he’d dare to 
spend in five minutes on the radio. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we reject that kind of budgeting 
plan that the Conservative Party — now they call themselves 
the Saskatchewan Party, the Saskatchewan Conservative Party 
— we reject that kind of budgeting, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have 
none of it, I tell you — none of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — So, Mr. Speaker, in contrast to their 

plan, Mr. Speaker, what does our plan call for? Well first of all, 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Silver Springs is yelling across the 
House, Mr. Speaker, but I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to hear 
his comments after I’m finished. I welcome him to get up, Mr. 
Speaker, I welcome him to get up at any time and illuminate us 
on counteracting what I’m saying now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In contrast, Mr. Speaker, our plan is to take that $1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve taken 179 million of it, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ve written down debt. So we’ve got $179 million less of 
debt, Mr. Speaker, that we now have to pay interest on. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s going to reduce our annual interest 
payments to an all-time low, Mr. Speaker. This year, Mr. 
Speaker, instead of spending $890 million a year in interest on 
debt we’re only going to need to spend $588 million of interest 
on debt, Mr. Speaker. So we’re finally getting the interest 
down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? It’s taken 14 years to get the 
interest payments down, Mr. Speaker, by almost $300 million a 
year. It’s taken 14 years of hard work, Mr. Speaker, to do that. 
We’ve still got a long way to go, Mr. Speaker, but our plan is to 
get rid of all this debt eventually, Mr. Speaker. That’s our plan, 
Mr. Speaker. They’d have none of it of course, Mr. Speaker. All 
they want to do is rack it up, Mr. Speaker. We’re intent on 
continuing to drive it down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — And I tell you why we want to keep 
driving it down, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t want to spend 
taxpayers’ money paying interest on debt. We want to spend 
taxpayers’, hard-earned taxpayers’ money, investing in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We want to spend hard-earned 
taxpayers’ money in social programs, in health care, in 
education, in social housing, Mr. Speaker, in protecting our 
environment. That’s where we want to spend that money, Mr. 
Speaker. We don’t want to spend it on interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what does that require? What does that kind of an initiative 
require, Mr. Speaker? Well it requires good long-term planning. 
Not throwing all our money that we get in one year, Mr. 
Speaker, at a problem, Mr. Speaker, but saving some of it to 
invest in the future. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what we’ve done. Of the $1 billion 
. . . And the member for Silver Spring continues to yell across 
the floor, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to say to him, we’ve taken 
353 million of the $1 billion and we’ve set it aside in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund for future spending over the next three or 
four years. So instead of spending it all in one year, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to spend it over three or four . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members, I’m having 
more difficulty hearing this person who has the floor, so I’d ask 
people . . . Order. I’d ask people to please pay attention. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that makes 
good sense. So of the $1 billion, I want to inform the member 
for Silver Springs, 353 million is for spending in the future on 
health, on education, on property tax relief, on keeping our 
commitments to the lowest utility bundle for residential rates in 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. That’s what some of the money is 
for. And 179 million of it is for debt reduction. 
 
So in other words, Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken that $1 billion and 
we set aside a third of it for future spending, and we have set 
aside about 18 per cent of it, Mr. Speaker, for debt reduction. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is fiscally prudent, that is fiscally 
responsible, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud to be part of a 
government that thinks long term instead of short term, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the other thing I 
heard the member for Carrot River Valley just say is that he 
doesn’t like our Crown investment policy. And he read off, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the losses. 
 
But I tell you what he didn’t do, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t 
acknowledge that this government has hundreds and hundreds 
of investments that make money, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t 
acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that every year now our Crown 
corporations return to the people of Saskatchewan a dividend of 
at least $200 million a year — $200 million a year, Mr. Speaker 
— that’s now available to invest in health and in education and 
in social initiatives, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud to be a part of 
a government that does that, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud to be 
part of a government that does that. 
 
So dividend payments to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, in the form of a utility rebate, dividend payments to 
the people of Saskatchewan in the form of dollars that are 
available to invest in health and education, that’s the legacy of 
the Crown corporations under our government, Mr. Speaker, 
under our management. 
 
Well what did we see when the Conservatives were in office, 
Mr. Speaker? I tell you what we saw. We saw massive losses in 
the Crowns under their management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I recall in 1989 when I sat in this Assembly and the Potash 
Corporation was sold . . . The member for Silver Springs just 
said, well what about potash. Let’s talk about potash. Let’s talk 
about it, since he raises it, Mr. Speaker. Yelling across the floor, 
he raises it. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind him the losses on 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan when they sold it off; 
$441 million, that’s what they lost, Mr. Speaker. They racked 
up, the Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, and the member for 
Silver Springs, Mr. Speaker, of course was a Conservative. 
 
I recall when he ran for Brian Mulroney, Mr. Speaker. I recall 
when he ran for Brian Mulroney, Mr. Speaker, and I just want 
to remind all members in this Assembly and all those listening, 
Mr. Speaker, that Brian Mulroney racked up the biggest deficits 
and the biggest debt for Canadians in all of history, Mr. 
Speaker. What did we have in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker? We had 
a federal government under Brian Mulroney that was racking up 
massive debt, which the member for Silver Spring wanted to be 
a member of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we had a provincial government at the same 
time that was massively racking up debt under Grant Devine, 
Mr. Speaker. And who was working for that government, Mr. 

Speaker? Who was learning from Mr. Devine? Well it was the 
member, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, who was 
learning under Grant Devine, who’s now sitting in the seat as 
Leader of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re going to ensure with, Mr. Speaker, with the policies that 
they are promoting that they stay in opposition for a very long 
time in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to 
the question of the Crowns because it’s fundamental, Mr. 
Speaker. We now, Mr. Speaker, this government has written 
down Crown debt by more than $2 billion. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, we have taken the debts that they 
have racked up and after 14 years of hard work and careful 
management and making a profit on the vast bulk of our 
investments, Mr. Speaker, not all of them — we’ve lost on 
some of them — but we have made money on a lot of them, Mr. 
Speaker. And the net effect is very positive for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have brought that $2 billion of 
debt down again, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to say that our 
Crowns are now in very good fiscal order, Mr. Speaker. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, provides a very solid basis for investment in 
the future. And they laugh, Mr. Speaker. They laugh, but I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, this provides a very solid basis for future 
investment. 
 
So what do we see in this budget, Mr. Speaker. We see our 
Crowns investing in wind power, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
be building, we’re going to be building wind turbines, Mr. 
Speaker, not only at Gull Lake, where we now have 22 
megawatts of wind power, but we’re going to be investing in 
wind power with 150 megawatts of wind power development, 
more than 100 turbines, Mr. Speaker, south of Swift Current. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Our Crowns in this budget, Mr. Speaker, are going to be 
investing in Internet for people in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that in this budget 
we are setting out on a path that will deliver high-speed Internet 
services to 86 per cent of our population, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
pleased to see that. And that’s the kind of thing we’re able to 
do, Mr. Speaker, when we have good, solid fiscal management 
of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, something that 
members opposite have demonstrated that when they’re in 
government they’re incapable of. 
 
Well Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the performance of our 
Crowns is one of the reasons why we’re a have province today, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s an important element in building a have 
province, Mr. Speaker. And you know when we were last a 
have province, Mr. Speaker, is in 1980 and 1981 and 1982 
under Allan Blakeney’s leadership, when the New Democratic 
Party governed the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

Hon. Mr. Prebble: — And now, Mr. Speaker, after 14 years of 
hard work, of paying down debt, building up our Crowns, 
investing strategically, being fiscally prudent, Mr. Speaker, we 
are a have province again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to pick up on one other point that the 
member for Carrot River Valley made. And that is, Mr. 
Speaker, he said — and I think it’s fair to say I’m coming very 
close to quoting him — he said, Mr. Speaker, that this budget 
was a non-event and that there was virtually nothing good in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell him 
about some of the good things in this budget, Mr. Speaker. I 
can’t believe that the Conservative party opposite says that 
there’s nothing good about the budget, Mr. Speaker. I just can’t 
believe it, because that’s not what my constituents are telling 
me. That’s not what the people of Saskatchewan are telling this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of people like this budget. They like the fact 
that it’s balanced, Mr. Speaker. They like the fact that there’s no 
tax increases, Mr. Speaker. They like the fact that health 
spending, Mr. Speaker, is up $192 million and that we’re 
investing another $74 million in our education system in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. They like the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have managed our debt to the point where instead of being 69 
per cent of our gross domestic product of all spending in this 
province, Mr. Speaker . . . back in 1991 debt was 69 per cent of 
total economic spending in this province, Mr. Speaker. Now our 
debt is only 28 per cent of everything that is spent in this 
province on goods and services, Mr. Speaker. And that is 
progress, Mr. Speaker. That is progress. And there’s a long way 
still to go, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a very positive step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think members opposite have complained, Mr. 
Speaker, about property taxes and municipal revenue sharing. 
But they never acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that three years ago 
we increased revenue sharing by 10 million. Then, Mr. Speaker, 
two years ago we increased it by yet another 10 million, Mr. 
Speaker. Last year we increased it by 10 million more. In other 
words, $30 million more than it was three years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. Do they ever acknowledge that on the Conservative 
side of the House? They never do, Mr. Speaker. So there’s been 
a significant investment in additional revenue sharing. 
 
Do they acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that there’s $55 million for 
school property tax relief in this budget, Mr. Speaker? Well no, 
they don’t. And that’s another positive tax reduction initiative 
that this government has taken, Mr. Speaker, on top of the 
personal income tax reductions that we’ve seen over the last 
three years; on top, Mr. Speaker, of the utility rebate when 
every Saskatchewan resident in December received on their 
telephone bill, Mr. Speaker, $137 in the form of a rebate. So 
those are some of the tax break initiatives that we’ve put in 
place, Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also made very positive social 
investments and I want to review some of the key ones. I am 
very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we are building 600 new 
affordable housing units in the province of Saskatchewan this 
year, Mr. Speaker. And you know, Mr. Speaker, during the 
difficult years of the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, under the Liberal 
government of the day, we saw social housing in Canada 
virtually disappear. And this government in Saskatchewan and 

the Quebec government were the only two governments in 
Canada that still invested in social housing, Mr. Speaker. And 
those investments continue today. 
 
Finally the federal government is getting back into the social 
housing field, Mr. Speaker. But this government has made 
investments in social housing each and every year, Mr. Speaker. 
And over a four-year period our plan is to build 2,000 new 
social housing units in the province to add to the 35,000 social 
housing units that are already in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s a very positive investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see in this budget some badly needed 
investment in supporting low-income families in our province, 
Mr. Speaker. In this budget, Mr. Speaker, there’s an increase in 
social assistance rates, Mr. Speaker, for every single person on 
social assistance in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And for many families, for a family of five for instance, Mr. 
Speaker, this will mean a $50 increase every month. There is 
also, Mr. Speaker, an important investment in housing for 
families on social assistance and for low-income working 
families, Mr. Speaker, who will receive, in this budget there’ll 
be 10,000 families who’ll receive on average an extra $65 a 
month in a housing supplement, Mr. Speaker. And for those on 
social assistance, that will be in addition to the increase in the 
basic allowance, Mr. Speaker. So that’s also very positive. 
 
And there will be, Mr. Speaker, for those with disabilities who 
are supporting families, there’ll be an extra housing supplement 
of up to $151 a month, Mr. Speaker. And that’s going to make a 
difference in the lives of another 3,000 people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, there is more money to support 
daycare and child care. And there’ll be an additional 250 child 
care spaces that’ll be supported financially in the coming year, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m also hoping that we will see an increase in the 
child care subsidy as the year goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s an important investment in a lot of the programs 
that are being delivered in our communities and in our schools. 
Some of our school feeding programs are very important in 
low-income neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to be 
getting another $500,000 invested in them in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the member for Carrot River Valley says there’s nothing 
good about this budget, Mr. Speaker. These are just 15 or 20 
examples of good things about this budget, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m not done yet, Mr. Speaker, talking about the good things. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, there’s dozens and dozens more positive 
things to talk about. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in public safety. 
My colleague, the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, talked 
earlier in this House about the fact that we have 18 more 
additional positions for police officers in this budget, bringing 
our commitment, Mr. Speaker, that we would hit 200 police 
officers. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Assembly that we 
are now 85 per cent of the way there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just wrap up, Mr. Speaker, by talking about some of our 
investments, some of our investments in health care, Mr. 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

Speaker, and in post-secondary education. Because in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, there is extra money, $4 million of 
addition spending, on bringing down our waiting lists for those 
waiting for elective surgery in our province, Mr. Speaker. There 
is almost $5 million of additional money to make it possible to 
expand diagnostic testing for MRIs, for bone scan density, for 
CAT [computerized axial tomography] scans in our province, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s an investment of $3.9 million, Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget to expand the child vaccine program in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, with some very important additional 
vaccinations becoming available for children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, on the post-secondary education front 
there is money for 1,000 new training spaces, Mr. Speaker, in 
the province of Saskatchewan to bring our training spaces from 
26,000 to 27,000. And finally, Mr. Speaker, a commitment that 
is very important to students in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, 
there is money here, Mr. Speaker, in the budget, $6.7 million, 
Mr. Speaker, for an investment in operating grants in our 
universities that will be ongoing, that will be there not just this 
year but next year as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the result, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re able to hold the line 
on tuition by way of a mutual agreement between this 
government, Mr. Speaker, and the University of Saskatchewan, 
and the University of Regina. They’ll be no tuition increase for 
any of our university programs this year as a result of that 
investment, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, record investment, 
I might say, in terms of capital in our universities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the member for Carrot River Valley says 
there’s nothing good about this budget. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that’s just an example of how the Conservatives opposite, the 
Saskatchewan Party, have misrepresented this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m proud to stand up and support it, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be voting 
for this budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget is about priorities, and in this budget agriculture was not 
a priority. Agriculture is responsible for the birth of this 
province. Agriculture was the reason this province got here. It’s 
the reason that people came here, it’s the reason that people 
stayed here. Agriculture is the reason we had 1 million people 
— and I say had 1 million people — in this province. 
Everything that happened in Saskatchewan is tied to agriculture. 
 
We’ve all heard the stories about the pioneers, the early settlers, 
their hardships, the pains, the suffering they went through. Mr. 
Speaker, their heritage is owed. Now the NDP say we can’t 
afford agriculture. Mr. Speaker, priorities, priorities. 
 
There’s a program in Manitoba called SEAT, means single 
engine air tankers. If used, the existing planes in Saskatchewan 
for the crop sprayers association would be doing our 
firefighting. The planes are there; the ability is there. But 
instead, what are we doing? We’re putting in $19 million to get 

our own fleet of planes. Mr. Speaker, don’t reinvent the wheel. 
There’s a system there. NDP Manitoba is using it. Why can’t 
Saskatchewan use the same program? Priorities, Mr. Speaker, 
priorities. 
 
I’ve just found $19 million now. It’s a miracle. You can now 
fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] and 
crop insurance. 
 
Oh yes, crop insurance. One of my constituents came to me and 
said, using the crop insurance formula, your $100,000 house, 
the premium for the year would be $20,000. Now then we 
would hear an outcry. But this is what’s being tagged on 
agriculture. 
 
Agriculture is in its darkest, darkest hour. They are at the brink 
of disaster. They’ve had drought, frost, wet, and of course, NDP 
government, and BSE. Where are they to go? The situation is as 
bad as in the dirty thirties, but nobody will acknowledge it. 
 
In the dirty thirties they could survive with bartering system. 
Today everything is cash. I have people call my office and say 
we don’t have the money and they want to shut down our 
telephone, shut down our whatever, because they’ve got 
nothing to deal with any more. 
 
One of my constituents called. His wife has been supporting the 
farm for years with an off-farm job. She’s been doing very well 
and they’ve been able to just barely survive. The other day she 
came home and said the company is shutting the office. She 
doesn’t have a job any more. He phoned and he said, I know 
you can’t help, but what are we to do? What can we do to 
survive? He says, I’m afraid we’ll have to have a sale. 
 
We hear sad stories like this every day in our office and in the 
coffee shops in the rural areas of Saskatchewan. Even the 
federal government has enough vision to see that there’s a 
problem. They have committed $1 billion. And the NDP says, 
we can’t afford to save the farm. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, heaven help us if we have a tsunami because the 
NDP couldn’t afford it. Priorities, Mr. Speaker, priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re on a roll; let’s see what other money we can 
find. Oh, here’s one. Navigata, total investments so far 75 
million I’m told. Now we could handle a tsunami. At the 
present rate it’s going to make SPUDCO look like a bag of 
potato chips. Seventy-five million, think of what we could do 
with that — cut taxes, both business and personal. The 
possibilities are endless. 
 
Now we can pull out the Sask Party 100 Ideas booklet. I could 
run through all 100, but the member from Canora-Pelly did a 
wonderful job of doing that. I’d just like to highlight a few of 
my favourite ones. 
 
No. 90, review the student loan program. Mr. Speaker, I can 
talk personally on this because I’ve got three children in 
university all at once. We need a review on student loan. 
 
No. 79, provincial tax credit to assist parents. I’m a firm 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

believer in daycare, but I’m also a more firmer believer in one 
of the parents staying home. Let’s look at that kind of a 
program. The best education a child could get is with his 
parents. 
 
No. 53, expand Saskatchewan’s irrigation capacity and 
potential. I’m told our irrigation potential is at 3 per cent — 3 
per cent of the water we could be using. We’ve got a long way 
to go. 
 
No. 44, expand Saskatchewan’s uranium industry. Mr. Speaker, 
we have the uranium. We mine the uranium, and we let the rest 
of world have the uranium. But we say it’s too dirty, we can’t 
touch it. That’s a little hypocritical. If it’s too dirty for the rest 
of the world, it shouldn’t be too dirty for us. 
 
No. 31, U of S [University of Saskatchewan] centre for health 
excellence. Mr. Speaker, my daughter’s a doctor and she says 
the University of Saskatchewan is very much in danger of 
losing its medical accreditation that we may teach doctors here 
in Saskatchewan. Will we achieve it though? Should have been 
looked after years ago. 
 
No. 14, crystal meth addiction treatment centres. A very, very 
serious issue. We’re just, they say, getting into it now. It’s 
going to get much worse. And are we ready for it? The 
Saskatchewan Party has pushed long and hard now trying to get 
the opposition to look at the crystal meth situation. 
 
Fetal alcohol syndrome. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had contact with 
these children. They have a terrific amount to overcome. They 
need help. They need special education, special training. 
 
No. 12, forgive students a portion of their debt load. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a program that’s been introduced by the Sask 
Party and we want to initiate it, and we wouldn’t mind if the 
other side copies it because the students sure need it. 
 
No. 16, a percent of the liquor and gaming should be used on 
gambling addiction. Saskatchewan is taking in a large amount 
of money due to the gaming and we are not putting enough of it 
back into the addiction programs. 
 
Increase the training seats in the medical profession. Right now 
we’re training them for exports. Let’s hope that we can just get 
this all going and bring in enough and train them so that the 
thing can grow in this province. 
 
And we do need a children’s hospital in Saskatoon. I think 
we’re the only Western province that doesn’t have one. It’s 
time; it’s long overdue. 
 
And no. 8, one of my favourites, supporting the livestock 
industry. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a livestock person all my life. 
This is a disaster on mega proportion we need to support. The 
money would have been much better spent there than on 
Navigata. Priorities, Mr. Speaker, priorities. 
 
Another item I would also look at is the balanced budget. Mr. 
Speaker, balanced means balanced. I took bookkeeping in grade 
9 and they always said, when your income is on the wrong side 
you’re in trouble. And somehow they’re using the new math — 
or is it creative math? — but they’re saying with the income not 

as big as the spending, they’re still balanced. Somehow this 
doesn’t fit, it doesn’t balance. It must be . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . It’s a new kind of math. Priorities, Mr. 
Speaker, priorities. 
 
This budget has missed the priorities and therefore I cannot 
support this budget, but I will support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I want to also get some remarks on the record 
regarding the budget, following on the great speech from the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I am pleased to be able to put into 
the record is why it is important to support the measures in this 
budget, and to put into record some of the reasons that it’s 
important that the members opposite never be allowed to get 
their hands on the purse strings of this province. I want to put 
on the record why the people who live in my constituency not 
support the agenda of the members opposite, and why the 
people of Saskatoon Fairview understand that Lorne Calvert’s 
NDP government will keep their lives more stable . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Just to remind 
members that we’re not to name members by their personal 
name but rather by the position or their constituency. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was saying, and 
that is why the people of Saskatoon Fairview understand why 
this government will keep their lives more stable and safer than, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, than the bizarre, what I would say 
ideological agenda of the Conservatives we have sitting in 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to put on the record 
which of the measures in this budget really hit home with me, 
and which measures will hit home with the people of my 
constituency. I want to put on the record how this budget 
reflects the kinds of priorities my constituents have and the 
manner in which my constituents would appreciate those 
priorities being implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon Fairview understand that 
we have to pay our bills. The people of Saskatoon Fairview 
understand that they need to keep their monthly payments less 
than their income. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatoon Fairview is a 
pay-as-you-go kind of place. When people get a swack of 
overtime they don’t go out and get a loan to buy a new car, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They fix up their existing car. They put the 
money in the bank and they use it to fix up their houses over a 
period of time. They wait for sales at the home reno places and 
they buy when they can get the most bang for their buck. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they might even throw a few bucks in the 
bank in case they get laid off. 
 
They don’t go wild with spending; these are prudent people. 
These are people who understand what happens when 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

somebody goes wild with credit cards, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They look at the Sask Party. They look at the Sask Party’s latest 
in a long line of platforms that’ll pave the streets with gold. 
They see a document from a new leader, and the new document 
is a kinder and gentler set of policies. And then they remember, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the last bunch of promises that weren’t so 
nice and so caring. And they see the same people sitting across 
the way and they wonder how this Sask Party leopard is trying 
to change its spots. They don’t trust that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to quote a member from 
Cypress Hills who just a couple of weeks ago in this House, on 
March 18, said this — remember, this is what the member from 
Cypress Hills said: 
 

. . . I’m going to pose, as part of our discussion today, I’m 
going to pose a rhetorical, biblical question. The question I 
would like to pose as a part of the ongoing discussion 
today, Mr. [Deputy] Speaker, is: can a leopard change its 
spots? My contention, Mr. [Deputy] Speaker, is that . . . it 
cannot. 

 
The people of Saskatoon Fairview look at how the Sask Party 
claims every new platform and new ideas document and plan to 
get rich is the one true answer. My constituents, Mr. Speaker, 
remember when the Sask Party told them the last get-rich-quick 
scheme for the province was the one true answer. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they don’t trust that. 
 
They look at the fact that the Sask Party used to be called the 
Conservative Party and now they have changed their name, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And they don’t trust that. They look at the 
fact, they look at the fact that the Sask Party has no history, or 
at least one that they won’t admit to. They know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Sask Party are Devine 
Conservatives, and, Mr. Speaker, my constituents remember 
how bad their lives were under that regime. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they don’t trust that. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they understand at a gut level that 
you can’t increase spending and reduce taxes without having a 
deficit. They know it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because any time 
they’ve tried it personally they’re the ones that had to pay it off. 
They remember the Sask Party when it was the Conservative 
Party guise, and they remember that they are still paying off 
that bunch of bills. So when the Sask Party comes peddling 
their latest snake oil, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they don’t trust that 
either, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
No matter how nice the Sask Party pretends to be, no matter 
which of their ideas in their new 100 points of light pamphlet 
might be palatable to people of Saskatoon Fairview, the people 
remember that the Sask Party used to have different policies. 
 
And they watch their TVs, as they are no doubt watching today, 
and every time a Sask Party member gets up, they see, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the intemperate and angry and ideological 
extremism, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even with the slick new leader 
and a new list of promises. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
don’t trust that. 
 
And many people in my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
have been without a job. Many people have been laid off at one 

time or another. If they haven’t, perhaps they know a close 
friend who maybe has. The people in Saskatoon Fairview 
understand what it means to have a job and what it means to be 
without one. They understand that wishful thinking doesn’t pay 
the bills and that sometimes pie-in-the-sky dream needs to be 
set aside for the real world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the real 
world is where we live, breathe, work, and play. 
 
This budget speaks to the realities of the lives of the people who 
live in Saskatoon Fairview. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget is 
the 12th consecutive balanced budget for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — NDP balanced budgets, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, after the people on the other side of the House almost 
bankrupt this province. This province was three days away from 
bankruptcy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those people, when they 
called themselves Devine Conservatives, almost bankrupt the 
province. 
 
And you know what they say about that. And I quote the 
member from Arm River-Watrous when he said, “You look at 
the Devine government. It did a lot of good things.” Really, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that was said, and not during any ancient 
history period either. He said it last year. If you want to check, 
look in Hansard, March 26, 2004. That member said: 
 

You look at the Devine government. It did a lot of good 
things, but [Mr. Deputy Speaker] when you mention [the 
Devine government] . . . debt always seems to be 
associated with the particular government. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder why its name is always 
associated with debt — the same reason that if members 
opposite get into government that their name will be associated, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with disaster. We’ve been down that road 
before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it isn’t pretty. Those people 
over there will ruin our province if they ever achieve power. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite every day scream to 
spend more and tax less, and that way they prove they are 
incapable of managing our province. Each day that they scream 
to spend more and tax less, they show us all that they would be 
as bad or worse than their last incarnation of the Devine 
Conservatives. The people of Saskatoon Fairview are frightened 
of members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The people of the 
province of Saskatchewan are frightened of the members 
opposite. That’s why they won’t make them government. 
 
Every year I look at the budget and I see the debt-interest item. 
This year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I called the Finance department 
and asked them how much interest we’ve paid on government 
debt since 1991. Not Crown debt, but government debt. And 
they told me over $10 billion. And this year alone we spend 
$588 million on interest and $179 million on paying down 
principal. All that money could have been spent helping people, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The opposition has been harping on SPUDCO since 1996, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They spent that 10 million over and over and 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

over again in things they would have done different. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as I said before, $10 billion of that group’s 
debt could have been spent better — 179 plus 588 is $767 
million this year alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year alone. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition tried to 
run for the Devine Conservative nomination in 1991. The whole 
province, the whole province thought Grant Devine’s 
government was a disaster, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the 
member from Swift Current ran for a nomination. He 
volunteered, he volunteered, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to suit up for 
Grant Devine. He volunteered to defend the Devine 
government. He volunteered to defend the spending and the 
debt and the mismanagement and the waste, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard he now tries to pass this off as 
youthful exuberance. He said it was like his hairstyle, his 
hairstyle, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The party that tries to dredge the 
Regina Manifesto off the 1930s history pages of our website 
and pulls out CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 
resolutions from 1946, then tries to pass their own Devine 
Conservative heritage off as a bad hairstyle and something 
everyone should just ignore — they want us to ignore the 
promised social services cuts, the education and health freezes, 
the promised wage rollbacks, the privatization, boot camps, and 
racial divisiveness, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the constituents in Saskatoon Fairview nor I ignore it, nor can 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want everyone to think about what we 
could have done with $10 billion — $10 billion, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about 
what we actually have done to help people. And some of the 
things we have done that we would be really excited about as 
opposed to the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our NDP government is providing 
education property relief of $110 million over two years. We 
are funding 600 new affordable housing units committed for 
2005, with a goal of 2,000 by 2008. 
 
We are investing in Saskatchewan children by developing a 
new provincial plan for early learning and child care which 
builds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on Child Care Saskatchewan and 
will create 250 spaces this year for a total of 1,200 new child 
care spaces by 2007. 
 
There is funding for 18 new police officers for a total of 169 
officers hired since 1999 and that will help keep our 
communities and families safe. We are providing an investment 
of 6 million for further resources for low-income families and 
individuals to improve their ability to get work and become 
independent. This includes an increase to the Saskatchewan 
assistance plan’s adult basic allowance which benefits over 
24,000 individuals on social assistance. 
 
There is also funding to help low-income families to cope with 
higher rent levels and a boost to the child nutrition and 
development program. There’s a 7.7 million increase support 
for low-income families in Saskatchewan through affordable 
and quality housing. 
 

The Saskatchewan rental housing supplement includes new 
family housing supplement providing support for up to 10,000 
low-income families and the new disability housing supplement 
providing up to $151 per month for as many as 3,000 
households for people with disabilities. 
 
There are energy conservation grants, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
families acquiring homes through neighbourhood home 
ownership program. 
 
We have purchased new MRI and CT scanners to increase MRI 
and other diagnostic testing volumes. We’re expanding cancer 
treatment capacity. We’re training and recruiting health 
professionals so that we have more doctors and nurses. We’re 
funding new childhood vaccines, and there are funds for new 
alcohol and drug strategies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are building the future here for young 
people through a 6.8 per cent increase in education fund 
spending, which includes significant capital improvements, 
funding for more than 27,000 training spaces, and a 6.8 per cent 
increase for universities and federated and affiliated colleges. 
There is also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 6.8 per cent increase for 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology]. And there’s more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a 
$6.5 million more in new money for youth initiatives, including 
an increase in training opportunities of 1,000 additional seats. 
 
The budget has an estimated $7.9 million for First Nations 
policing in 65 First Nation communities and to support 
community police management boards in 32 of those 
communities. 
 
The budget provides 3.3 million in direct and indirect funding 
for initiatives, events, and organizations that provide sport, 
culture, and recreation opportunities to Aboriginal and northern 
children, youth, and adults. There is 2.2 million for the Indian 
and Métis educational development program and the Aboriginal 
elders and outreach program. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget 
includes 1.9 million for the Aboriginal participation initiative, 
increase of 468,000 to increase participation in sports and 
cultural activities. 
 
The budget has 1.3 million in support of the Aboriginal family 
violence strategy and Aboriginal resource officers to assist with 
the provision of victim services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number of people on social assistance 
declined by 41 per cent since the introduction of the Building 
Independence program in 1998. Remember, social assistance 
caseload is now the lowest it has been since 1991. I’m also 
proud to say this budget includes an additional 6 million for our 
Building Independence strategy to help low-income families 
improve their ability to find work and achieve independence. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in closing, I would like to share some 
knowledge with members on the opposite side of the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That won’t take long. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — The member says it won’t take long. 
Probably not. What everyone on this side of the House knows, 
and what many of the people of Saskatchewan know, is that that 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

group on the other side of the House are nothing but 
Progressive Conservative Party under the witness protection 
program. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the constituents of 
Saskatoon Fairview don’t trust that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud of this budget, and I will be 
voting for this budget, and I thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to have 
the opportunity to speak to the 2005-2006 budget; pleased for 
the opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not pleased with this 
budget. 
 
I would like to think that I am an optimist. I believe in change 
that will lead to progress. We all have dreams of where we as a 
province could go, what we could be. But we realize it is by 
small steps — one day, one week, one month, one year at a time 
— that we move towards these goals. 
 
One of these steps that we take is the annual budget process. 
We would hope that this document that is presented to the 
province of Saskatchewan would reflect the plan and the means 
that will lead to this progress, take us to where we could be. 
Unfortunately this budget comes up short. The vision to lead us 
to where we could be is clouded at best. Madam Deputy Deputy 
Speaker, when expenditures exceed revenue, you do not have a 
balanced budget. So to tell the people that this is a balanced 
budget is simply untrue. 
 
So that’s where we start with this budget. The government says 
it’s balanced, but it isn’t. Our future as a province depends not 
on increasing the size of government but on increasing the size 
of the economy. This budget has it wrong. It increases the size 
of government and does not address the economic realities that 
must be addressed if this economy is to grow. 
 
My constituency is an agricultural area where there is also 
considerable oil and gas activity. So how does this budget affect 
and treat these drivers of the economy? 
 
Let’s look firstly at agriculture. The past three years have been 
particularly hard on the agricultural sector: 2002-2003, we 
suffered drought; 2004, severe frost. In that same period of time 
we had the BSE situation and low commodity prices. 
 
So what does this budget offer to agriculture? Firstly, firstly we 
note that this government does not provide for the full funding 
of the 2004 CAIS program. This program, CAIS, is far from 
perfect but it does provide a level of assurance of some relief in 
your revenue, in the event of a disaster. Unfortunately the level 
in Saskatchewan is a lot lower than the level in the rest of this 
country. 
 
Our level is lower because this government refuses to live up to 
the terms of the agreement that it itself took such pride in 
participating in the drafting of. The amount of dollars required 
to fully fund the 2004 CAIS program could have been estimated 
and provided for in this budget, but they have not been. 

From a practical point of view how does the failure to fully 
fund the CAIS program affect our producers? When the CAIS 
program was designed and sold to the producers, one of the 
main features of the program was that it would be bankable. 
The producer was to be assured that based on the coverages that 
were provided, that in the event of a decrease in income, be it as 
a result of a disaster or lower commodity prices, that the 
producer’s income would be brought up to a predetermined 
level. This predetermined level was to be bankable, but 
bankable only if the program was fully funded. 
 
So now in Saskatchewan our program is not bankable. Banks 
and credit unions are not prepared to lend money based on the 
program as a result of their experience from last year. As you 
will recall in the 2003, this government would not commit to 
fully funding the program until the end of 2004. And it was not 
until early 2005 that this government actually lived up to its 
promise for the 2003 program year. This performance, Madam 
Speaker, is simply not acceptable to the lending institutions, let 
alone the producers. 
 
Where in other provinces the program is fully funded, a 
producer can arrange financing based on the program. Not in 
Saskatchewan. The banks and the credit unions have no faith 
regarding the program, no more faith regarding the program 
than the producers because of the uncertainty that this 
government has created and its failure to honour its agreements. 
 
[12:30] 
 
The agricultural sector has also been dealt a double whammy as 
a result of the changes in crop insurance. Rates are up, coverage 
levels are down. Mr. Speaker, both of the programs mentioned, 
the CAIS program and the crop insurance program, are based 
on historical averages to provide the levels of coverage. With 
relatively low commodity prices and yield and quality problems 
over the past three years, the coverage that is available to 
producers has been drastically reduced based on the design of 
the programs alone. Add to that increased premiums, decreased 
coverage, and inadequate and uncertain funding, then really 
what is this government doing to help our agricultural sector? 
 
Last year with great fanfare it was announced that the education 
portion on property tax would be reduced or rebated at the rate 
of approximately 8 per cent. Well this year will be the test. This 
government’s lack of any increased funding for municipal 
governments and school divisions will, it would appear, require 
property tax increases in excess of the rebated amount. 
 
That is how this government addresses the inequities in the 
funding of education. The Boughen Commission made specific 
recommendations regarding these inequities. This government 
chose to pick and choose from these recommendations. They 
chose to increase the PST. They chose to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions. But the basic inequity is still 
very much in place. So that’s how agriculture has fared in this 
budget. 
 
As I mentioned, oil and gas production in my constituency is 
very prominent. So how did this budget address the needs of 
this industry? This was said to be a budget of no tax increases. 
Well the corporate capital tax, probably the most crippling 
impediment to long-term growth in this province, the tax the 



April 1, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

corporations pay over and over even if they don’t make any 
money, now is being assessed on resource trusts. 
 
In my area, close to the Alberta border, where would you base 
your resource business? Where there is corporate capital tax or 
where there is not. 
 
For the oil patch and business in general, this budget did not 
provide any needed tax relief. What we have instead is a study. 
The study is going to tell us the obvious. Firstly, that corporate 
capital tax should be phased out to zero as soon as possible. 
Secondly, that our corporate income tax rates need to be 
lowered as soon as possible. Thirdly, that the small business 
threshold should increase to $400,000 as soon as possible. And 
fourthly, that the PST should be decreased as much and as soon 
as possible. 
 
I am concerned that the recently announced incentives for the 
oil industry, balanced against the unfavourable tax regime, will 
result, in our area, in the majority of the activity continuing to 
be west of the fourth meridian. 
 
I do commend the government on its inclusion in this budget of 
the addition to the Maidstone health care facility. We have a 
progressive community and will continue to contribute to this 
province. This project has been in the planning for over 10 
years and the community has supported it and looks forward to 
the beginning of construction. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion to 
adopt this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak in the budget debate this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have talked about the 
different budgetary figures but a few things that have to be 
pointed. It’s a $7.1 billion budget which is the highest in history 
for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 145 million came from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, again, money that is not in a bank 
account. It’s borrowing against . . . it’s borrowing to pay off a 
deficit. So in reality, Mr. Speaker, this is another deficit budget, 
a string of deficit budgets. And the accountants of Canada have 
said the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is really a false accounting 
procedure that should not be used by provinces, and most 
provinces are not using it. And again this NDP government is 
really hiding a $145 million budgetary deficit this year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the whole concern that my constituents have 
is in very key fundamental areas, and I’d like to speak to some 
of the local issues that are problems province wide. 
 
But take health care for instance, Mr. Speaker. We always hear 
many stories about people waiting for 6 months, 12 months, 18 
months in waiting lists for some very serious problems — heart 
problems, knee and hip replacements. And it’s very 
discouraging, Mr. Speaker, to have those people phone my 
constituency office with those problems. 

But I’d just like to tell a little bit . . . a story about, in Biggar in 
particular, but in the Heartland Regional Health District. 
Heartland Regional Health District is short four doctors right 
now; in Biggar we’re short one doctor. We had three doctors in 
Biggar. One has moved on to Saskatoon, so there’s two doctors 
left. 
 
And the human tragedy really and the fundamental problems in 
Biggar is that these two doctors are on call all the time. There’s 
no chance of a day off. And just as an example, the other day 
one doctor tried to take some time off, but there was a patient 
that had to be delivered to Saskatoon by ambulance, so the 
doctor on call had to go with the patient. There was nobody left 
in Biggar, so that doctor was brought back to the office and had 
to work on a day that he thought he was going to have off. 
 
The doctors are working very hard to bring in new doctors and 
I’m helping them in that endeavour. But it’s a very serious 
concern. And really they don’t see, the doctors in Biggar and 
Heartland don’t see the government trying to help them recruit 
doctors. They have many plans, we’ve heard all their plans, but 
at the end of the day there’s problems retaining doctors and 
recruiting new doctors. And it’s a very disturbing situation in 
Biggar. 
 
Also in Spiritwood. Spiritwood used to have four doctors and 
now they’re down to one. And this is a very, very serious 
problem. It’s not only a serious problem to the stress on the 
existing doctors and the patients of course, but it’s a matter of 
economic development as well. How do you attract new 
businesses to communities if you’re losing doctors? And of 
course if the doctors leave, you have the potential of losing the 
hospital. And so health care issues are an economic 
development issue. Businesses that come into a community like 
Biggar or Vanscoy or Wilkie are looking at infrastructure, 
roads, highways, but also health care and schools. And it is a 
very disturbing situation that these communities are having. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to make a few comments about 
agriculture. Naturally the constituency of Biggar is basically a 
rural agriculture constituency. And the NDP not fully funding 
CAIS through ’04 is really a problem. I know last year the 
government held out and held out and tried to negotiate 
something with the federal government to the last minute and in 
the end fully funded CAIS for ’03. 
 
But the producers of my constituency in Saskatchewan are 
really at the end of their rope. You know, I mean the borders are 
still closed, the commodity prices are very low, crop insurance 
rates have gone up, coverage has gone down, no relief on 
property tax. There’s a limit to how long the producers and the 
family farms in my constituency of Biggar and the people of 
Saskatchewan can go here. 
 
And having the government say they’re not going to fully fund 
the CAIS again in ’04 is very disturbing. These are things that 
are taken to the bank. People are looking for operating loans to 
seed their land to get through another spring and a summer 
without the border opening. So these are very, very personal 
issues that people have to deal with because of the lack of the 
NDP government’s initiative in these areas. And this is . . . 
considering that the NDP government also has record resources, 
record revenue from resources as well, and a record budget — 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2005 

7.1 billion. And to be told that they’re not going to be fully 
funded for CAIS, the producers are very upset about this. 
 
And of course we just heard another announcement from the 
federal government concerning $1 billion across Canada, and 
again the provincial NDP government is not fully funding their 
share of that program. And this is causing a lot of concern in the 
banking industry that have many clients that are farmers. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the only issue. Right now the 
government is negotiating contracts with a number of unions. 
And the teachers’ union is also . . . contract is up for 
negotiation. 
 
And I’d just like to read into a record a letter from Clare 
Friesen, who is a teacher in St. Gabriel School in Biggar, the 
head of the local union. And I’d like to put it on record. The 
letter is made out to myself. It goes on: 
 

We need your help and the help of everyone in your party 
who is willing to speak on behalf of the teachers and the 
students of this province. The party in power is not 
listening and we are reaching a point of crisis that is 
frightening. Not only have negotiations broke down 
between the teacher and the government bargaining team, 
but also conciliation has proven to be a fruitless endeavour 
in spite of the conciliator’s report admonishing the 
government for not bringing anything to the table with 
which to bargain in good faith. 
 
We now have lost faith. Since the we’s refer to over 
12,000 teachers, that’s a lot of lost faith. We need your 
help in restoring positive negotiations through your voice 
and the voice of the Saskatchewan Party. In regard to the 
need for greater consideration of our contract proposals, it 
is important to recognize the vast number of personal 
monetary and time commitments that the government has 
imposed on teachers through the last major initiatives. As 
school divisions are being forced to amalgamate, teachers 
are left holding a significant part of the responsibility for 
ironing out issues relevant to contracts, supervision, 
teaching assignments, compatible policies, and transfers, 
all on their own time and personal payment of travel costs. 
As school divisions are asked to work with SchoolPLUS the 
details of how other organizations will impact the school 
environment is once again left to the teacher on a 
day-to-day basis of working within the school. 

 
All of these extra responsibilities require extra personal 
time, personal expense, and personal stress, all without 
compensation. It seems that the government has dumped 
the responsibility and now, when it’s possible to settle a 
contract in a way that can give some value and worth to 
the teachers, the government has refused to entertain any 
creative ways of settling the provincial contract. 
 
I am greatly concerned about the possible near-future 
consequences if the government does not significantly 
change their attitude and offers at the negotiating table, 
and request once again your assistance. 
 
Thank you in advance for your efforts on our behalf and 
we appreciate feedback and any progress. 

Sincerely, Clare Friesen [from] St. Gabriel School [in] 
Biggar. 
 

Well I met with those teachers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they 
are very concerned as you hear from the letter that I have just 
put on the record. They have real, serious concerns and these 
are not concerns that just developed in the last year. These are 
concerns that have been built up for many, many years. And 
quite frankly, the teachers are once again very upset for the way 
they’ve been treated by the government and the lack of 
negotiation in their contracts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And for the lack of concern for agriculture from this NDP 
government, the lack of concern for property tax relief from this 
NDP government, the way the NDP government is treating the 
teachers of this province, Mr. Speaker, there is no way that I 
can support this budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment that was 
brought down by the Saskatchewan Party when we vote on it. 
So, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved that debate 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. on Monday. Have a pleasant 
weekend. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:45.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2301 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2301 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2301 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2301 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2301 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2301 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2302 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2302 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2302 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2302 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2302 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2302 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2302 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2303 
  Clerk Assistant ........................................................................................................................................................................2303 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2303 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2303 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2303 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2303 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................2304 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2304 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2304 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Royal Canadian Air Force Celebrates 81 Years 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2304 
 Community Living’s Spring Fling Fundraiser 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2304 
 High School Basketball in Saskatchewan 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2305 
 Golden Opportunities Fund Wins Award 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2305 
 Wynyard Student Wins Heritage Poster Award 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2305 
 Saskatchewan’s 2005-2006 Budget 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2306 
 Students’ Centennial Quilt Project 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2306 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Saskatchewan Economy 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2306 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2306 
 Funding for Additional Police Officers 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2307 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2308 
 Contract for Printing New Saskatchewan Health Cards 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2308 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2308 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2309 
 Revenue-Sharing Agreements with Municipalities 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2309 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2309 
 Investments in Navigata 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2310 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2310 
 Support for Budget 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2311 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2311 
 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 SaskTel Wireless High-Speed Internet Service 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2311 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2312 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2312 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2313 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2316 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2320 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2321 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................2324 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2325 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


