

















































Hansard: May 26, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 117A  THURSDAY, MAY 26, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3217 
 May 26, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, today I have nearly 300 names on 
a petition involving a different highway in the constituency of 
Cypress Hills, Highway 18 that runs from Claydon to Robsart. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed from individuals from 
the immediate Claydon area, but also from the communities of 
Robsart, Consul, and a substantial number from Frontier and 
Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure the portion of Highway 47 
south of Highway 48 to Stoughton is resurfaced. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from pretty well all of the 
communities in that area both along No. 47, 48 and No. 1 
Highway and a number of people from right across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m rising today on 
behalf of people who’re concerned about the drug crystal meth. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to pass a law that will give 
Saskatchewan parents the ability to place their children 
into involuntary drug treatment. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley 
and Fosston. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions 
because the proposed changes to amalgamate 59 school 
divisions by January 2006 will not prove to be cost effective. 
The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
of school divisions in Saskatchewan and continue 
reorganization of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 
basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the fine 
community of Wiseton, and I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of those people from 
my constituency who are very concerned about the assistance to 
autism-affected families. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to improve access to resources for 
families who desperately need help for their autistic 
children. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Estevan, 
Bienfait, and Moose Jaw. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise 
on behalf of citizens concerned about the condition of Highway 
368. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 

 
The signatures on this petition are from the communities of 
Annaheim, St. Brieux, Cudworth, and Lake Lenore. And I’m 
proud to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And today I too 
have a number of petitions with citizens concerned about the 



3218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

deplorable state of Highway No. 368. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from St. Brieux, Melfort, 
Annaheim, Humboldt, Middle Lake, Muenster, Regina, 
Naicam, Saskatoon, and Yellow Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I present a pile of petitions from people who are upset 
about the forced amalgamation of school divisions. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by citizens from 
Hazenmore, Lafleche, Meyronne, Kincaid, and basically 
throughout all southwestern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present 
petitions regarding highways and the disrepair of the highways. 
And I read the prayer regarding Highway 47: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure the portion of Highway 47 
south of Highway 48 to Stoughton be resurfaced. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions I present this afternoon are signed 
from by the good folks from Glenavon, Forget, Osage, 
Stoughton, Creelman, Ocean Man, and a number of other 
communities. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from citizens that are still waiting for the government to 
resurface Highway 15: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as to 
remove the safety hazard to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Kenaston and Dundurn. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents opposed to possible 
reductions of the health care services in Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned with the effect that the TransGas Asquith natural gas 
storage project may have on their quality and the quantity of 
their water, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens of Grandora. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise with 
a petition. The condition of Highway 368 starting 4 miles south 
of Lake Lenore to 4 miles south of St. Brieux which has 
seriously declined over the last number of years, and that the 
condition of this highway endangers the safety of drivers and 
harms economic growth in the area. The petition reads . . . 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address the safety and economic concerns. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

From the good people of Humboldt and Saskatoon. 
 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3219 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise in the 
House today to present another petition with regard to the 
condition of Highway No. 368. I will read from the prayer for 
relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Melfort, 
Pilger, and Lanigan, and St. Brieux. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition that I’m pleased to be able to present on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan who are very concerned and 
disappointed by this government’s unwillingness to implement 
the SARC [Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres] human resources plan and the negative effects it’s 
having on Deer Park Villa in Ituna. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly will please consider implementing 
recommendations as outlined in SARC’s human resources 
plan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Ituna, Kelliher, and Goodeve. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
speak to a petition on the Hon. Assembly to agree to the 
repairing of Highway 368. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
368 in order to address the safety and economic concerns. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got 22 pages and they’re all signed by 
the good people of St. Brieux. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A new petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 368 as 

sessional paper 818. 
 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 72, 96, 640, 666, 716, 798, 814, and 815. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I am very pleased to introduce Mr. 
Marvin Bernstein and his wife Helen, who are seated in the 
front row in the Speaker’s gallery. Mr. Bernstein has been 
recommended as our newest independent officer of the 
legislature, the next Children’s Advocate for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Bernstein has 28 years of advocacy and senior leadership 
experience in the child welfare field in Ontario and nationally. 
Most recently he has served as a director of policy development 
and legal support for the Ontario Association of Children’s Aid 
Societies, acting as their provincial spokesperson on issues 
affecting the interests of children and families. 
 
In February 2005 the Board of Internal Economy appointed a 
selection panel to conduct the search for an individual to be 
recommended for the position of the Children’s Advocate, an 
officer of the legislature. The committee held an open, national 
competition which attracted 131 applicants before 
recommending the successful candidate to the board at a 
meeting on May 17, 2005. On May 17 the Board of Internal 
Economy considered the report of the selection committee and 
passed a motion recommending that Mr. Bernstein be appointed 
Children’s Advocate for Saskatchewan, effective September 6, 
2005. 
 
Later this afternoon members will have an opportunity to meet 
Mr. Bernstein in the library reading room. At this time I would 
ask all members to welcome Mr. Bernstein and his wife to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Also seated in the gallery are several staff 
members from the Children’s Advocate’s office and the 
Provincial Ombudsman’s office, and with them also is Arlene 
Julé, member of the selection committee and former MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Humboldt. And 
would members of the Assembly please welcome these guests 
to the Assembly as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce three friends and constituents of mine 
to the members of the legislature. I’d like to introduce Sandy, 
Georgina, and Stan Bergen, and I’d just like everyone to join 
me in welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 



3220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this afternoon in the west gallery are a number of 
people who participated in some very innovative projects to 
improve habitat for piping plovers and burrowing owls. Mr. 
Speaker, both of these species are regarded as endangered. 
 
These astonishing individuals have been working with the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority and earlier today I had the 
opportunity to meet with these individuals and present them 
with an award in recognition of their contributions and 
commitment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce these individuals and 
some of the guests accompanying them and if they might just 
stand and give a short wave. In the gallery, Mr. Speaker, is 
Irvine Warren from the Rouleau area. Mr. Warren has been 
providing habitat for the endangered burrowing owl now for 
many years by growing cover that provides an area for the owls 
to capture food. 
 
Also in the gallery are a number of individuals dedicated to 
creating a viable habitat for piping plover. Joining us today are 
the Hoffarts from the Bengough area, Rhonda and Garnet. And 
unfortunately, from the Assiniboia area Donald and Kathy 
Stevenson were planning to be here but could not be here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people have all contributed to the protection 
of these shorebirds, providing them with a safe nesting habitat 
away from grazing livestock to improve the piping plover’s 
breeding success. 
 
With them, Mr. Speaker, are some other guests: Trisha Lang 
and Dr. Mark Brigham, who study the burrowing owl, working 
with Mr. Warren; Kim Dohms, coordinator of the Operation 
Burrowing Owl, Nature Saskatchewan; Claire Sanders, 
Saskatchewan Burrowing Owl Interpretive Center. And I don’t 
know . . . I don’t see Piper. She doesn’t have Piper with her 
today. And Ross Macdonald, an agrologist with the 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. As well with them is 
Malcolm French from the Watershed Authority, and from my 
office Rachel Birns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge our federal partners 
who help fund these projects through the habitat stewardship 
program for species at risk. Everyone involved should be 
commended for taking steps to ensure that our burrowing owls 
and piping plovers are available for future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
these folks to our Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour this 
afternoon to welcome 29 grade 8 students from Lawson Heights 
School in my area. I’m sure they’re counting the days, not to 
the end of the school period but until the chance they get an 
opportunity to choose which high school that they’re going to 
go to. I welcome them here. I’d like to thank their teacher, Mr. 
Daryl McKen, the chairpeople who helped to bring them here, 

Lori Traill, Lori Newlove, Louis Barlas, and Loraine Pura. I 
want to thank them for bringing these fine young people to their 
Legislative Assembly. And on behalf of all of us here, 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your gallery 
today — and perhaps he could stand when I mention his name 
— is Michael Carpentier. He is sitting with our Saskatchewan 
legislative internship program students. And he is currently a 
master’s student in political studies at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He is originally from Zenon Park, 
Saskatchewan, and he is a friend of two of our current interns, 
Rhiannon and Alyssa. 
 
So I would ask all the colleagues in the House to welcome him 
to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Addictions Expert to Expand Facility 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize a very special person in our province, Mr. Serge 
LeClerc, who is head of Teen Challenge, an addiction treatment 
centre located in Allan, Saskatchewan for men from 18 years of 
age and older. Serge is a renowned expert in Canada with over 
25 years of experience. Serge has been a keynote speaker 
requested by police forces and provincial governments across 
Canada. 
 
Mr. LeClerc runs an addiction centre that has graduated 15 
young men successfully from a program that heals and comforts 
them from their addictions. Mr. LeClerc is an expert in his field 
and yet the member from Sutherland has never called or asked 
him about his field of expertise or the excellence of his 
program. A man who is classified as a expert across Canada is 
not even consulted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Serge LeClerc is in expansion mode for an 
additional doubling the size of the facility. Teen Challenge, like 
other facilities, have a waiting list and hopefully this expansion 
will assist more young men in our province. Once again this 
will be done by the parents, business, and other concerned 
citizens. 
 
To Mr. Serge LeClerc, on behalf of myself and my colleagues, 
congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3221 

New Water Treatment Plant in Edenwold 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Water is an 
essential element of life, and yet water quality is something that 
we often take for granted. But this is not the case for the people 
of Edenwold. A few years ago the Premier and I were in 
Edenwold at the signing of the first water agreement in the 
province. This morning I was extremely pleased to see the 
Minister for SaskWater had the privilege of the attending the 
official grand opening of Edenwold’s new water treatment 
plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many small communities throughout our 
province, Edenwold depends on a dugout as a water source. The 
relatively shallow water in the presence of sunlight creates an 
environment in which algae and aquatic vegetation can thrive. 
This can sometimes result in poor water quality. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the days of poor water quality are a thing of 
the past in Edenwold. Now thanks to investment by SaskWater 
of $530,000 in a new water treatment process, the water now 
meets all the regulatory standards established by Saskatchewan 
Environment. Mayor Deval Ruecker says and I quote: 
 

This is an outstanding solution to the challenges faced by 
our water system. Knowing that it is in the hands of 
qualified technicians and is being constantly monitored, 
we can be assured of quality drinking water. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the residents of Edenwold 
for taking steps to have an adequate supply of healthy drinking 
water that will meet their needs well into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Upcoming Marriage in Biggar 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Shortly after my 
election in the 1999 provincial election I asked my wife who I 
should hire to be my constituency assistant for my Redberry 
Lake office. Her immediate reply was Ed Young. Ed and Cindy 
went to school together and attended St. Gabriel’s Church. 
 
After several days of talking to family and friends and 
acquaintances who knew about the job and its challenges, Ed 
accepted the position. Ed’s life really has been a training ground 
for his future job serving constituents first in Redberry Lake 
then in Biggar. 
 
Ed is not only active in St. Gabriel’s parish, serving as 
welcomer, lecturer and as Eucharistic minister, he is also an 
active member of the Biggar Knights of Columbus, Lions, 
Legion, Biggar Wildlife Association, and local gun club. His 
community involvement also included the chairperson of the 
Biggar Tourism Board, putting on functions like the Apple 
Blossom Festival, and fireworks events. Ed also teaches hunter 
safety. 
 
Terry Zimmer has lived for many years in Biggar. She is now 
the owner of Shear Touch salon and spa and drives bus for the 
Biggar School Division. Terry’s daughters Sarah and Jessica are 

very busy with school and sports. Terry’s very active with the 
girls’ team serving as manager, organizer, and driver. Terry has 
also been very active with the Apple Blossom Festival. 
 
I’m very pleased to announce that on June 25, 2005, Terry 
Zimmer and Ed Young will be married. Please join me in 
congratulating Terry and Ed on their special day. We wish you 
and the girls the very best in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Starting today and running until May 29, Sunday, our fair city 
of Yorkton will again host the prestigious Yorkton Short Film 
and Video Festival. In its 58th year, Mr. Speaker, this film 
festival — the first in Canada — is showcasing to the world its 
talent that comes from this province and from the country. 
 
Saskatchewan’s scenery and thriving natural environment will 
fuel the creativity and imagination that Yorkton residents and 
visitors will see on the big screen this weekend. It’s no wonder, 
Mr. Speaker, that this festival has over the years earned the 
reputation as one of the most outstanding celebrations of film. 
 
Mr. Speaker, participants in the films will be engaged in 
workshops and numerous social activities that showcase the 
country’s film industry and help educate our young people 
about the opportunities that can be found right here in our 
province and across Canada. 
 
I want this afternoon to congratulate film executive director Fay 
Kowal of the board of directors and all of the volunteers for the 
work that make this festival such a success in our community 
and our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on May 28, I will be participating in this 
year’s Golden Sheaf Awards, a banquet that wraps up the 
festival’s screening and honours the best of the best of the 
numerous film categories. I invite, this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 
all members of the Assembly to join me in Yorkton and take in 
a film or two at the festival and rub shoulders, Mr. Speaker, 
with Canada’s finest producers and filmmakers. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Voting One’s Conscience 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 
response to the comments made in this Assembly yesterday. 
That member yesterday, the member from Regina Wash Acres, 
stood in the House and bared her soul on the government 
directed legislation. 
 
She said she wanted to help the vulnerable workers in society. 



3222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

She said she wanted to help the single moms, the working poor, 
and the young workers. She said she hopes members of the 
House have the courage and conviction to rise up to the 
challenges of the 21st century. She said she wrestled with her 
decision and she gave great thought to her decision. She even 
went so far as to blame the opposition for forcing her 
government to repeal the government directed hours legislation. 
 
The irony of this situation escaped the members opposite. The 
member from Walsh Acres got out of her chair and gave an 
impassioned speech on the merits of this legislation, and then 
moments later voted against it. Her actions are both hypocritical 
and very telling; telling of how democracy is not respected by 
members opposite. She belongs to a party that does not allow 
her to vote her conscience. She belongs to a party that does not 
respect democracy. 
 
During my career as a legislator, I have on two separate 
occasions voted differently from my party. My party gave me 
the democratic freedom to vote with my conscience and with 
my constituents. I was not forced to vote a party line. I was not 
forced to vote like a mindless bob. I was given a choice, not like 
the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Prärie Sängerfest Choir Festival 2005 
 
Ms. Morin: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, the member for 
Regina Walsh Acres, am Saskatchewan born, but I’m also a 
proud German-Canadian so I know that German language 
traditions are alive and well in the province. However, Mr. 
Speaker, even I was impressed with the celebration of German 
culture I had the privilege to attend at the Centre of the Arts 
here in Regina on Sunday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every two years for the last 30 years or so, 
German folk music choirs from Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 
Alberta have been getting together for a weekend of fellowship 
and song, celebrating German folk music and culture. 
 
This year, in honour of Saskatchewan’s centennial, Regina’s 
Volksliederchor Harmonie asked to host the Prärie Sängerfest 
Choir Festival 2005. And they did a wonderful job. According 
to all accounts this is always a great event but this year’s 
surpassed all expectations. Over 350 singers and 13 choirs from 
across the prairies were in town, Mr. Speaker. There were 
performances from each individual choir, a massed male choir, 
a massed female choir, and a finale by all voices in a massed 
mixed chorus. It was inspiring, Mr. Speaker, and incredibly 
stirring. 
 
The afternoon performance was followed by a banquet attended 
by some 500 people and the singing and celebration continued. 
I felt both proud and privileged to be part of all of it. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate and thank all the members 
and volunteers of the Volksliederchor Harmonie for hosting this 
outstanding musical celebration and showing once again that 
Saskatchewan’s German community is one of the strongest and 
brightest cultural threads in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

A Health Care Success Story 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party has said in the past that we will give 
credit to the government when credit is deserved. Well today 
I’d like to share with this Assembly a health care success story. 
 
The patient was born in Naicam and has resided in Wascana 
Plains constituency for the past three years. Mr. Speaker, two 
weeks ago Carmello Jackson had X-rays to confirm that he 
needed knee surgery. He was prepared for the usual long 
waiting list he has heard about from family and friends. But lo 
and behold he got in to see his doctor right away, he got his 
X-rays that he required, and was booked in for surgery in two 
weeks time — two weeks, Mr. Speaker. And the reason that he 
had to wait for two weeks is because his surgeon is in Germany. 
The surgeon returns from his trip on May 30, and Mr. Jackson 
will see him at 8:30 a.m. that day and will undergo day surgery. 
 
Now we know that a two-week wait for knee surgery is 
practically unheard of in Saskatchewan. In fact one of our 
researchers required this surgery and had to wait for 22 months 
— almost two years. But Mr. Jackson gets in right away. 
 
And of course that begs the question, Mr. Speaker: how is it 
that some cases get treated almost immediately while others 
must wait almost two years or more in pain, unable to walk, 
unable to enjoy life’s qualities? Well I’ll tell you why, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Jackson got special treatment because he’s a 
yellow Labrador retriever. Mr. Speaker, Jackson’s future is very 
bright in Saskatchewan because when our pets get better health 
care than people, one thing is perfectly clear — this province is 
going to the dogs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 

Worldwide Pork Ceases Operations 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday hundreds of people in 
Moose Jaw and area were dealt a devastating blow. Worldwide 
Pork in Moose Jaw shut down operations, laid off 300 workers, 
and left dozens of hog producers and local businesses 
wondering if and when they will ever get paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is one of the owners of 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3223 

Worldwide Pork. They invested $1 million in this business. And 
the Minister of Agriculture is listed as a major shareholder. Mr. 
Speaker, beyond the government’s $1 million equity 
investment, does the government have any outstanding loans to 
Worldwide Pork? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, the government does hold a position in Worldwide 
Pork. And Worldwide Pork is however a private company, and 
the owner of that company has been working diligently recently 
to try and restructure relationships with both the producers and 
within the company to try and make this company successful. 
 
Today layoff notices did go out, and there will be a downtime, 
Mr. Speaker. But it is our hope — and we are monitoring very 
closely — it is our hope indeed that Worldwide Pork will be 
back up processing and being a vital part of the economy in 
Moose Jaw and this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, when the government invests in 
business ventures, they have a responsibility to ensure that 
people don’t get hurt. The collapse of Worldwide Pork is a 
disaster for everyone involved — the 300 families who lost 
their jobs, the hog producers and other businesses who are owed 
money, and Saskatchewan taxpayers who are on the hook for $1 
million at least. Can the minister tell the 300 workers who lost 
their jobs yesterday if and when they will get their jobs back? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have a secured position of course with Worldwide Pork. 
And as I indicated in the first answer to the question, the owner 
is working diligently to try and restructure the relationship with 
the producers. The producers need to be delivering hogs if the 
plant is going to be operational. And there has to be a 
confidence that the owner will provide them the returns that 
they deserve for their hogs. Mr. Speaker, in order to do that, 
there needs to be a restructuring. Now is the time when that 
owner is trying to get that restructuring in place. 
 
There are other options that could be pursued down the road, 
Mr. Speaker, and certainly we will be on top of it. And we want 
to see a vital operation there in Moose Jaw, and that’s what 
we’re working towards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, hog producers stopped 
delivering to Worldwide Pork a couple of weeks ago because 
they weren’t getting paid. The Minister of Agriculture is one of 

the owners and he’s not paying his bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, producers have told us that Worldwide Pork owes 
them as much as $3.5 million, and they fear they may be at the 
bottom of the list of creditors. Can the minister tell us today 
how much money does Worldwide Pork owe hog producers, 
and when can they expect to be paid? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this seems odd 
coming from the Conservative member opposite, advising on 
government involvement in investment. But we know that they 
like to play both sides of the fence verbally as often as they can, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as a responsible holder of debt in this 
company, we certainly want to see it productive. We want to 
see it operational. And those people who have been delivering 
to Worldwide Pork knew that there was risk in delivering and 
were receiving a premium for delivering to that plant, Mr. 
Speaker. That premium was to encourage them despite the risks 
there. And, Mr. Speaker, once that relationship is restructured, 
it is the owner’s hope that they will continue to deliver product 
there. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, let’s try again. This NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government keeps telling us how they have 
to bring in labour laws to protect workers from bad 
corporations. Yet what does this government do with one of the 
companies it owns? It lays off 300 workers. It doesn’t pay its 
bills. Not exactly a model corporate citizen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government walked away from millions 
of dollars of outstanding bills in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company]. Now they appear to be 
doing the same thing again. The people of Moose Jaw and area 
would like a specific answer. When will Worldwide Pork 
re-open? When will the workers get their jobs back? When will 
hog producers and other creditors get paid? And how much 
money exactly is owing to hog producers? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
these high-rolling financiers across the way here seem to be 
mistaking something between owning a company, Mr. Speaker, 
and carrying some of the debt in that company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Minister 
of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it is very . . . I’ll step back and just say I think it is very 
important that all of us understand the distinction between being 
an owner and holding some of the debt. We do hold some of the 



3224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

debt. It is secured, Mr. Speaker, and we want to make sure that 
taxpayers’ money is protected in this. 
 
The owner is responsible for the operations of that plant. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we are encouraging that owner to follow through, 
to restructure in a responsible way so that those people who he 
owes money to can be paid and so that this operation can move 
forward and be productive in the future. That’s our hope. That’s 
what we’re working towards, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, one month ago I introduced a 
private member’s Bill, The Protection of Children Abusing 
Drugs Act. We know this government does not fully support the 
Bill, yet we’ve still not heard one single, solid alternative. 
 
Georgina and Stan Bergen and their daughter, Sandy, are here 
today from Biggar to tell this government this status quo will 
not work. Something must be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sandy overdosed on crystal meth a little over a 
year ago. She’s been clean for a year now, and she and her 
parents believe the government needs to give parents more tools 
to get kids the help they need. Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell 
them why she hasn’t done anything yet. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The member says one thing and the facts say another. 
The fact is that we have as of today got in place mechanisms for 
prevention, for treatment, for education, for reducing drug 
supply, enforcement, as well as the 24-hour health line. Now 
these things in this budget, there’s money for new treatment 
beds, and as well I committed to and have been using the full 
powers of section 18 to apprehend youth where that’s 
necessary. 
 
But before we take the additional step of locking up youth, you 
have to be sure that the processes and mechanisms that are put 
in place strike a balance between the rights of youth and the 
need for protection of children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Sandy had been abusing drugs 
since she was 13, and she was in and out of treatment when 
she was younger. Georgina and Stan were frustrated because 
they couldn’t get Sandy to stay. Last May Georgina got a call 
from Sandy who said to her mom, I’m going to die. Sandy 
overdosed on crystal meth and was rushed to Saskatoon 
Hospital. She was in a coma for 10 days. Her kidneys, liver, 
and lungs failed. She only had 7 per cent of her heart 

function. Miraculously she survived. And today she has 52 
per cent of her heart function. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Georgina and Stan and Sandy know that 
parents need more tools to get their children help. If this 
government isn’t going to act on my Bill, what are they 
going to do? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE 
[Community Resources and Employment]. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think I want to mention a couple 
things here, Mr. Speaker. Historically it was in 1987 when 
some of the members opposite were part of the government 
that the provisions were removed that allowed apprehension 
of youth who were 16 and 17 because too many young 
people were ending up in jail, Mr. Speaker. So it’s very 
important that the standards we set, that people who make 
that decision, and the appeal procedures that are bearable to 
the youth are appropriate. 
 
I met recently with the Children’s Advocate office, and they 
are going to be consulting youth, not to form an opinion on 
it, but to bring forward the voices of youth in this discussion. 
I made a commitment that by September we’ll be coming to 
a final conclusion. All the other services are being put in 
place as we speak. 
 
But the fact is Alberta, on which this Bill is copied and 
modelled, is taking a year because they understand the 
seriousness of having the right processes and services in 
place before you put the law in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Alberta’s waiting till next July 
so that they will actually have the treatment beds ready. 
They’ve got the Bill passed and what they’re telling parents 
is, we have the tools ready and we’re going to be working on 
it. This government isn’t doing that. 
 
Doctors in Saskatoon told Sandy’s parents last May that she 
would not live. All of her organs were failing. Her heart was 
as hard as a rock. Her lungs had collapsed and all of her 
veins had hardened. She brought a picture of herself lying in 
a hospital bed with more tubes going into her body than 
anyone can imagine. When she finally came out of the coma, 
she was released into her family’s care within three days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she could hardly walk, and she was given no 
aftercare except a follow-up EKG [electrocardiogram]. This 
family was given no support, no home care, no addictions 
counselling, no treatment, no nothing. 
 
Why is this government failing to provide families with 
addictions services especially in cases like this? Is it because 
we just don’t have enough beds? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
CRE. 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3225 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I take great exception to 
the statement that we are doing nothing. This very budget that 
we are discussing in this legislature contains provisions for 
additional beds in the province for this very purpose. 
 
And, you know, I have a huge, huge care and sympathy for the 
family that’s here today. We all have had experiences in our 
families where people have gotten tragically involved with 
things that were hard to handle. 
 
And as a result the member from Sutherland who is talking to 
all the people with expertise around the province . . . And 
certainly if the member opposite has people he should be 
talking to that he hasn’t, then he can be helpful, by forwarding 
those names to that member. So before he provides his final 
report in June, we can have the best thought possible to put into 
this question. 
 
But I have to say that it is a combined effort of enforcement 
interprovincially as the premiers will be doing at the conference 
in June. But as well we are putting all those services in place 
and strengthening the ones that already exist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Sandy’s family has been through 
extreme hardship. When Sandy was on meth, she would stay up 
for hours and hours. And when she was trying to stay clean, her 
four sisters each took turns staying with her, talking to her, 
trying to help her get through the nights. Mr. Speaker, Sandy’s 
mom believes if she could’ve forced her daughter to stay in 
treatment when she was younger, it would never have come to 
this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government allow my Bill to go to the 
committee stage, so we can get one step closer to giving parents 
the ability to give their children help? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, again I would say that it 
is very important to be thoughtful about the services and the 
processes before you take the step of locking someone up. Now 
I have to say that this is a whole community problem. I think 
it’s very good that the young person is fortunate to have a 
caring family, a caring community, but we also need services 
that work. 
 
In some instances where young people have been locked up, it’s 
been found that it causes them to be more resistant over the 
long term to the interventions being made and sometimes 
causes much of the problem to go underground. 
 
So we’re checking this out very carefully. I have taken the step 
of apprehending, so I am acting in the spirit of what the member 
is suggesting. And I think that no matter what we do, we will 
have a much more comprehensive program in place much 
before Alberta. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the crystal meth dealers and 
traffickers aren’t going to go on holidays or wait until this 
government thinks they have things just right. They’re still 
going to be dealing to our children. 
 
When this Premier ran for leadership on the NDP, he told 
people if he became Premier, he would work to reconnect 
people with the government. In a November 2000 news release 
from his campaign, the Premier said, and I quote: 
 

I believe every citizen should have access to the legislative 
process and the results would be better public policy [and] 
that . . . [would be] good for Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the private member’s Bill may not be perfect, but 
at least it’s a starting point. Why doesn’t this government allow 
this Bill to pass second reading and go to committee so that 
people like Sandy and George and Stan can have access to the 
process and give their input? They have walked the walk, and 
they have much to give. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier keep his word? Will he give these 
people a chance to have their input? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, there are many people 
having people present their input at the moment. There is the 
member from Sutherland who’s doing the special work on this, 
who’s been all around this province, staying in communities for 
long periods of time to meet with treatment workers, to meet 
with families, to meet in community meetings. 
 
Certainly in our department, we’re talking to all the provinces 
about what they found works best in their provinces. Certainly 
the Children’s Advocate office is looking into some of the 
youth issues related to this. 
 
At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll have a very 
good process. And we will not just be dealing with crystal meth, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ll be dealing with all of the other addictions, 
many of which — although not as perhaps immediate in their 
impacts as crystal meth — are certainly as life-threatening and 
as life-damaging. And we want to have those all included. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 

Improper Access to Information 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, well 
it’s déjà vu all over again. Back on May 22, 2002, Mr. Speaker, 
I rose in this House and called for swift action to ensure that the 
security of information that people give the Government of 



3226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

Saskatchewan would remain secure. And I was assured, Mr. 
Speaker, by the members opposite that since 1992, this has been 
a very serious concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it’s such a serious concern, why do we once 
again have government employees under suspension for 
improperly accessing a government vehicle registry database? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There have been three employees suspended without pay for 
improper use of data. There are a very limited number of 
employees who have access to this data, and the problem was 
caught because SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
noted the high number of contacts. And that’s how it was 
caught, and that’s as it should be. And it was dealt with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as it should be should be 
that there is no access where we have our information 
dilly-dallied out throughout the province. That’s as it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had this government hire Deloitte & Touche to 
undertake a sweeping privacy review in 2002, Mr. Speaker. 
This happened after employees from SGI, the Health 
department, the Department of Social Services as it was then 
known, and SaskPower — all of those, Mr. Speaker — were 
found to have provided confidential information to 
unauthorized people. On May 22, 2002, almost two years ago to 
the day, we had the minister responsible stand up in this House 
and say what a serious concern this was. Then why, Mr. 
Speaker, is it still happening? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I want to indicate to the public that the Government 
of Saskatchewan takes matters of privacy and confidentiality 
very seriously. And any breach of policies or legislative 
provisions is a serious matter and may result in discipline up to 
and including dismissal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we became aware of a situation, we 
undertook the following. We hired in May 2002 Deloitte & 
Touche to review the policies and procedures and information 
security practices regarding confidential information. In 
February 2003 our government announced that it would 
implement all 11 of the Deloitte & Touche recommendations. 
In 2003 our government established an overarching privacy 
framework which designates a privacy officer in each 
department. And, Mr. Speaker, in 2003-04, during a period of 
fiscal restraint, the government expanded the budget and 
staffing for the Office of Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget we’ve 
established an access and privacy . . . 
 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, after that bit of a 
filibuster for an answer, we should probably just ask, how’s it 
working for you? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say one thing; they do another. We’ve had 
the story about back in 2002 how they were going to solve it all. 
They haven’t, Mr. Speaker. They say that protection of public 
information is a serious concern. They love to talk about 
reviews, policies, security framework, security committees put 
in place to deal with a whole range of issues. They just don’t do 
anything that works, Mr. Speaker. They talk and talk, and the 
problems obviously don’t get solved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have a simple expectation of government, 
a simple one. Protect the sensitive public information it has 
about people. Mr. Speaker, why does this government 
continually fail to deal on that issue? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to all the 
information I gave in my previous answer, we delivered 
training sessions to over 1,000 managers in government on 
government’s obligation under the freedom of information and 
protection of privacy legislation. In addition, Mr. Speaker, in 
the Crown sector they also developed a Crown sector privacy 
framework and delivered information to their managers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was SGI, it was SGI that was able to determine 
that there had been improper access to information. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we believe that our framework policy and all of the 
mechanisms we’ve put in place identified this problem. And, 
Mr. Speaker, appropriate action has been taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Misuse of Funds in Environment Department 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as a result 
of the Department of Environment’s decision to repeatedly 
ignore the Provincial Auditor’s recommendations, we have a 
situation where up to a half a million dollars of taxpayers’ 
money may have gone missing. The minister said yesterday that 
he had made some changes within his department — as far as 
approval of payments and those sorts of things — yet the 
auditor says there’s no way of knowing if those policies are 
actually being followed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us is anyone responsible to 
ensure that those policies are being followed? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3227 

Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And of course 
the facts say one thing; the opposition — the Conservative 
Party over there — says another thing. We are not repeatedly 
ignoring. We are working hard to resolve this issue. We’ve put 
in several measures to make sure this stops. To the point, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve hired a new person in the internal audit process 
to ensure this kind of thing doesn’t happen again. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken steps as part of managers’ 
evaluations, annual evaluations, that this kind of thing doesn’t 
happen again. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor noted that changes were 
made, but the auditor also said in his report that there was no 
way of ensuring that those policies were being followed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also the auditor noted on page 92 of his report, 
there’s a table that outlines the spending of the resource 
stewardship branch, Mr. Speaker, over a period of six years. 
And the table indicates that out of a possible spending of $2.2 
million, possibly half a million dollars of that has gone missing, 
Mr. Speaker. Almost 23 per cent of that fund of $2.2 million 
has gone missing, Mr. Speaker. How can the minister allow that 
to happen — such a large portion of that pot of money to go 
missing — and no one noticed over a period of six years, Mr. 
Speaker? How can the minister explain that? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know we take this very seriously, and we’ve been working with 
the auditor to ensure this kind of thing does not happen. And we 
have implemented several, several steps to make sure. 
 
First of all we’ve implemented a new delegated signing 
authority that resulted in segregated approval for payments for 
those who’ve initiated the requests. We’ve initiated a training 
program for employees that focus on financial operating 
processes and procedures. We’ve delivered training programs to 
increase fraud awareness and internal control training. As well 
as I said we’ve increased internal audit capacity. And, Mr. 
Speaker, managers now receive annual performance reviews 
and will be evaluated on compliance with our approved 
authority grid that we initiated last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a 
motion to appoint our new Children’s Advocate. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Premier has requested 
leave to move a motion with respect to the appointment of the 

Children’s Advocate. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of the Children’s Advocate 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my 
very brief remarks, I will be moving the motion that will 
officially appoint Mr. Marvin Bernstein as our new Children’s 
Advocate. I understand my motion will be seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members of this Assembly we all have 
recognized that the Office of the Children’s Advocate has been 
very, very well served by Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen since that 
office’s inception — the first of its kind as an independent agency 
anywhere in Canada. And so we are sure that the selection 
committee that was struck to find a replacement faced a very 
daunting challenge when it came to filling the shoes of Dr. 
Deborah Parker-Loewen. They have, I am sure — given the 
information that we have received, given your introduction 
today, Mr. Speaker — we are certain that this committee has 
done an excellent job. And I want to thank members of the 
selection committee for their work and for their very wise 
recommendation of Mr. Marvin Bernstein. 
 
The Children’s Advocate office, Mr. Speaker, was created in 
1994 as part of Saskatchewan’s Action Plan for Children. As an 
independent officer of this Legislative Assembly, the Children’s 
Advocate works to promote the best interests of 
Saskatchewan’s children in our society and within our 
government departments and agencies. The Saskatchewan 
Children’s Advocate office has therefore a very special and 
very important role to play in the life of our province and in the 
future of our province. The Children’s Advocate not only 
listens to, but gives voice to Saskatchewan’s children. This is an 
essential role in any society that strives to promote the welfare 
and dignity of every member of the human family. 
 
To simply state that Mr. Bernstein is eminently qualified for the 
Office of the Children’s Advocate may be something of an 
understatement. The time does not permit us here to enumerate 
all of Mr. Bernstein’s accomplishments, his professional or his 
volunteer activities, his publications. But I can just say that one 
look at Marvin Bernstein’s CV [curriculum vitae] makes it very 
clear that he has devoted much of his life to the service of 
children. 
 
And so I thank Marvin Bernstein for offering to this province, 
to its people, and particularly to its children, his very 
considerable talents, his vast experience. And we look forward 
to his valued service beginning today for the people and the 
children of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 



3228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending to the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council that Mr. Marvin Bernstein be 
appointed the Children’s Advocate pursuant to section 
12.1 of The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act. 

 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, to conclude the 
motion. And I will read the motion again from the beginning: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending to the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council that Mr. Marvin Bernstein be 
appointed the Children’s Advocate pursuant to section 
12.1 of The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act 
effective September 6, 2005. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor recommending to the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council that Mr. Marvin Bernstein be 
appointed the Children’s Advocate pursuant to section 
12.1 of The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act 
effective September 6, 2005. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to respond on behalf of the official opposition. I 
would like to concur with the Premier’s remarks. 
 
I would also like to say that the staff that are here with you 
today, sir, have done a commendable job. You are starting from 
a good foundation. I would also like to thank the committee and 
those members that are here today. From 132 people, sir, having 
read your resumé, it was a wise choice, a unanimous choice. 
And I can certainly understand why. 
 
Ms. Deborah Parker-Loewen did a tremendous job on behalf of 
the children of the province of Saskatchewan. And I see that 
Mr. Bernstein’s credentials are very impressive. And I know 
that you will continue to represent our most valuable assets, our 
children. 
 
You, sir, have the full support of the Saskatchewan Party and 
we will welcome you and the strengths that you bring to your 
current position. Please call upon us at any time to assist you. 
And I look forward to personally meeting with you and having 
a discussion. Welcome and congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — With respect to the motion moved by the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale, seconded by the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest, regarding the appointment of the 
Children’s Advocate, is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Why is the member from Cannington on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member from Cannington state his 
point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a 
point of order that twice during question period the Minister of 
Agriculture, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, did 
twice deliberately mislead this Assembly and therefore the 
public of Saskatchewan. The member stated that — in 
questioning — that the members of the opposition, which he 
called financial high rollers, did not understand the difference 
between ownership and lending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well a quick review, Mr. Speaker, points out that the member 
from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is indeed a pig plutocrat. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. The 
member is not presenting a point of order. The member is 
entering into debate. The point of order is declined. 
 
Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise a point of 
order about information that was given to this House from the 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the answers to 
questions from the member from Thunder Creek about the 
equity position in the Moose Jaw pork company, the Minister of 
Agriculture said that we should understand there’s a difference 
between ownership and being a lender. 
 
In a review of the title search of World Wide Pork Company 
Ltd., equity number 101002103, it lists the shareholders of the 
company and included in those shareholders listed is the 
Minister of Agriculture and Food. And it’s a shareholder, and it 
says yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have you review this document and the 
fact that there’s 1 million shares listed in the minister’s name 
and to see if the minister has indeed been accurate in the way he 
represented the ownership of this company by the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3229 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity to address the point 
of order that’s before the Legislative Assembly, or the so-called 
point of order. Clearly what we have here is a matter of debate 
and interpretation of terminology. I certainly understand, given 
their genesis back in the 1980s, that the opposition members 
have always had difficulties in Saskatchewan understanding 
finances, and today shows it’s no different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I’ve listened to both sides and what 
we do have is an obvious dispute over facts which is a 
debatable item. A point of order is denied. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. Order please. Order. I would caution the member 
from Cannington of any remarks he might toss across the floor 
that are unparliamentary because it simply creates a great deal 
of disorder in the legislature. It’s unparliamentary. 
 
Are there any written questions? I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
government and table responses to written questions no. 1,280 
through 1,293 inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
(Subvote HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
estimates, Department of Health. Would the minister like to 
introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. It’s my pleasure to introduce 
to the Assembly this afternoon Mike Shaw, who is the associate 
deputy minister; Bonnie Blakley, who is sitting behind Mike, 
the executive director of health human resource planning 
branch; Max Hendricks, who is the executive director of finance 
and administration branch; and Lawrence Krahn, who is the 
assistant deputy minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Okay, thank you. Before the committee 
is central management services, (HE01). I recognize the 

member from Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome the 
minister here today and his officials. I have just one concern 
that was raised, brought to me by a constituent concerned about 
funding for BridgePoint Centre for Eating Disorders. The centre 
is located in Milden, Saskatchewan. I understand it’s about the 
only centre of its kind in Saskatchewan and possibly maybe 
even in Canada. 
 
The centre has been funded by the provincial government for 
the last number of years. They have now asked for an increase 
in funding for the first time in five years, and the request was 
denied. The reason for the request for an increase was due to the 
fact that their clients have increased from 166 to 321, and they 
are no longer able to sustain that many people. They will have 
to look at cutting back services. Can you give me a little 
information on that particular facility and the funding involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that through the 
Heartland Health Region they have a budgetary amount of 
about $350,000. In this year’s budget, as a community-based 
organization they received the 1 per cent increase in salaries 
across the board for the people that work there. So they have 
slightly more than that $350,000. 
 
I have personally met with the Chair of the board of directors 
briefly about this, and I know that there are some concerns 
about how this works. And we are trying to take a look at the 
services that they’re providing and the kinds of things that 
they’re doing. And that it is an area where we know that they do 
provide good service for many people. And so we are looking at 
their funding issues. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s good to hear 
because I know that they have been talking to some of the 
officials and also putting out petitions, I believe. And it sounds 
like it is a good program. The constituent that had to take their 
daughter there was quite happy with the results. 
 
So my request to you would that you keep an open mind in this, 
and if you could possibly increase the funding for something 
like this because I think this is . . . The schools do quite a bit of 
awareness with this. It is a problem that isn’t in Saskatchewan. 
It has been growing and being made aware of. There is a vary of 
organizations that deal with eating disorders and that I think any 
help that we can provide there will be very good. 
 
So I will be in contact with the people, and I hope that you will 
keep an open mind on this. And if you can increase the funding 
for it. And we will maybe talk about this in a later date. Thank 
you. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that comment. And I would 
just remind the member opposite and the people in the province 
that BridgePoint provides good service, and it complements 
services that are provided right across the province through the 
regional health authorities as it relates to eating disorders. And 
it’s a continual challenge to provide the right services, but we 
are going to do that. 
 



3230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, the last time we had Health estimates up I just had a 
kind of a tail end before we adjourned for the evening. But I 
would like to just raise a couple more points regarding the issue 
of a renal dialysis unit for the community of Broadview. 
 
In the response at that time, Mr. Minister, you indicated that 
right now the dialysis committee for the whole province is 
looking at another three- to five-year plan because you 
indicated what had been done in the past seems to be working 
quite well. And you indicated at that time that information from 
Broadview would be certainly . . . or you said obviously 
included in that. 
 
Mr. Minister, just chatting with the gentleman who’s been 
really working diligently to address the needs of people who 
need renal dialysis in the area . . . and there’s further meetings 
taking place at this very moment. And the concern I have, and I 
would like to hear from you, Mr. Minister, when you talk about 
the provincial dialysis committee and looking at where we have 
dialysis units at this point, will the committee actually be given 
the ability if they see the need to look at centres like 
Broadview? 
 
And as we talked the last time, we indicated there were 17 
individuals currently that travel from that area, and when you 
look at a centre like Moose Jaw — when the announcement was 
made — 12 individuals receiving services. We looked at 
Broadview and we see the First Nations communities all around 
that area have all given overwhelming support for a unit in that 
community. 
 
What assurances, Mr. Minister, can you give these people that 
the work they’re doing is worthwhile and is the type of work 
that is needed to address concerns of people who have to face 
these types of health issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The province-wide committee that looks 
after this whole program has provided advice and guidance as 
the renal dialysis has been expanded across the province. And 
what they do is get the information from who the patients are, 
where they live, what kinds of requirements there are. And they 
look at it very objectively and then say this is an area where you 
need to expand, this is an area where maybe there’s not quite 
the same demand. My sense is that they do this in a fair way. 
They take information from communities where they’ve 
identified concerns, but they also are looking at a broader, 
longer-term picture. 
 
I know for a fact that they continue to look at the Estevan area 
for the next expansion of renal dialysis. But I think the 
information that’s been provided by this community and by the 
First Nations in that area, would be information that they would 
look at in light of the overall provincial plan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so I’m taking from what 
you’ve just indicated that the community and the . . . all the 
people involved in the proposal for the Broadview proposal, 
could contact or would be able to contact, or how would they 
contact the provincial dialysis committee to have . . . and have 

the ability to sit down with this committee to present to them all 
the objective work that they have done to this point that is 
showing there’s an overwhelming need in the area. And it’s just 
not the need of receiving dialysis but as you’re aware, Mr. 
Minister, for people who do have to travel to the larger centres, 
it’s . . . there’s the cost, there’s the mileage, there’s the food 
costs. And it’s not just the expenditure of receiving the care, it’s 
the additional costs that people face of this nature. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would also like to indicate that from the 
ongoing discussion and debate that has taken place, the 
community have been contacted by a doctor and a nurse in 
Manitoba that have actually been instrumental in putting 
together a dialysis unit north of Winnipeg — I believe it’s in the 
northern part of the province — and they are willing to come to 
Broadview to share some of their thoughts and expertise. 
 
So I guess the question at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, is, 
will this committee . . . or what would be the process for the 
committee to sit down with the provincial committee to discuss 
their proposals for a unit in Broadview? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The normal access for people to get in 
contact with the committee would be through the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Regional Health Authority. That’s where for 
southern Saskatchewan, the expertise lies around this whole 
service and I think that this committee has in fact had some 
contact already with the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority 
and the officials there. That’s where the needs are assessed and 
then developed which . . . and that information that they have is 
provided to the province-wide committee, who then makes 
recommendations as to where expansion should take place. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ve again a number 
of questions in a number of different areas and it probably 
won’t be any too terribly long in any one area. 
 
The first question I have is regarding — this is very specific — 
but brachial therapy, and I don’t know if you have any officials 
that will be able to help in this. But I had met a person in my 
constituency who . . . I guess, brachial therapy, I didn’t know 
much about it and I’ve been looking on the Internet and reading 
about brachial therapy. And it’s implanting to deal with cancer, 
an implant and radiation implant and it’s mainly targeted 
towards prostate cancer I believe. 
 
This lady was . . . The person that I was talking to, was 
questioning why it wouldn’t be used in cases of breast cancer 
and I certainly don’t have any answers for that. She was told 
that there was no one trained in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Authority that could do that. They dealt with the prostate cancer 
but couldn’t deal with breast cancer. 
 
And she said it was just, to her . . . It was explained to her that it 
was an issue of training; that there was no one trained in the 
area. Well this lady thought well if it just takes training, she 
went to work and has raised I think roughly around $15,000 in 
that area. And said if we need somebody trained, we’ll darn 
well pay for it. Here’s some money to train the person. 
 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3231 

Now when I did my quick bit of research on this therapy they 
didn’t talk anything regarding this type of therapy for anything 
but prostate cancer. Can you expand? Do you have anybody 
that can expand on that? Or maybe I can leave it with you and 
get more information and get back to this lady in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think you’d want my speculation 
on this so we will take notice of that question and provide you 
with further information on that from some of the people that 
we would have access to in the department, and so that I can 
provide that to you hopefully by early next week. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think probably 
what I will do is talk to this lady then and tell her that you’ll be 
working on it and maybe even give her the number directly. I 
mean I could get the information; I’d just be transferring it and 
it might as well come from your department. So I will talk to 
her and have her phone your department on this. I’ll just turn it 
over to the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 
a couple of questions on a couple of different issues, 
substantially different than I think have been addressed in this 
House in the recent past. The first has to do with a public health 
issue concerning the swimming pool in the town of Cabri. The 
community pool there is some 60 years old, I believe. It’s really 
a fairly old structure but, to date, has provided very good 
service to not just the community of Cabri, but all the 
communities along Highway 32 from Leader right through to 
Swift Current. 
 
And as a consequence of very careful attention by a group of 
volunteers in the community, they’ve been able to upgrade it 
and keep it in good running order. There’s never been an issue 
with water quality in that particular swimming pool but 
apparently, according to the last public health inspection, it does 
not meet the 1999 standards for swimming pools. 
 
Now the public health inspector has basically indicated that he’s 
prepared to give them, in the community, five years to make the 
improvements that the 1999 standards require. But that’s going 
to cost upwards of $60,000. The community says they simply 
cannot generate that kind of money in the small community. 
 
The request from the community is this: would the minister and 
the department consider grandfathering the Cabri swimming 
pool as a working and suitable facility in view of the obligations 
that would be brought to bear on the community in terms of 
meeting the requirements of the new regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is a very specific question about an 
issue. There is an appeal process within the Cypress Health 
Region around this particular order. 
 
But I think what we have to do is step back a little bit and say 
why are there standards for swimming pools in general across 
the country. And basically, it relates to protection of the public. 
And I think that what maybe needs to happen is further 
discussion with the public health inspector and with the local 
community around how do we want to protect our kids and our 

families to make sure that somebody doesn’t end up with a 
problem that the national standards are meant to prevent. 
 
And so I don’t think anybody really would want to get into a 
grandfathering kind of position in a place where you’re talking 
about the protection of the public — especially protection of, 
primarily, kids. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I understand the, you know, the 
concerns about liability and so forth. But you know the fact of 
the matter is that the pool has never had a bad report in terms of 
the water quality. The inspection of the pool has been met with 
immediate response by the community. They’ve upgraded the 
facility. They’ve done whatever changes needed to be made to 
the facility for the convenience and health of the patrons of that 
particular pool. 
 
What you’ve got here is a requirement under the new 
regulations that a cement curb and a means of circulating the 
water off the top of the pool be made part of the facility. What 
happens now is they take water off the bottom of the pool and 
recirculate it, refilter it, and put it back into the pool. 
 
So what you’re asking for is cement guttering and skimming of 
the water off the top as opposed to recirculating it through the 
bottom. And it doesn’t seem to me that given the, you know, 
given the added expense of making these changes for no likely 
improvement in terms of water quality, that it’s a necessary 
step. 
 
I guess the other thing, Mr. Minister, is that the individuals 
from the community of Cabri who have struggled with this 
particular requirement have done some surveys of their own. 
And they can’t find any other pools in the province that are in 
the similar situation or a similar situation to them. They have 
found that almost all the other operating pools are significantly 
newer in construction and already meet these standards. Even 
though they might be 20 years old or so, those standards were 
included in the construction of the pool at the time of erection. 
So the point is that, even if you did consider grandfathering, it 
would be a rarity. This would be probably maybe the . . . one or 
two of the possible exceptions to the rule. 
 
And I think what you would find, Mr. Minister, is the 
community would be quite, quite prepared to accept their 
obligation — if a provision of this sort was granted to them but 
their water quality was found to be poor, that they would take 
the necessary steps to close the pool. But in the meantime there 
doesn’t appear to be any justification for closing the pool 
simply to meet standards which will make really no difference 
to the water quality. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As Minister of Health, part of my job is to 
be the preserver of standards and things, especially in public 
health areas around making sure the public is protected. And I 
really think that any solution here would have to involve the 
local community working with the public health inspector and 
obviously the managers of that particular operation to see how 
it can meet the standards. Because the national standards or the 
standards that are provided in this particular area are there for a 
reason. They’re there to protect the public, and I don’t think that 
any of us would want to step back from those standards unless 
there was some very, very good reason. 



3232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

[15:00] 
 
Mr. Elhard: — It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that the 
standard that is of every . . . is of concern to everyone is the 
quality of the water. That is what is the priority here. That is 
what is being achieved by the standards, the new standards that 
have been instituted in 1999, and apparently are being achieved 
by the existing arrangements in the pool, in the existing 
configuration of the pool. The water standards, the water quality 
are being met. 
 
And it’s, you know, akin to standards to vehicles and insisting 
that because your vehicle is 25 years old, you don’t meet the 
current standard so you have to take yours off the road. Now, 
you know, that analogy only goes so far, I understand. But 
nevertheless that’s a very real concern for this community. And 
if we’re going to impose the new standards, we’re basically 
saying to the community of Cabri that your pool needs to be 
shut down, and I don’t think that that’s what we want to achieve 
here. We want to find some solution. 
 
So if there’s an appeal process that’s available to the 
community, if there is some latitude, some discretion that is 
achievable here — assuming that they can meet the water 
quality standards — I think that it would be in the best interests 
of everybody to try and mediate a successful resolution to this 
particular issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It sounds to me it’s appropriate that the 
local community continue to talk with the public health 
inspector to sort out how they can file an appeal with the 
Cypress Regional Health Authority. And the issue’s been raised 
here, and I know that the staff in the department who work in 
this particular area will see if there’s something that they can do 
to provide assistance to the Cypress Regional Health Authority. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that, and 
the community will appreciate any further attempts to resolve 
this particular impasse. 
 
Mr. Minister, while I have your time here, I’d like to raise a 
couple of other issues. One I guess pertains to the situation 
affecting the community of Climax and the Border Health 
Centre. And I know that the last time we talked there was just 
about that same time a meeting between individuals from the 
communities of Climax and Frontier. They were planning to 
meet and have ongoing discussions with the board of the 
Cypress Regional Health District about the possible extension 
of service or continuance of service for the health centre in 
Climax. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give 
the House a report on any progress that might have been made 
in those discussions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that the delegation 
from Climax and Frontier and that whole community in the 
southwest corner of the province met with the Cypress Regional 
Health Authority board on May 5, and they presented some 
pretty solid ideas about how things could be done. 
 
The commitment by the regional health authority board was that 
they would be back to that committee on May 31 with their 
comments and ideas and understanding of their proposal. And 
it’s my hope that that process is going to allow for something 

that will work for the community and will make sense in the 
overall Cypress Regional Health Authority plans. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, other than the description of what 
the local community representatives were proposing, have you 
been familiarized with the proposal from there? Do you know 
details, personally, as to what they were advocating and 
requesting of the health district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The simple answer is yes, although not 
maybe as full a detail as the local board. But when I was down 
in Swift Current for the groundbreaking for the new health 
facility, then I had a chance to hear from the regional health 
authority board and senior management about the proposals that 
were coming from the Climax, Frontier people. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, without committing yourself 
directly in your response, is it your feeling that the request and 
proposal that was being advocated by the local people was 
reasonable or had some opportunity to be implemented and 
found workable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically this is an issue for that region to 
sort out, but I’m hopeful that they’re close to getting it sorted 
out. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the 
constituents that are served by that particular health centre 
would be appreciative of any solution that would see the 
enhancement of hours or the extension of hours of service 
provided to that area, especially of course as ambulance service, 
EMS [emergency medical services], becomes more and more 
difficult to provide on a timely basis in that vast open area. 
Which leads me to the third and final topic I want to raise here 
today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that we have fixed-wing air ambulance 
service in the province of Saskatchewan. Has your department 
and has your government ever entertained the idea, and would 
they consider the possibility of having an ambulance service 
provided through helicopters if that type of service was offered 
to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
There are some opportunities that seem to be coming together 
in the southeastern part of Alberta and there might be an 
opportunity to have that service made available to a huge area 
of southwest Saskatchewan for the benefit of individuals that 
would be in dire need of emergency services that could not be 
adequately supplied by a fixed-wing aircraft but would be 
reachable in quick order by a helicopter properly equipped for 
medical evacuations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank the member for that question. This 
issue of helicopter service in Saskatchewan has a certain appeal 
to it when you look at it initially. I personally have gone to 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] in Calgary and 
visited and sat in the helicopters and seen how the whole 
operation works. And there are quite a few limitations on 
helicopters for use in the Prairie regions just based on weather 
and the numbers of days that they’re available to provide 
service. 
 
It’s one that we continue to keep our eyes on and we keep 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3233 

making sure that we understand what the different options are. 
And so I would say that we haven’t closed off any reasonable 
proposals. There are some real challenges around the costs of 
the system as well. And so how that could fit into an overall 
EMS system in the province and provide the service, it’s . . . 
Some of the places where we would see that helicopter 
ambulances would be a real boon based on the number of roads 
that we have also are ones that are sort of almost outside the 
distance that that helicopter could serve. And so there are many, 
many factors to be taken into account. And I personally have 
gone to see what some of the options are, and I don’t think at 
this point it’s one that’s there. But if a new proposal comes 
forward, we’ll be willing to take a look at it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Let me detail just a 
little more about the opportunity that might be presenting itself 
at this point. The source of this idea and I had a discussion the 
other day, and this individual is looking at establishing 
Medicine Hat as sort of the centre of the service that would be 
provided. But if you look at the range of a helicopter, it could 
probably — in a circle about 150 miles from the centre — could 
service as far to the northeast as Beechy, probably east of Swift 
Current, and south almost as far as you go into my constituency 
of Cypress Hills. 
 
And while I understand there’s a lost of cost associated — or 
potentially a lot of cost associated — with this type service, I 
am thinking of sort of the issues related to large, open areas 
where there’s scarce population, where you know roads and 
ambulances are not fully reliable, where service might be 
difficult to obtain in an emergency, and where you have an 
ever-increasing number of oil and gas industry related 
employment. 
 
The individual that I was talking to today said that in the area 
east of Brooks, Hanna — that Highway 36 that runs north and 
south in Alberta, in that area to the Alberta-Saskatchewan 
border — at any given time there are 20,000 oil and gas 
workers in Alberta that aren’t serviced by the STARS 
ambulance because of limitations to its distance of travel. 
 
But if there was a facility, or I’m sorry, a capability located in 
Medicine Hat, those 20,000 people could be serviced from 
Medicine Hat quite readily, and the same workers on our side of 
the border — and they don’t number 20,000 but there’s 
probably many, many thousands out there right now — plus the 
additional service that would provide for these remote and 
isolated and small communities that may or may not have 
regular ambulance service. It might make it more appealing. It 
might make it more practical. 
 
There’s a possibility of an arrangement I think being worked 
with the provincial government, or the health district down 
there, where they would be an actual partner in the cost of this 
operation, but there might be other arrangements that could be 
worked out with them. And if the minister and his department 
and the regional health district are open to discussions, I think 
this individual would be more than happy to outline what his 
plans are for that kind of service delivery based in Medicine Hat 
but servicing all of southwest Saskatchewan on an emergency 
or as-needed basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as I said before, if there’s a 

reasonable proposal that makes sense on a whole number of 
levels then I think we would be willing to look at it, just as we 
have looked at some of the other proposals that have come 
forward. But I am quite wary as a minister working in this 
whole area because I know that some of the costs and some of 
the limitations are quite severe. But this sounds like something 
that would have some possibilities and we’d be willing to look 
at it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate your willingness to 
consider the idea. I will try and put the individual in touch with 
your office if that would be all right with you. I think the 
punster sitting next to me asked if this idea was going to take 
wing and I hope that it might. Thank you for your time, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And Mr. Minister, 
and your officials, welcome today. Mr. Minister, I want to . . . 
First of all, I guess with the strike at the EMTs [emergency 
medical technicians] in the Yorkton Sunrise Health District, has 
there been any movement on that situation to this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that the employer 
and the employees have reached an agreement. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — That’s very good to hear I think for 
everyone concerned, Mr. Minister. 
 
I guess why I raised the question again then here, this weekend 
I had a constituent come to me, and the husband has had cancer 
for the last four or five years and about six weeks ago called the 
ambulance. And the ambulance — Crestvue Ambulance out of 
Yorkton — came, picked up the patient, took him to Yorkton. 
And the charge was $200 and that was fine. Everything was 
fine. This last week again the same situation arose, they called 
the ambulance. There wasn’t an ambulance available so they 
had to use the Langenburg ambulance system and the bill was 
$478. 
 
Now realizing of course in every situation this is a dramatic 
increase in cost, but in this situation of this family where this 
person has been off work for about four or four-and-a-half years 
now, dollars are very hard to come by. And I guess the 
complaint that they had was that they just couldn’t afford this 
increase. And I think at that point the strike may have still been 
on or because they were short-staffed in Yorkton and only a 
number of ambulances going compared to what they normally 
have, they had to call Langenburg in. And the service was fine, 
the service was adequate; the problem was just the bill for $478. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This sounds to me like something that the 
parties should raise with the region because it obviously is the 
bill for coming from Langenburg and then providing the 
service. But in that particular situation the region would, I think 
be willing to look at it and make sure that it’s sorted out. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to 
hear that and I’ll pass that information on. 



3234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

One further question and I’m not sure that you’re at liberty to 
answer this but the EMTs in the Yorkton area compared to the 
Melville area were 5 to $8 an hour less. Has that problem been 
solved? I guess it’s been solved to the satisfaction of the 
workers or at least to the point where they’ve gone back to 
work, but do we have equality within the health district between 
the two different centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have that specific information but 
my understanding, that was a major part of the dispute and so 
there’s obviously been some accommodation around that that 
allows for the matter to be resolved. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a couple of 
questions regarding hearing aid and The Hearing Aid Act that 
was passed in 2001 — The Hearing Aid Sales and Service Act 
— but it is yet to be proclaimed. Can the minister explain why 
this piece of legislation hasn’t been proclaimed in the last four 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate that question because I had a 
chance to meet with the national association of the speech and 
language pathologists and others involved in this particular 
industry. And what has happened since the legislation was 
passed is that they have been working together with officials in 
Sask Health and in Sask Justice around developing the 
regulations and also a manual for the operators, the people who 
provide the service. 
 
And the issue and why it’s taking a little bit longer to come 
forward than might be normally the case is that if you recall, 
this particular legislation is both consumer protection legislation 
and a form of professional legislation, if I can put it that way. 
And one of the initial challenges was whether it stayed as a 
consumer protection issue within the Department of Justice or 
became a professional part in Health. Well they’ve worked out 
a lot of innovative ideas around how we can have that ability to 
protect the people who purchase these devices at the same time 
as we deal with a lot of the professional health issues. 
 
And so it hasn’t been an easy task. I met with some of the 
people who had been a part of this committee and they were 
quite pleased with the result. We anticipate that the regulations, 
the manual, and the Act will all be available and proclaimed 
this summer. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Because certainly 
that was the intent of the legislation was to protect consumers. 
And of course when you’re dealing with this area, mainly 
seniors, and certainly obviously there’s some protection needed, 
that’s why the legislation came forward. So over the last four 
years there really hasn’t been, I mean, any extra protection that 
this legislation could have provided. But you say that it will be 
proclaimed by the summertime, the regulations will be done, 
and it will definitely be proclaimed this summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That is the plan. And I know that the 
people who have been involved in the committee are feeling 
that they’ve sorted out a lot of these issues and now have a good 
proposal to go forward. I also know that many other 

jurisdictions are watching this because it’s sort of the first 
attempt to try to do this. And the sense I got from talking with 
the people at this national convention was that they were quite 
excited by some of the ideas that we had developed here and 
they were asking whether we’d be willing to share them, which 
we will. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll be 
following the progress of that as are other provinces, I guess. 
 
My next set of questions will be regarding the regional health 
authorities. The first time that we were up doing Health 
estimates, I asked a number of questions on the health 
authorities. And I guess maybe some of the answers, it’s not as 
easy to just give a straight number but I’m still trying to get a 
grasp. In 2002 we went from 32 health regions to 12 health 
authorities. And I’m trying to get a grasp on some of the 
savings that the Department of Health would have realized. 
Now I guess it wasn’t savings in that the money wasn’t spent, 
but maybe it was spent differently. 
 
Can you give me some sort of a grasp on how much was saved 
— going from 32 health districts down to 12 — was saved or 
realized by the Department of Health and then of course then 
put back into services? But how much was saved? 
 
Because it certainly . . . When you go from 32 regions to 12 
authorities, hopefully we see some saving on administration. 
Could you give me some sort of an idea on how much that was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The overall administrative costs for the 
regional health authorities over the last three years have gone 
down. 
 
Now what’s happened is we have in our accounting structure a 
very clear designation of which expenses are administration, 
which expenses are not. And in that process if we sort of restate 
the amounts from the year 2002-2003, from the 32 districts 
down to the 12, the total expense of admin across the board was 
about 7 per cent. In the ’03-04 actual expenditure it was down 
to 6.4 per cent. Our budgeted amount for last year — we don’t 
have the actuals yet because we’re still gathering that 
information from March 31, ’05 — but the budgeted amount 
was 5.5 per cent. So we saw a downward trend on that admin 
side. So that’s one way of looking at it. 
 
The other way which I think is much more dramatic is using the 
CIHI [Canadian Institute of Health Information] or the 
Canadian national data. And it shows that for the last three 
years that they have in their system that our admin costs in 
Saskatchewan were, and this is for ’99-2000, was 3.4 per cent; 
2000-2001, 3.2 per cent; 2001-2002, 3.3 per cent. And we 
basically ranked as the cheapest on admin in the whole country. 
 
So out of the rank one to ten, we were number ten. And the 
Canadian average — in other words what the rank between five 
and six was, you know — 6.4 in the first year, 6.5, and 6.1. So 
we were effectively half of what the national average cost in 
admin was in our Saskatchewan structure. And we think from 
’01-02, we’ve actually been able to reduce it again. 
 
So I think this is an area where it becomes a difficulty in sort of 
saying, well what kinds of things are we doing. But we have, 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3235 

through the structures that we have, eliminated many of the 
administrative procedures that we’ve had before and reduced 
the costs overall. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Just to clarify then, Mr. Minister. I think 
just from the numbers that you said, in roughly the ’02-03 year, 
fiscal year, to the next two years . . . terms that you used, we 
went from 7 per cent down to 5 per cent. A couple of per cent 
savings. I’d be interested in roughly what the dollar figure of 
that would be, if you could figure that out. 
 
But also then when you were talking about the CIHI data, and 
the numbers didn’t quite show the same savings — am I correct 
there? You were going 3.2 and 3.4. It didn’t seem like there was 
near the savings according to CIHI over that same time frame as 
what you or your own department was showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the problem is, the problem is that 
CIHI uses just the hospital data, and also they’re using the 
information from the three years prior to the last three years that 
we use. 
 
Now just for clarity, I can say that the admin costs that we use 
in our province-wide budgeting process include general 
administration. So that’s the executive offices, board costs, 
planning and development, those things that relate to the 
executive. They also include the finance — and cost, finance, 
and administration — human resources, information 
technology, and communications. So those are the things that 
we have in our admin costs in the operation. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Further to the different health authorities 
and the boards that are appointed, are there set salary levels . . . 
not salary but remuneration levels? For example the board 
Chair and the other boards, is it uniform across the 12 health 
regions, authorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — For the board Chair and the members, it’s 
the same right across the whole province. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Could I get a list of like, for example, what 
are board Chairs paid on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have that with me but I’ll be happy 
to send it to you. It’s public information. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So what would be the criteria then? How do 
you come up and determine the salary levels? What criteria is 
used? I mean it’s uniform across . . . How did you come up with 
those salary levels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — How the system was developed, these are 
honorariums. They’re not salaries at all. And there is a retainer 
for the board Chair; that’s the only person that has a certain 
amount that’s paid on an annual basis. And then everybody else 
is paid on a per diem basis for the amount of days that they 
work or half-days, and they also get their expenses, their meals, 
and some of the travel. And it’s based on trying to make a 
comparison with other similar operations across the province. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One more question on the health authorities 
and this is kind of specific to each health authority. When 
reviewing the annual reports, I have down here that the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Authority cut 10 full-time positions from 
the senior management from 2004 compared to 2003 and the 
savings was about 615,000. The Saskatoon Health Region 
eliminated 12 position in senior management for that same time 
frame and the savings was about 912,000. Cypress Hills 
reported 14 fewer full-time and senior management during that 
same period but the savings was only . . . they only realized 
6,000. 
 
Can the minister explain that? Just going through the full-time 
equivalents in senior management and why there’d be such a 
discrepancy between the Regina Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, and 
then the Cypress region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s a very good reading on your part, 
but I think there’s a simple explanation for the Cypress Health 
Region. The people went from out of scope to in scope and so 
they still had the same jobs and the same amounts of money to 
pay as far as the region was concerned, but just they were not 
. . . no longer located in the same place in the annual report. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. McMorris: — A couple of questions on the new MRIs 
[magnetic resonance imaging]. What is the status of the new 
MRI . . . Saskatchewan Health commitment to the new MRIs? 
Where is that? What’s the status of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The second MRI in Regina is in the 
process of being built. And we basically have to build the space 
for it and then install the machine. And it’s expected that this 
will be operational later this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So that’s the only commitment to a new . . . 
is the one new MRI in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region? 
So then the next question is, I mean it seems like . . . And we 
certainly heard that often is that are they run 24 hours? It’s a 
staffing issue as much as it is a machine issue. I realize that one 
extra MRI in the city of Regina and the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health District will help. But it only helps if there’s enough 
staff to run them. 
 
And so prior to the new MRI coming, how is the staff level 
complement? Were we able to . . . What were the hours of 
operation, for example in the two health regions? Were we 
running it 8 hours a day or 12 hours, 24 hours? And with the 
new MRI, if we were short staffed before, how are we going to 
be addressing that issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the ’03-04 budget we expanded the 
numbers of hours of service. And the goal was — we didn’t 
quite reach it all the time — but was 16 hours a day operation 
for the machine. At the same time we also provided a lot of 
extra money for training. And the goal was to train more people 
to provide that extra service, but also to help the regions be 
ready for the new machine when it comes forward. And so 
we’ve had the ability to train more people. 
 
I think the plan is to have sufficient staff in place for when the 
new machine comes on to allow them to expand. Also it’s an 
area where we continue to monitor as it relates to the overall 
training for the province-wide health human resources plan. 
 



3236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

Mr. McMorris: — So the machines were, the target was 16 
hours a day but wasn’t always met and it wasn’t always met 
because of staff shortages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think primarily that would be the case. 
But I think what I can say is, and I think it was in the paper 
today, that the numbers of MRIs in Regina over the last year 
have gone up quite dramatically. And the goal is to do that 
similar expansion for next year. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So we’re running them 16 hours a day 
roughly this past year. So the years prior then, they were 
operating 8 hours a day. Is that correct? And, you know, when 
you’re saying that we’re trying to operate up to 16 hours, I 
would think it would be staffing issues — not enough. It 
wouldn’t be the lack of demand for that diagnostic tool. I mean, 
there’s enough people coming in that need it. So if it’s not being 
run 16 hours I would think it was a staff issue. But when you 
look back a couple of years ago where they run it 8 hours a day 
and is that the increase simply because we’re running them 
more hours in through the day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, I think the answer is yes that it is 
the fact they’re running more hours per day. I mean, an example 
is that the number of patients that have been waiting for MRIs 
in Regina has decreased by 22 per cent this last year because of 
the ability to expand the number of hours that are there. 
 
And we’ve made specific commitments in the budgets from a 
year ago, last year, and then now as we go forward to increase 
our capacity in this area. What we’re also doing is going 
forward with our assessment of the diagnostics services across 
the whole province and looking at what other options, what 
other opportunities there are for providing province-wide 
diagnostic services which then includes looking at the human 
health, human resource issues, equipment issues. Looking at, 
sort of, what equipment we have to replace, not just for MRIs, 
but also CTs [computerized tomography], X-ray, everything. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Would there be . . . what is the drawback, 
and I’m just, on pure information. What is the drawback from 
running them other than we maybe don’t have enough staffing? 
But the natural progression is if you’re running them 8 hours a 
day and you went to 16 and we were doing so much better, 
there are 24 hours in the day. Why aren’t we going with around 
the clock with the machines that we have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think each day the machine does 
need some down time. But I think the bigger factor is staff 
working in the middle of the night, patients coming in the 
middle of the night, that kind of thing, and working and making 
sure of that schedule, and I think now if there are emergencies, 
well then the fact that we can provide some of those services. 
 
But it’s something that they, you know, continue to examine 
and push the boundaries of what’s reasonable both in making 
sure that patients want to be there and staff want to be there. 
But having it operate the number of hours that it is now does 
provide many more procedures at times when people are willing 
to come there quite readily. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last question on this issue. And I 
understand the issue of running them 24 hours. Of course 

people are going to have some times that aren’t your normal 
waking time to be going in. But talking to a number of people 
who have been on waiting lists for MRIs, frankly they’ll say 
you tell me what time you want me there and I will be there. 
 
And the other argument about . . . and knowing a little bit about 
the health care profession is that it is a 24-hour day in the health 
care field. Nurses work around the clock. Doctors work around 
the clock. It is a 24-hour day in the health care field. 
 
So I guess my last question on the whole MRI issue is, are you 
looking at extending the day over 16 . . . to more than 16 hours 
to use the facilities that we have so we’re not . . . You know, I 
mean it’s all great to invest in another MRI but you have to look 
at the ones that we have and if we’re using them to capacity. 
And if we can double the hours last year, can we add another 50 
per cent on to them? I’m not sure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the best way to answer that 
last question is to say that in our budget for this year — which 
hopefully we’re going to have passed very soon — we have 
10.5 million that’s going into provincial diagnostic imaging 
initiatives. 
 
And of that, 2.1 million is going towards MRI and CT capacity 
increases and more bone mineral density examinations. We 
anticipate that it’ll increase the numbers of MRI examinations 
in this budget year by 4,600. And so that will be added capacity 
using our existing three and, because the fourth one will come 
in late in the year; it won’t make that much difference in the 
added capacity. And so clearly we’re looking at all options to 
increase the capacity including making sure we have the dollars 
to do it. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I’d just like to know what the status is on the 
Maidstone hospital addition, or the Maidstone health care centre 
addition, and when we might expect to see some sod turned or 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding on very recent 
information, information from this week, is that they’re on 
track. The very first meeting of the group of professionals 
around the functional plan is going to be next week. So 
everything is moving ahead as we anticipate and we have the 
dollars set out for it in this year’s budget plan. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister 
regarding SWADD [system wide admission and discharge 
department]. Now I’ve . . . Certainly there’s been some articles 
in the paper over the last number of months that I think 
probably all of us have read. Can the minister explain to me 
how this system wide admission and discharge program works? 
Because there certainly have been questions. 
 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3237 

I know I’ve had a few phone calls from people reading the 
article and saying how could this happen when, for example, 
the doctor is saying this person should stay in the hospital but 
SWADD says no, I’m sorry, they’re going to have to go home 
— we don’t have a room in the inn tonight for them — and 
sends them home when the doctor is saying no, they should be 
staying here. So how does that . . . First of all, how does the 
SWADD program work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that the system is 
set up in a way to ensure appropriate entry into the hospital and 
discharge of patients, and that there are utilization managers 
that are on the job effectively 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 
And their job is to work with the doctors and the nurses and 
make sure that the patients are appropriately entering into the 
facility and also appropriately going out of the facility, either 
home or to some other particular place. 
 
And so it’s that area where there may be some discussions that 
take place between the doctors and the utilization managers. 
And I suppose there’d be a process of appeal to higher 
administrative people if that’s required. But I think practically 
that’s how the system works. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So ultimately it comes down to either you 
can stay tonight or you’re out — you know you’re discharged. 
And if a doctor is saying no, that person shouldn’t be 
discharged, who has the final say? Does SWADD, in 
consultation with nurses and some of the doctors? But the 
doctor is saying that person should not be discharged from this 
hospital, but SWADD is saying yes, they’re out of here. Who 
has the final say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The physician has to sign the discharge. 
An administrator can’t discharge somebody. So it would be the 
physician that would do that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. It was interesting reading in the 
paper just earlier this week regarding a reporter in the city here 
that had been through open-heart surgery and he was talking 
about the code burgundy issue and some of the issues in his 
short stay in the hospital. 
 
And you know I think what’s happened — and this is my own 
impression — but the code burgundy is called so many times in 
the hospital that it doesn’t even seem to be an issue anymore. 
That you know the hospitals are running at 110 per cent 
capacity all the time. There aren’t enough beds. And you know 
I’ve heard it said by people that you know if you have an issue, 
a health issue, and you need to get into the hospital, just darn 
well go there and stay. You know, don’t wait and be called in or 
. . . Just get in the hospital and stay and make them deal with 
you then. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And I think it happens over and over again. So I’ve asked the 
minister to comment on that. I think he probably read the article 
about code burgundy and how it’s . . . You know, the people 
that were working in the hospital that this person was quoting 
are saying that it happens so often that it really . . . You know, I 
don’t even know why they call it code burgundy anymore 
because it seems like they’re operating in code burgundy 24/7. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well technically the term code burgundy 
isn’t used anymore in Regina. What is used at . . . They now 
have a full capacity protocol. And so what they are designing is 
a system that makes sure that when people come into the 
hospital and require a place that there would be a place 
available. And so it’s about how you manage the emergency 
rooms and the capacity in the emergency areas and getting 
people into the hospital. 
 
This clearly is an issue in both Regina and Saskatoon. And so 
what is happening and using some of the technical money that 
we received in the federal health agreement, we are working 
together with the Health Quality Council and the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Authority, Saskatoon Health Authority 
around some of the new methods of managing the flow of 
patients to hopefully meet some of the concerns that arise from 
time to time because it really is sort of big issues that come all 
the time. And so in Regina, for example, at the General there’s 
more pressure than at the Pasqua, and so the full capacity 
protocol is in place more often at the General than it is at 
Pasqua. And what that means is that they then end up having 
some ability to get patients that require to be into the hospital 
into the hospital. But still it becomes a real problem I think too 
. . . on an ongoing basis. And that’s why we’re looking at it on a 
broader basis across both of the major tertiary centres in the 
province. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think you know the issue is . . . And I 
certainly would agree that the hospitals are trying to run as 
efficiently as possible, I mean that’s the whole goal of it. But it 
seems like . . . and just from people again that we talked to is 
that the hospitals are running at 100 per cent. I mean they are at 
capacity, they’re dealing . . . And there’s an ebb and flow, just a 
natural ebb and flow of people coming into the system. 
 
And it’s okay as long as it’s . . . You know at the lower point 
they’re running at 100 per cent capacity but when you have you 
know a large influx, and it may only be 20 or 30 people, the 
system really struggles to handle that then. 
 
And it seems like it’s just . . . You know and they always say 
well, we’re short of beds. I really don’t believe it’s ever an issue 
of that there’s not enough physical beds. It’s the people around 
the beds to man . . . to supply the services. 
 
So it just seems like we’re running it so tight, so tight that when 
there’s any sort of an influx the system really struggles with it. 
And that’s when you get the people in the hallways and waiting, 
and waiting, and waiting. 
 
And you know I guess it’s always fine if you happen to be 
entering into the system when the volumes are down. But if you 
happen to come in with a bulge, those are the stories we seem to 
hear of so often that people just didn’t get the treatment and 
they were shuffled from one room to the next because we just 
. . . or one hallway to the next because there just isn’t enough, 
wasn’t enough capacity. And it’s not again the capacity of pure 
beds, I think it’s a capacity of personnel and human resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s good questions that you’re asking in 
this area because it is an area where people are trying to solve 
problems. And at the public meeting last night at the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Authority they presented some information 



3238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

around their tertiary acute care, and basically that’s Pasqua and 
the General. 
 
And one of the things that they said last night — and it actually 
I think took place in March — was that they increased 10 
convalescent beds, so sort of post-surgery beds, and then 7 
surgical beds. So they, you know, so they’ve actually increased 
the number of beds by about 17 since March. And part of the 
reason for doing that is exactly what you’ve identified — that 
pressure that just stays there day after day after day. 
 
And so they showed though that their occupancy rate on a 
year-round basis in 2002-2003 at these two hospitals in Regina 
was 89.4 per cent. In ’03-04, it was 91.7 per cent. And then in 
’04-05, it was 90.4 per cent. But that ends up putting pressure 
on the whole system when you have that kind of an occupancy 
rate. But the full capacity protocol that was introduced in 
January led to them saying, we need these other beds to provide 
sort of expansion relief when there’s a big influx of people. 
 
The other thing that they’re doing in conjunction with this is 
continuing to provide education to the public around the 
appropriate use of the emergency room because there’s still 
many people that go to the emergency rooms for just regular 
doctor checkups that . . . It would be a lot easier if they went to 
some of the clinics or to their own doctor. And the education of 
the public around that will help alleviate some of these other 
concerns as well. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, that is an interesting area, and I don’t 
know . . . I mean, it’s a tough area to tackle, but I certainly 
would agree with you. And not that I’ve sat in the emergency 
and done analysis on whether they should be here or not, but 
certainly you hear an awful lot of that, that people are using the 
emergency as their, you know, their doctor’s office. And that 
was never meant to be. 
 
I don’t know why that has come. I think if you look back 20 
years ago, that wasn’t the case. And I’m wondering why that is 
the case now; why people are using that as their, you know, as 
their yearly checkup almost or, you know, if they’ve got a cold, 
to come into the emergency when I don’t believe that was the 
case 20 and 30 years ago, at least I don’t ever remember. I 
remember going to the hospital a couple of times and it was 
usually for stitches and that was about it, not for a cold. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m not sure if you’re really asking 
for an answer there, other than . . . But I think the point is that 
we need to remind people that they should use the most 
appropriate services and for many times . . . People phoning the 
health line, for example, and getting some advice there may 
eliminate a wait at the hospital. 
 
One of the things that happens with the full capacity protocol is 
that patients that have come in and are part of that process will 
be priorized over ones that come in through the emergency 
department because of just the way they’ve designed that 
system. And to remind people that, make sure that you use 
emergency rooms for true emergencies. Call the health line, 
work with your family doctor, go to some of the other clinics 
around the city and get your care there. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — We don’t have a lot of time left. I do have a 

couple questions regarding sharps — needles and scalpels and 
that type of thing. Can you give me the status? I believe that 
there was . . . Was there legislation or there was talk? You had 
talked about legislation to SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses] that this was of course a workplace safety area and 
you’d be moving on that. And could you give me a status on 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is actually an issue that comes under 
the Department of Labour and The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act. And my understanding is that they’re working on 
the regulations around this and working on the consultation. 
And I know that in our Health budget, we have money around 
training for people in how to use the new . . . what would be the 
new requirements for these sharps. 
 
So it’s something that is clearly part of the plan and we’re 
moving forward on it, but it’s not as simple as just changing the 
product. There’s some other things that seem to have to go with 
it. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So just one, I guess, you know . . . So we do 
have legislation and you’re working on regulations. Is that 
correct? And I know it’s not you, it’s not the department . . . the 
Department of Labour but in consultation, I’m sure, with the 
Department of Health as to regulations around. There’s 
legislation in place, but the regulations have not been put in 
place. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the way to describe it is that it’s 
under The Occupational Health and Safety Act which allows 
you to make regulations around particular products that you 
might use for safety reasons. And so, practically, you don’t 
have to change the Act but you can use the powers that you 
have there to create the regulations, and that’s what they’re 
working on right now. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — A couple questions on a facility, Valley 
View Centre in Moose Jaw. What’s the status report on that? 
Certainly there was lots of talk of it during the election. We’re 
hearing rumours of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Valley View Centre is part of the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment. Health 
has no interest or share of that at all. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all the 
questions I have for today. I’d like to thank you and your 
officials for the answers that you provided in the quick hour and 
a half that we had. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. I appreciated the 
questions and will provide some of the information that you 
requested and get that to you. I want to thank all the officials 
that are here and the ones that aren’t here for providing 
information and for providing good service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. So thank you very much. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, members. (HE01) for the amount of 
13,104,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3239 

The Chair: — That’s carried. (HE04) for the amount 
$127,182,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (HE03) for the amount 
$1,964,061,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (HE10) for the amount 
$8,712,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. (HE06) for the amount 
$541,282,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (HE08) for the amount 
$238,176,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (HE05) for the amount 
$1,249,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Amortization of capital assets is 
a non-voted, non-cash expense and is presented for information 
for the amount of $757,000. Any questions on that? Seeing 
none, therefore: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums for 
Health in the amount $2,893,766,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 32 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates 

Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — The supplementary estimates for Health is 
(HE03) for the amount $9,000,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 

Therefore resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty 
for the 12 months ending March 31, 2005, the following 
sums for Health for the amount $9,000,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 32 agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — And that concludes the estimates for Health. I 
would move that the minister move on to the estimates for . . . 
Pardon me. Thank you, members. This concludes the 
consideration of Health estimates. 
 
[16:00] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
The Chair: — The next item on the agenda is the consideration 
of estimates for Executive Council (EX01) for the amount of 
$3,814,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (EX07) for the amount of 
$476,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (EX04) for the amount of 
$1,339,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (EX03) for the amount of 
$1,560,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (EX08) for the amount of 
$420,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (EX06) for the amount of 
$690,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Amortization of capital assets is 
non-voted, non-cash expense and is presented for information 
purposes only for the amount of $4,000. Is there any questions 
on that? Seeing none, therefore: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums for 
Executive Council, the amount of $7,609,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



3240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 10 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates 

Executive Council 
Vote 10 

 
The Chair: — The supplementary estimates for Executive 
Council, vote 10, administration (EX01) for the amount of 
$305,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. Therefore: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2005, the following sums for 
Executive Council, the amount of $305,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. That concludes the Executive 
Council. 
 
[Vote 10 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — The next item before the committee is estimates 
for Agriculture (AG01) in the amount of $5,796,000. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (AG05) for the amount of 
$5,833,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (AG06) for the amount of 
$13,222,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (AG07) for the amount of 
$13,664,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (AG12) for the amount of three 
million . . . pardon me. There are some statutory amounts and 
the amount to be voted is $3,387,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. (AG04) for the amount of 
$3,488,000. Is that agreed? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. (AG08) for the amount of 
$98,776,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. (AG03) for the amount of 
$3,819,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (AG09) for the amount of 
$4,124,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (AG10) for the amount of 
$112,090,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. Amortization of capital assets 
and non-voted, non-cash expenses presented for information 
purposes only for the amount of $175,000. Any questions on 
that? Seeing none, therefore: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums, for 
Agriculture and Food for the amount of $264,931,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 1 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 1 

 
The Chair: — Supplementary estimates, vote 1 for the amount 
of $101,200,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. Therefore: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2005, the following sums, for 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization the amount of 
$101,200,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 1 agreed to.] 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3241 

Further Estimates 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — (AG07) for the amount of $732,000. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 
[Vote 1 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair: — Okay. Government Relations, (GR01), for the 
amount of $5,329,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (GR04) for the amount of four 
million . . . 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
The Chair: — Members, lending and investing activities, 
found on page 156 of the Estimates book, Agriculture and 
Food, vote 146 for the amount of $400,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 

Resolved therefore that there be granted to Her Majesty 
the 12 months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums 
for Agriculture and Food, lending and investing activities, 
for the amount of $400,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 146 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair: — Government Relations (GR04) for the amount of 
$4,409,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (GR07) for the amount of . . . it 
includes statutory amounts so the amount to be voted is 
$139,308,000. Is that agreed? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Municipal relations, (GR08), for 
the amount of $5,113,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (GR03) for the amount of 
$2,255,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (GR06) for the amount of 
$1,071,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Amortization of assets, capital 
assets, non-voted, non-cash, for information only, for the 
amount of $3,000. Is there any questions on that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Chair: — Seeing none, therefore: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums for 
Government Relations, $157,485,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried, and I know the minister’s 
relieved that I got that right. 
 
[Vote 30 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 

The Chair: — The final item before the committee is Learning 
estimates. (LR01) for the amount of $12,812,000. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR11) for the amount of 
$396,763,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR03) for the amount of 
$582,364,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR10) includes statutory 
amounts. The amount to be voted is $6,974,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



3242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 2005 

The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR12) for the amount of 
$33,651,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR13) for the amount of 
$69,513,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR15) for the amount of 
$8,581,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR08) for the amount of 
$3,306,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR09) for the amount of 
$55,050,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR04) includes statutory 
amounts and the amount to be voted is $20,782,000. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Amortization of capital assets is 
a non-voted, non-cash expense for information purposes only, 
the amount of $3,503,000. Any questions on that? Sounds good. 
Seeing none: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006 the following sums, for 
Learning the amount of $1,216,795,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
[Vote 5 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Supplementary Estimates 

Learning 
Vote 5 

 
The Chair: — That is carried. Supplementary estimates on 
Learning, vote 5, (LR11) for the amount of $13,500,000. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2005, the following sums, for 
Learning for the amount of $13,500,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 5 agreed to.] 
 

Further Estimates 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — Members, further estimates for Learning, vote 5 
(LR03) for the amount of $24,500,000. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. (LR04) for the amount . . . 
includes statutory amounts. The amount to be voted is 
$2,499,000. 
 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 5 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Learning 
Vote 169 

 
The Chair: — Lending and investing activities for Learning, 
vote 169 (LR01). The amount to be voted is $66,000,000. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. Therefore: 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, the following sums, 
lending and investing activities for Learning in the amount 
of $66,000,000. 
 

Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[Vote 169 agreed to.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation 
Vote 170 

 
The Chair: — Lending and investing activities, (ED01), is 
statutory for the amount of $3,900,000. That’s not to be voted, 
but are there any questions? Seeing none. 



May 26, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 3243 

[Vote 170 — Statutory.] 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Deputy Government House 
Leader move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes thank you. I move that we rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The government Deputy House Leader has 
moved that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee 
to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to consider 
motions for return no. 358 through 364 as ordered. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has requested leave to 
consider motions for returns 358 through to 364 as ordered. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Leave has been 
granted and these items, returns 358 to 364, so ordered. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you, and through you, I want to introduce three very special 
people that travelled a long way to be here today. And I’ll begin 

with the coach Kelvin Yee. Kelvin Yee is from the Hay River 
Lions Swim Club in Northwest Territories, and they’re here as 
part of a training program, and they’re taking part in the ROD 
[Regina Optimist Dolphins] Invitational Swim Meet. And 
Kelvin, being the coach of two highly qualified swimmers from 
the territories, and in fact both the swimmers that he’s with here 
today have qualified for the Canada Summer Games. And 
they’re here for the Regina Optimist Dolphins swim meet. 
 
And with Kelvin Yee is Colton Yee. Colton is swimming at the 
ROD Invitational in a number of events, Mr. Speaker: the 200 
free, the 50 free, the 50 breast, the 200 IM [individual medley], 
the 50 back, the 100 free, and the 50 fly. 
 
And with Colton, his teammate is a cousin of mine, Michelle 
Daigneault, from Hay River as well. And she’s also swimming 
at the ROD Invitational. And Michelle is taking advantage of 
the opportunity to compete in a number of events as well. 
That’s the 50 free, the 50 breast, the 100 breast, the 50 back, the 
100 free, and the 50 fly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kelvin tells me — the coach — that they’ve got a 
number of swimmers in the territories, in Hay River to be more 
specific. There’s 32 swimmers in that particular community and 
from that area. And Kelvin says these are the two swimmers 
that are deemed to be the excellent swimmers of that particular 
club, and they’re here to compete in Regina all weekend. 
 
I would point out that Michelle is from a family of athletes. Her 
uncle Izzy Daigneault played on the world famous 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Selects hockey team. Her uncle Leonard 
Daigneault is an avid curler, is not that good in terms of his 
win-loss record but he’s really involved with curling. Her Dad 
Alec is also an excellent athlete in a number of sports, more 
particular in hockey. And I think overall that she gets a lot of 
her athletic ability from her mother. 
 
And I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a long ways 
from Hay River, and I think I’d ask all my Assembly colleagues 
to give the people from Hay River a big, warm Saskatchewan 
welcome and good luck on your competition. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Deputy 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, after that long 
speech, I would move that this House now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:22.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3217 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3217 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3217 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................3217 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................3217 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3217 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................3217 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................3218 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3218 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3218 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3218 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................3218 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3218 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................3219 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3219 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................3219 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................3219 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3219 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3219 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................3220 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3220 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3220 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................3243 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Addictions Expert to Expand Facility 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3220 
 New Water Treatment Plant in Edenwold 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................3221 
 Upcoming Marriage in Biggar 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................3221 
 Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................3221 
 Voting One’s Conscience 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3221 
 Prärie Sängerfest Choir Festival 2005 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................3222 
 A Health Care Success Story 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3222 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Worldwide Pork Ceases Operations 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................3222 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................3223 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................3224 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................3224 
 Improper Access to Information 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................3225 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................3226 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................3226 
 Misuse of Funds in Environment Department 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3226 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................3227 
MOTIONS 
 Appointment of the Children’s Advocate 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................3227 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................3228 
POINT OF ORDER 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3228 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................3228 



 

  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................3229 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3229 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................3229 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3229 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................3229 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3230 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................3230 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................3231 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3233 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................3236 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — Health — Vote 32 .........................................................................3239 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 .......................................................................................................3239 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — Executive Council — Vote 10......................................................3240 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 ...................................................................................................3240 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization — Vote 1 .............3240 
 Further Estimates — Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 ...........................................................................................................3241 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations — Vote 30................................................................................................3241 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Agriculture and Food — Vote 146 ..................................3241 
 General Revenue Fund — Government Relations — Vote 30................................................................................................3241 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 ........................................................................................................................3241 
 General Revenue Fund — Supplementary Estimates — Learning — Vote 5.......................................................................3242 
 Further Estimates — Learning — Vote 5 ................................................................................................................................3242 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities — Learning — Vote 169 .......................................................3242 
 General Revenue Fund — Lending and Investing Activities 
 Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation — Vote 170 ..............................................................................................3242 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................3243 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................3243 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




