

















































Hansard: April 27, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 100A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 27, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2713 
 April 27, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to present a petition to the Assembly. 
And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition comes and is raised in regards to the contract of 
Jim Fergusson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I present a similar petition 
outlining the concerns of people with the consulting contract 
provided to the former CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the city 
of Saskatoon proper. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
on behalf of staff, participants, and families of the Wheatland 
Regional Centre and other like centres across the province that 
provide services for individuals with disabilities. Mr. Speaker, 
they are concerned about a human resources plan that they have 
presented to the government. And the prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly will please consider implementing the 
minimum compensation recommendations for staff 
members who support people with disabilities as outlined 
in SARC’s human resources plan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition, all 

from the community of Beechy, and I’m pleased to present it on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the contract for Jim Fergusson, and the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these signatures on this petition come from people 
in Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the state of health care in 
our constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that facilities providing 
health care services in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy are not closed or further downsized. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville and 
Bengough. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition to cancel the consulting contract 
of the former CEO of the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, 
Jim Fergusson. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 

 
The petitioners today reside in Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that are calling on the government to repair and 
resurface Highway 15 from the junction of Highway 11 east to 
the junction of Highway No. 2. 
 



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2005 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that this portion of 15 
Highway be repaired and resurfaced immediately so as 
remove the safety hazards to all motorists who rely on this 
vital road for transportation and economic purposes. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from the town of Hanley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and Grandora. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of the citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 
contract, the consulting contract for former CEO, Jim 
Fergusson, of Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the most excellent constituents of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition about the excessive contract of CEO Jim 
Fergusson in Saskatoon. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 
Signed by the people of Martensville and Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise too regarding the growing 
outrage over the contract of Jim Fergusson. I’ll read the prayer 
for relief, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by Saskatoon residents from 
a number seats and constituencies that are now held by the NDP 
[New Democratic Party], at least for the time being. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned with the 
consulting contract that was given to the former CEO of the 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the consulting contract 
is immediately terminated. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning reintroduction of recycling of 
plastics within the Carlton Trail Regional Authority; 
 
A petition concerning compensation recommendations for 
staff members who support people with disabilities 
outlined in SARC’s human resource plan — that’s 
sessional paper 798; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 72, 96, 107, 637, 639, 666, and 716. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



April 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 105 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance: how much is SGI budgeting for 
advertising the safe driving recognition program in the 
year 2005? 
 

And I have similar questions for the previous three years. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 105 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: does the department currently 
provide tax incentives or tax refunds to homeowners for 
the installation of geothermal heating and cooling 
systems? If so, how much has been paid out through this 
incentive program? 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that on day 105 I will ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: for the year 
2005, how many staff members in the Department of 
Industry and Resources were working on the issue of the 
Kyoto accord and its impact on the province of 
Saskatchewan? If these employees were not employed 
strictly for this purpose, what percentage of their time was 
spent on developing a plan to help Saskatchewan meet its 
Kyoto objectives? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for 2004, 2003, 2002. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also have a similar set of questions to the 
Minister of Environment, the Minister of Agriculture, and the 
Minister Responsible for SPMC [Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation]. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you a couple 
of young men who I think exemplify why we are so fond of 
saying here that the world needs a little more Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery with ministerial assistant, 
Dan Drackett, are Ryan Anderson. Ryan who is a constituent of 
mine and a fourth year student at the University of Regina 
where he’s majoring in sports administration. Ryan is a 
long-time member of the university of Rams football club and 

son of a couple of long time friends of mine as well, Don and 
Bev. Seated with Ryan is Kris Gendall, and Kris’s family are up 
behind Kris. 
 
Kris, is also from Regina, is completing his senior year at St. 
Francis Xavier University in Antigonish, Nova Scotia where 
among many other activities, including volunteering at the 
campus radio station, he’s majoring in chemistry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two young men could be spending their 
summer in many different ways, but instead they have chosen to 
use it to work with the Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan to 
raise awareness about that disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me today in 
welcoming Kris and his family, and Ryan to this Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated 
in your gallery are four individuals that I’d like to introduce to 
all members in the Legislative Assembly. They are Mary Ann 
McFadyen, Warren Michelson, Larry Seiferling, and Don 
Richardson. All four of these individuals represent the 
Saskatchewan Business Council. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to the 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Minister 
Responsible for Industry and Resources in our province, I’d like 
to join the official opposition in acknowledging and welcoming 
the members of the Business Council and we certainly value 
their input. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the members today, I’d like to introduce 
two very good friends of mine. Esther and George Haas, who 
farm along the Manitoba-Saskatchewan border, are in town on 
business and getting ready to do their spring seeding. So I 
would ask all members to welcome them here today and wish 
them the best of luck with their spring seeding. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2005 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
Administrative Professionals Day, a day set aside to express our 
gratitude for the hard work and invaluable contributions that 
administrative professionals provide on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, behind every successful office there is an efficient 
and dedicated staff . . . of administrative support staff. In 
today’s high speed, demanding, and technical world the role of 
the administrative professional is ever-changing and becoming 
increasingly dynamic. 
 
Aside from handling the mail, answering telephones, writing 
letters, and sending emails and faxes, administrative 
professionals play an essential role in public relations. Whether 
they’re greeting our constituents over the phone or in person, or 
maintaining a solid working relationship with our colleagues 
and various organizations and institutions, our administrative 
professionals are the backbone of our offices. They ensure that 
the day-to-day business runs smoothly, and quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, we couldn’t function without them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, I take this opportunity 
to acknowledge the hard work of all administrative 
professionals throughout the province and commend them for 
their tireless efforts and commitment. Thank you to all of our 
constituency assistants and the administrative professionals in 
our caucus office, Jannet, Margaret, and Gail. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too today would 
like to join in the recognition of the Administrative 
Professionals Day. It is the recognition of the terrific work that 
all our administrative professionals do. 
 
Recognition of this day was started in 1952, and 53 years later 
our administrative professionals still file papers, conduct 
research, produce reports, and get us to our appointments. 
 
But they do much more than that, Mr. Speaker. They are often 
the glue that holds a busy office together. Without them, offices 
cannot function. Sometimes they are unappreciated, but their 
work is invaluable. They are the very first person you see when 
you walk into your office in the morning. They are always there 
with a smile, professional attitude, and a great work ethic. 
 
I want to thank our two very capable professionals in our office, 
Sylvie Toffan and Joanne Gilewicz, and my constituency 
assistant, Whitney Friesen, for their fantastic and much needed 
work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Gearing Up for Alzheimer’s Disease 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As our Minister of 
Ag and Food has already mentioned, in only a few days two 
young men from Saskatchewan, Ryan Anderson and Kris 
Gendall, will embark on a bicycle tour across Canada to create 
awareness about Alzheimer’s disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Gearing Up for Alzheimer’s Disease tour will 
begin in Victoria on May 1, and is expected to end three months 
later in St. John’s, Newfoundland. However, even before they 
begin their journey, Ryan and Kris hope to raise $5,000 to 
support a summer student scholarship at the University of 
Saskatchewan’s neuropsychiatry research unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are currently 18,000 people in Saskatchewan 
suffering from Alzheimer’s disease or a related disorder, and 
the problem is growing. That’s why these young men believe 
that the work being done at the neuropsychiatry research unit is 
so important. 
 
Under the direction of Dr. Peter Yu, it is hoped that this 
research could one day lead to the development of a diagnostic 
tool for Alzheimer’s disease and to a treatment that could 
prevent memory loss and other debilitating symptoms. 
 
The summer student scholarship will not only contribute 
significantly to Dr. Yu’s research, but will also provide a 
promising science student with the opportunity to gain valuable 
research experience while attending university. 
 
I invite all members of the Assembly to join me in wishing Kris 
Gendall and Ryan Anderson a safe journey and in commending 
them for their compassion and obvious commitment to helping 
those less fortunate than themselves. 
 
100 years of heart is our centennial theme, Mr. Speaker. The 
task that these two young men have set for themselves here at 
the beginning of our second century proves that will be as true 
in our second 100 years as it was in our first. Congratulations to 
both. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

National Medical Laboratory Week 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
is National Medical Laboratory Week. It’s a week where we 
recognize the valuable contribution of hard-working 
technologists and medical lab professionals, making our health 
care system work. 
 
From hospitals to community health clinics, lab techs are on the 
front lines of health care service delivery. These dedicated 
professionals work to detect and control disease and infection. 
In addition to their work on the front lines, medical lab 
professionals contribute their knowledge and expertise to the 
research that is crucial to the diagnosis and treatment of disease. 
 
Medical lab professionals are the third largest group of medical 



April 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

care professionals in the country. They play a crucial role in our 
health care system as indicated by the fact that 85 per cent of 
physicians’ diagnosis and treatment decisions are based on 
laboratory test results. 
 
Given the important role that these professionals play in 
Saskatchewan’s health care system, it is only fair that they have 
the right to determine which union best represents their 
interests. That is the choice that they no longer have or will be 
able to make because of this government. 
 
And so today we recognize the National Medical Laboratory 
Week. And I would once again ask this government to allow 
MLTs [medical laboratory technologist] to exercise the same 
freedoms as other unionized people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Receives 12th Credit Rating Upgrade 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, here’s some very 
good news for the province of Saskatchewan that we won’t be 
hearing from the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, the Dominion 
Bond Rating Service has recently boosted Saskatchewan’s 
long-term debt ranking from A to A high. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — This is the 12th, this is the 12th consecutive 
credit rating increase the province has received since 1991 and 
the third credit upgrade under the leadership of this Premier. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it comes less than a month after 
Saskatchewan posted its 12th consecutive budget — balanced 
budget, pardon me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Bond Rating Service 
press release says the upgrade reflects the significant 
improvement in the province’s debt-to-GDP [gross domestic 
product] ratio, supported, and I quote: 
 

. . . by the Province’s sound fiscal management, as 
highlighted by the solid cumulative budget surplus over 
the past five years and below average spending growth . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy has been recovering 
for years from the last time right-wing ideologues — like the 
members opposite — got hold of the budget. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here we are at the beginning of our second 
century and the future is bright. The economy is performing 
extremely well. March was our 12th straight month of record 
high job numbers, and we have the second lowest rate of 
unemployment in the country. All very good news, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So why is the opposition silent, Mr. Speaker? Because, Mr. 
Speaker, to put it plainly and simply, good news for the people 
of Saskatchewan is bad news for the party opposite. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Federal NDP-Liberal Budget Agreement 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This must be 
from the twilight zone, so tell me it’s not true. I had this 
nightmare that I saw the following ad on eBay: For sale — 
conscience of the New Democratic Party of Canada. Starting 
bid — 4.6 billion Canadian. Closing date — May 19, 2005. 
Bidders — one. Bidder — Paul. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess what Sir Robert Walpole said must be 
true. Every man has his price. Jack Layton and the entire NDP 
are prepared to sell their soul to those responsible for the ad 
scam sponsorship scandal. You have to keep in mind that every 
NDP in Saskatchewan is a member of Jack Layton’s sellout 
team, as they all hold federal NDP memberships. 
 
I guess it should not be a surprise, as this NDP government 
bought Jim Melenchuk and his caucus. The NDP paid a lot less 
but then again Melenchuk only advertised on the NDP’s failed 
on-line auction, Clickabid. But Clickabid is now out of business 
because Jim Melenchuk and his caucus was one of the very few 
sales they made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, please tell me this is a nightmare, only a dream, 
that the NDP have abandoned their self-proclaimed moral high 
ground to support corruption. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, on a less bitter note, Mr. 
Speaker, each year the Saskatchewan Literacy Network honours 
those people in our province who have demonstrated a spirit of 
commitment to literacy and learning. This year five people and 
groups were recognized for their . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
year five people and groups were recognized by the 
Saskatchewan Literacy Network for their contributions and 
personal achievements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, literacy affects every part of our lives and means 
much more than just writing and reading. It influences our 
health and self-being, our sense of personal security, and our 
participation in our communities and in society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s recipients of the 2005 Literacy Awards 
of Merit are, in the professional category, Sally Greenough, 
who has been a tireless advocate for adult literacy education. In 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2005 

the program/project category the winner was Saskatoon Public 
Schools’ Parents Matter project. 
 
The Prince Albert Raiders won the corporate award for their 
involvement in the Read With the Raiders program, a reading 
club that brings hockey players and their young fans together to 
play word games, read stories, and of course sign autographs. 
And the two Learner Literacy Awards went to Maritza Tello 
and Lori Wilson for overcoming significant challenges in 
learning to read. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating this 
year’s nominees and winners for their efforts and achievements, 
and in acknowledging the many organizations that have 
contributed to the advancement of literacy and learning in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, later today I will be introducing a 
Bill designed solely with the intent to protect and assess the 
children of our province who are abusing drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, addiction is an illness. We must protect children 
with this illness. My question to this government is simple. Will 
you support this Bill? Mr. Speaker, will this NDP government 
support the Bill we are introducing today that attempts to save 
our children from a life of drug addiction? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I will say that there is no question that families are 
sending a clear message that they want a stronger ability to 
intervene when their children are experiencing addiction 
problems. And I would say that we agree in principle with the 
notion that we need to take stronger action in this area. 
 
I have had this Act since 1:30 and I still have not had a chance 
to review it. I want to see to what degree it’s similar to 
provisions we have in The Child and Family Services Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that this government has 
been listening to the buzz that’s surrounding this Bill and the 
discussion around it, and I know that they’ve been listening to 
families that are desperate. Even the mayor of Regina said 
today that he thinks this Bill will help. 
 

In Alberta all the parties came forward to provide parents with 
the legal tools they needed right away to help their children. I’m 
asking that this government sets aside politics, it sets aside 
process, set aside surveys and studies and legalese and 
everything else you have in front of you, and think about 
children. Will this government support this Bill today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — First of all I’d like to just correct one 
bit of information and that’s that Alberta is not implementing 
this Bill immediately. Alberta will not be bringing this Bill into 
force until July ’06. And I would say that the reason for that is 
there’s many things that have to be determined within a 
comprehensive Bill like this. 
 
And so I will say that we will act; we will act in a timely way. I 
need to look at the Act and I need to compare it to The Child 
and Family Services Act because I think we have some similar 
provisions that we could build on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Privacy Issues Related to Cancer Screening Program 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Privacy Commissioner, Gary Dickson, has tabled his report 
on the prevention program for cervical cancer. I want to make it 
perfectly clear, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party 
supports prevention initiatives for cancer. However, many 
women in this province are upset with how the health 
information prevention program collects and uses their private 
health information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner office has received 
over 100 complaints. Some women now are choosing not to 
even have Pap tests because there is no guarantee their privacy 
is being respected. Gary Dickson recommends that women have 
an opt-out provision like Manitoba that complies with national 
standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he agree today to provide 
such an opt-out provision for women in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner 
has provided valuable information about the legislation, about 
the operation of this particular program which provides very 
good screening to deal with something that kills people. And 
we’re very careful to make sure that we work with that. 
 
He has made some suggestions around changing the 
information and the opt-out program, and we’re supportive of 
putting something into place that will work that way. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll continue to take the good advice we’ve got here 
and make sure that we work with the professionals who are 
working in this field. 



April 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Privacy Commissioner says that the agency needs to do a 
better job of communicating with women, and quote: 
 

[that] . . . the degree of transparency should be higher than 
would be the case for many other kinds of personal health 
information. 
 

Mr. Dickson says that the agency needs to take further steps to 
minimize the risk of access by unauthorized persons to the Pap 
test results including, he says, it is not prudent to permit more 
than 70 different government institutions including such diverse 
organizations as SaskTel, the Milk Control Board, the Wascana 
Centre Authority, an opportunity to use or disclose personal 
health information without consent. Mr. Speaker, many women 
have said unless these deficiencies are corrected, they will no 
longer go for Pap tests. How does this help the prevention of 
cervical cancer? 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Will the minister commit to 
correcting these deficiencies today, so that having a screening 
program in place can give the women of this province trust? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the problems identified by 
the Privacy Commissioner will be corrected and they will be 
corrected as soon as possible. Some of the issues have already 
been starting to be addressed. And we will work with the 
organization to make sure that the information is protected. 
They need to comply with the law of Saskatchewan. Those 
areas where they’re not complying, we’ll make sure they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Minister of 
Labour said she tried to consult on Bill No. 87. She told this 
Assembly, and I’m quoting from page no. 2613 of April 21 
Hansard: 
 

There were three meetings that were set up and three 
meetings that were cancelled by the representative of the 
Business Council. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in a letter dated April 22, 2005, the representatives 
of the Business Council said at no time did the council request 
and then cancel three meetings. Mr. Speaker, why did the 
Minister of Labour provide this inaccurate information to the 
House? 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, at the initial meeting that 
we had with the Business Council, the spokesperson for the 
council was Ms. Pollon. Ms. Pollon took the lead in the 
meeting, Ms. Pollon introduced the members of the Business 
Council. Ms. Pollon spoke for the Business Council after in the 
meeting. She spoke to the media. 
 
So I assumed by that . . . Now if that was incorrect, I make 
apologies. But, Mr. Speaker, the meetings had been set by Ms. 
Pollon. She had phoned my office, set up three meetings — all 
of which have been cancelled over that period of time. I 
assumed that by her being the spokesperson initially for the 
Business Council, that that’s whom she was continuing to speak 
for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
letter dated April 22, 2005 to the Minister of Labour, signed by 
officials of the Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices 
Association, by a member of the Retail Council of Canada, and 
by a member of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, they 
state emphatically that they were not consulted on meetings and 
did not attend. 
 
Those representatives of the Business Council are here this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister start down the road 
towards co-operation? Will the minister live up to her 
government’s commitment and begin consulting with everyone 
on Bill No. 87? And will she apologize for her earlier 
comments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, very seldom you will go 
into a meeting with an organization when they don’t take the 
opportunity to address all issues that are on the table or within 
their realm of interest. Whether it is a meeting with the chamber 
or the Business Council, it will always encompass all issues that 
are currently either on the table, in the works, or being projected 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been very open to meet with all 
stakeholders when it comes to labour legislation and anything 
that is being put forward by the Department of Labour. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister has indicated her quotes of Marilyn Braun-Pollon, the 
director of CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business]. And I want to quote from a letter that she sent to the 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2005 

hon. minister on April 22, and it says this: 
 

It is important to state that CFIB did not make 3 separate 
meeting requests with your office. The first scheduled 
meeting with your office was on December 9th, 2004 in 
order to discuss a number of labour issues. However, it 
turned out that your office was willing to meet with 
members of the Saskatchewan Business Council the 
evening of December 9th. Out of respect for your time and 
recognizing your busy schedule, CFIB thought it best to 
forgo our meeting with your office and instead meet later 
in the day . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the information that’s been provided to this 
minister who stands in this House and says that, I did consult, I 
talked to people. And in fact there was no opportunity for 
consultation. Will the minister go back to a policy that involves 
all employers and consult on Bill No. 87? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit . . . I’m left a 
little bit aghast here, Mr. Speaker. There was a meeting set in 
the morning; it was cancelled. It was set up not by the CFIB, 
not by the Business Council, but it was cancelled because we 
were having a meeting later in the evening. Mr. Speaker, I met; 
I didn’t meet — I mean I’m not sure what the member is saying 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been three meetings established, set up 
with my office, all which were cancelled by outside parties. I 
had met with the Saskatchewan Business Council 
representatives on the one evening. We had a very lengthy 
discussion. Mr. Speaker, I will repeat again, I’m very open to 
meeting with stakeholders; have been consistently doing that 
over the years that I have held this portfolio. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I will continue to meet with stakeholders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important for the public in general to understand the time frame. 
These Bills were introduced in the month of November. We’re 
talking about consultation that the minister wanted in the 
months of December and January. Consultation on the draft of a 
Bill should have occurred long before the month of November. 
Can the minister identify what she did? 
 
There’s another unfulfilled promise here, Mr. Speaker. Last 
week the Minister of Labour said she had five years to repeal 
section 13.4. On this side of the House we’re a bit more 
efficient. We have a Bill that repeals section 13.4 of The Trade 
Union Act. Why not act in good faith, Mr. Speaker? Business 
leaders are here today. Will this minister extend the olive 
branch? Will the Minister of Labour support our Bill to repeal 
section 13.4 of The Labour Standards Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, how quickly the 
opposition forgets. It wasn’t just a short number of days ago the 
member opposite was standing and defending workers and 
workers’ rights across this province, almost singing “Solidarity 
Forever,” Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, here he is. 
 
But there is one thing, Mr. Speaker, that I do take offence to. 
And that is when the member opposite wishes to quote me, I 
wish he would stick to the facts and be accurate. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, he wants to quote out of Hansard. And, Mr. Speaker, 
what I said is that we have two to three years left in our term 
and, Mr. Speaker, we are normally here in the House until the 
end of June, into July. We still have two months left in this 
session. And, Mr. Speaker, the member should read Hansard 
and be accurate, please, with his details and stick to the facts. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will keep our word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Compensation for Saskatoon Health Authority 
Management 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this week the Minister of Health defended paying Jim 
Fergusson, the former CEO of the Saskatoon Health District, 
$13,000 a month for a bit of advice. He said that was okay. 
 
Let’s get this straight. Mr. Fergusson retires and then gets a 
severance package worth over $66,000. Let alone does he get a 
$66,000 severance package, he also gets a pension. So you 
combine that now with his new, lucrative contract worth 
$13,000 a month for advice. Sounds a little bit like 
triple-dipping to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister now has had a few days to think about it. Does he 
really believe that it’s appropriate to pay the former CEO, the 
NDP Jim Fergusson $160,000 a year for a little bit of advice? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think this line of 
questioning runs in a long line that we get from that opposition 
of attacking our senior leaders in our health care system, our 
education system, right across the government and attacking 
them for doing a good job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fergusson worked for many years for the 
predecessors to the Saskatoon Health Authority. When he ended 
up leaving that job, he worked with the board and with his 
lawyers and with others to negotiate a easing out from that 
particular job and, Mr. Speaker, that was arranged through the 
Saskatoon Health Authority. They did it because they valued 
his experience as somebody who could provide advice as this 
past year has transpired. And, Mr. Speaker, the transition to the 
new CEO is going well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that answer is absolutely 
ludicrous. We are not attacking Jim Fergusson for the salary 
that he’s getting. We’re attacking this government for accepting 
$166,000 salary for one year for a little bit of advice, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what we are talking. 
 
But you know, like if John Gomery said — from the Gomery 
Commission which is going on in Ottawa that this thing draws a 
little parallel to — if you can get the job, good for you. And 
that’s exactly what this government is thinking. A former NDP 
policy decision maker getting a soft landing from this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister stand up and justify their priorities by paying 
$13,000 a month when the health care system needs much more 
improvement, whether it’s health care professionals or 
equipment? How can he justify that expenditure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have the Conservative 
Party opposite saying one thing one day and something the 
next. Yesterday the member from Humboldt was talking about 
how you have to pay good dollars to get good advice for senior 
leaders in our government. Today we have somebody attacking 
somebody who’s provided good leadership in the Saskatoon 
Health Authority over many, many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about employment contracts that are 
negotiated between good leaders and their boards. We know the 
history of the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and the 
George Hill contract with SaskPower prior to ’91. Mr. Speaker, 
there are a whole number of things that happened at that point 
which we in this province will never let happen again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, health care workers around 
this province are exacerbated by this government and its 
priorities, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what one health care worker at 
the ICU [intensive care unit] unit of the Saskatoon hospital said. 
Here’s what she had to say: 
 

There are many things that we need in our unit to do our 
job properly and look after . . . [the] patients . . . [safety]. 
We do not have . . . simple blood pressure cuff . . . [at] 
each of . . . [the] bedsides. At times we do not [even] have 
. . . sterile scissors or forceps . . . Beds remain closed in 
our hospital while patients wait overnight in the ER on 
stretchers . . . Why is the district not spending money on 
hiring . . . nursing staff . . . [for] these beds . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, last year the Saskatoon Health District had to 
cancel surgeries throughout the hospital because it didn’t have 
the personnel. But this government has the money to support an 

NDP former policy-maker on a soft retirement package. Is that 
the priorities of this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the 
members of that Conservative Party exasperate all of the people 
of Saskatchewan for the thinness of their issues that they raise 
in this House. Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a contract 
between a board and a senior executive who provided good 
service over a long period of time. 
 
I ask the members opposite: do you still have that list of civil 
servants that you’re going to be severing at some point if you 
ever got into power? Mr. Speaker, are you in favour of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
I’d ask the . . . I’d ask for order first. Order. I’d ask the minister 
to address all his remarks through the Chair. Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it appears today that we 
have now found out that my legal friend, the new colleague 
across the way, is the keeper of the hit list. We encourage him 
to provide those details to us all. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Investment in Minds Eye Entertainment 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Kevin DeWalt is the CEO of 
Minds Eye Entertainment and he seems to be a very, very 
confident man. Prior to even consulting with the Department of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation, Mr. DeWalt included an extra 
half a million dollars in his budget for the Tommy Douglas 
movie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was Mr. DeWalt so confident that he would 
get the extra money? Who promised that money to Mr. 
DeWalt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, once again the facts say one 
thing and the opposition party says another. The fact is that due 
diligence was done on this story, the story about Tommy 
Douglas. And the fact is that he is a great Saskatchewan citizen 
and Mr. DeWalt recognized that fact. And based on that, he is 
doing a story on Tommy Douglas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the minister isn’t 
willing to actually answer the question, but there is one question 
that we can answer for her. And that is, who signed off on 
giving an extra $614,000 to Minds Eye for the Tommy Douglas 
movie? Whose signature, Mr. Speaker, is on that order of 
council? Who took the unprecedented action of handing over 
the money that was in the budget even before the producers had 
started to talk with the department? Why, Mr. Speaker, it’s none 
other than the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, her . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Allow the question 
to be put. Member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, her officials said, don’t do it. 
Her officials said it was part of a consistent pattern of 
last-minute assistance that was unhealthy to the industry. Her 
officials said that there was no policy rationale for the decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister give Minds Eye Pictures the 
money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I will just take the answer from 
the minister. Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that this project 
is resulting in all kinds of economic opportunities for the young 
people of this province and one of those communities is 
Gravelbourg. Seven million of the $8 million from this project 
is being spent in Saskatchewan and most of those are in rural 
Saskatchewan. The Government of Saskatchewan is very proud 
to have invested in this project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, only this government would be 
proud of losing 7 million taxpayers’ dollars. Only this 
government would call that a success story. Outside of this 
Assembly yesterday the minister said that the due diligence had 
been done by her department. Then the minister said that it was 
done by the partners, Telefilm Canada and the CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation]. After that the minister said this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please 
members. The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, after all that the minister said 
that the centennial office had done its own due diligence. Can 
the minister inform this House today which story she would like 

to use? Can she commit to tabling all of the information 
prepared in support of paying the extra money for the Tommy 
Douglas movie? Can the minister even table one document, one 
form, one piece of advice that she received that said that paying 
the extra money was a good idea? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that there was 
due diligence done on this project. It was reviewed. And 
funding for The Tommy Douglas Story is a one-time grant 
through the centennial office that provides opportunity for us to 
recognize one of the greatest Canadians today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that her own 
department recommended against it. The facts are that they said 
it would be harmful to Minds Eye as well as the industry as a 
whole. The facts are that her department is responsible for the 
film industry. So if she has the facts, we’re asking her to table 
anything — one piece of information that was advice saying it 
was a good idea; have her table anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say again 
that the facts remain that due diligence was done on this 
proposal. And based on that I would like to continue adding that 
the economic spinoffs as a result of these . . . The Tommy 
Douglas Story builds on the culture of Saskatchewan. And that 
is something that is appropriate and timely to tell during our 
centennial, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 96 — The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am very pleased to move the long-awaited Bill No. 96, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 and that 
it be now introduced and read for a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 96, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



April 27, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 97 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Consequential Amendment Act, 2005/Loi de 2005 
sur une modification corrélative découlant de la loi intitulée 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Although not quite as long awaited, 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 97, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 97, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 206 — The Labour Standards 
(Repeal of Government Directed Hours) Amendment Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 206, The Labour Standards (Repeal of 
Government Directed Hours) Amendment Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly that Bill 206, The Labour Standards (Repeal of 
Government Directed Hours) Amendment Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 116 — The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 116, 
The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 116, The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 207 — The Protection of Children 
Abusing Drugs Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 207, An Act 
providing for the Protection and Assessment of Children who 
are Abusing Drugs be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena that Bill No. 207, The Protection of 
Children Abusing Drugs Act be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2005 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave, right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena has 
requested leave for second reading of Bill 207, for 207, right 
now. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. When shall the 
Bill be read a second time? Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
208, The Tommy Douglas Day Act, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone that Bill 208, The Tommy Douglas Day Act, be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to put on 
the record that earlier today I have tabled the investigation 
report H2005-002 from the Saskatchewan Information and 
Privacy Commissioner dated April 27, 2005. I also at this time 
wish to table the 36th annual report for the year 2004 of the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Saskatchewan 
branch. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Comments Regarding Member’s Remarks 
 
The Speaker: — I also, before orders of the day, wish to refer 
back to a statement that was made by the member for 
Cannington, who in his remarks I believe crossed the line in 
accusing a former member and this government . . . a former 
member and specific members on this side of wrongdoing with 
respect to Mr. Melenchuk. And I would ask the member for 
Cannington to withdraw the statement. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — I withdraw that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member and go ahead with 
government orders. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the 
meetings of the Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure 
Policy Field Committee and the Economy Policy Field 
Committee, I move the House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:18.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2713 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2713 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2713 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2713 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2713 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2713 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2713 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2714 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2714 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2714 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2714 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2714 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2714 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2715 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2715 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2715 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2715 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2715 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2715 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2715 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Administrative Professionals Day 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2716 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2716 
 Gearing Up for Alzheimer’s Disease 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2716 
 National Medical Laboratory Week 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2716 
 Saskatchewan Receives 12th Credit Rating Upgrade 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2717 
 Federal NDP-Liberal Budget Agreement 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2717 
 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2717 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2718 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2718 
 Privacy Issues Related to Cancer Screening Program 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2718 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2718 
 Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2719 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2719 
 Compensation for Saskatoon Health Authority Management 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2720 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2720 
 Investment in Minds Eye Entertainment 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2721 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2721 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 96 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2005 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2722 
 Bill No. 97 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 sur une modification corrélative découlant de la loi intitulée The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Act, 2005 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2723 
 



 

 Bill No. 206 — The Labour Standards (Repeal of Government Directed Hours) Amendment Act 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2723 
 Bill No. 116 — The Osteopathic Practice Repeal Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2723 
 Bill No. 207 — The Protection of Children Abusing Drugs Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2723 
 Bill No. 208 — The Tommy Douglas Day Act 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2724 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2724 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Comments Regarding Member’s Remarks 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2724 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2724 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




