















































Hansard: March 23, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 79A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 23, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2183 
 March 23, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
constituents of Cypress Hills are very concerned about the 
ramifications of forced amalgamation. I present this petition on 
their behalf: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Frontier, Gull Lake, Hazlet, Tompkins, and 
Piapot. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the communities of Muenster, 
Drake, Saskatoon, and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
constituents who are concerned about the deficiency in 
residential support offered to people in Swift Current with 
long-term disabilities. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today all the petitioners are from the great city of 

Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to present a 
petition from people who are concerned about the use of crystal 
meth: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal meth education, prevention, enforcement, and 
treatment. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Porcupine 
Plain and Carragana. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition where people express their consternation over forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of communities represented on 
this petition. They include Rosetown, Beechy, Herschel, 
Ruthilda, and Elrose. And I’m pleased to present this petition 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Moose 
Jaw and Spring Valley. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the Claybank Brick Plant. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Leduc, 
Alberta; Moose Jaw, as well as St. Albert, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
concerned about the growing problem of crystal meth. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the folks from Porcupine 
Plain. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
government’s lack of commitment to the Humboldt hospital. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill its commitment to the people 
of Humboldt and area and provide the funding necessary 
for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the community of Watson. I’m proud to present on their 
behalf. 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens in the Humboldt area who are concerned 
with the lack of commitment by the government for funding for 
the new hospital and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area and provide the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Cudworth and 
Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of parents in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs, regarding a much 
needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today live on Kenderdine Road, Wickenden 
Crescent, Guenter, Wright, and Bentham crescents in northeast 
Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the effect 
that the TransGas Asquith natural gas storage project will have 
on the quantity and the quality of their water, and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signed by the citizens of Grandora. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to able to present a petition on behalf of citizens that are 
concerned about the negative effect that the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project is having on their water supplies and 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas and consider alternative 
water supplies for the project. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Vanscoy and Grandora. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received: 
 

A petition concerning a strategy to deal with crystal 
methamphetamine; that’s sessional paper no. 720. 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 180, 637, 715, 716, and 718. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 84 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Provincial Secretary: can the Provincial Secretary 
identify the amount the provincial government has spent to 
date on print commercials promoting this province’s 
centennial and radio commercials promoting the 
province’s centennial? 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 84 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: is Highway 35 south of 
Weyburn to the US border part of the 2005 spring 
construction project for the Department of Highways and 
Transportation; when will the construction be started; what 
section of Highway 35 will be included in the project; 
what type of work will the project include; and what is the 
cost of the project? 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 84 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in the 2005-2006 budget, how 
much money is allocated for the construction of the new 
St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in Humboldt? 
 

And in addition, Mr. Speaker, I shall ask: 
 

The Minister of Health: when is the construction of a new 
hospital in Humboldt scheduled to begin? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — I would just like to take a moment on behalf 
of the Assembly to welcome all of the guests that we have here 
today. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Mission to Mexico Volunteers Recognized 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked 
about the great work done by volunteers here in Saskatchewan, 
but 35 volunteers from the Rosetown-Elrose constituency didn’t 
stop volunteering at the Saskatchewan border. In fact their 
volunteer effort carried them across two international 
boundaries. 
 
They called their effort, Mission to Mexico. Their numbers 
included grandparents and teens, men and women, and 
represented several different churches from the communities of 
Rosetown, Milden, Beechy, and Lucky Lake — plus two 
imports from Saskatoon. 
 
After some successful fundraising, they boarded a bus on 
February 11 and rode non-stop to Mexico where, in the space of 
one week, they constructed a 20 foot by 24 foot home for a 
mother and her two adult children. One child has a heart 
condition and the other has a severe mental disability. Prior to 
moving into their new home, the family dwelling was a shack 
constructed from cardboard and other scraps, with only a dirt 
floor. Apparently it was a very emotional day when the new 
furnished home was presented to the Mexican family, fully paid 
for and constructed by Saskatchewan volunteers. 
 
After speaking with many members of the team, they all said 
that they would certainly jump at an opportunity to repeat the 
effort. I know all members of this Assembly will join me in 
thanking the 35 volunteers with their far-sighted vision and for 
showing remarkable dedication and compassion. We say well 
done and thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

Impact of Research Parks on Saskatchewan’s Economy 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, according to a recent independent 
study, Innovation Place and the Regina Research Park have had 
a significant impact on Saskatchewan’s economy. Together, 
they contributed half a billion dollars to the provincial economy 
in 2004 and created more than 6,000 full-time jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon’s Innovation Place — located in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland — has demonstrated 
remarkable growth and continues to strengthen the economy 
through job creation and expenditures on goods and services. 
 
The tenants of Innovation Place contributed over $180 million 
to the economy of Saskatoon last year, and over $260 million to 
the provincial economy. 
 
In Regina, the Research Park had a combined impact of more 
than $400 million on the economy of the Queen City and the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main focus at the Regina Research Park is 
environmental sciences, petroleum technology, and information 
technology. Innovation Place has fostered increased knowledge 
in the areas of agriculture, information technologies, resources, 
and the life sciences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of the companies at the research parks 
has bolstered the science and technology sector, and helps move 
important discoveries into the marketplace. 
 
We’re very proud of the performance of both Innovation Place 
and the Regina Research Park, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure all 
members will join me in commending them on their 
contributions and continued success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just like to mention to all of our 
special guests that their presence is very welcome. However, I 
would ask that they not intervene in any way in the 
proceedings. Thank you very much. 
 
I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Funding for Cypress Health Region 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to raise the 
concerns of doctors in Swift Current. In a letter to the editor 
published in the Regina Leader-Post on March 3, Dr. Kielly, 
Dr. Gatzke, and Dr. DeKlerk talked about the situation at the 
emergency room at the Cypress Regional Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hospital in Swift Current does not have a 
24-hour, on-site emergency room physician, despite the fact 
that it’s deemed a regional facility that serves 40,000 people. At 
present local doctors are on call during daytime hours for their 
patients in the case of an emergency. And at night doctors 
provide the service on a shared rotation basis. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the doctors write in their letter, quote: 
 

True emergency patients stand the very real risk of 
receiving delayed care, clinic patients also face delays 
which not only affect their schedules, but also undoubtedly 
put some at risk because of not receiving care in a timely 
fashion. 
 

Mr. Speaker, local doctors have been lobbying for a change to 
this situation at the emergency room for almost two years now. 
They’ve also lobbied for a very simple solution; that the 
provincial government provide funding to the Cypress Health 
Region so that the hospital can have an on-site emergency room 
physician at all times, similar to other regional facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge Dr. Kielly, Dr. 
Gatzke, and Dr. DeKlerk for speaking out on this issue. And I 
would ask the Minister of Health to give serious consideration 
to providing a funding arrangement to the Cypress Health 
Region similar to what is in place at other regional facilities. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon Student Co-Hosts CBC Radio Program 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Jennifer Wang, a 
student at Walter Murray Collegiate in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Eastview was recently chosen from 150 teenagers 
across Canada to co-host a nationally syndicated CBC Radio 
show, As It Happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in her 90-second, on-air audition, Jennifer showed 
compassion, heart, and relevancy, and impressed the program’s 
listeners who called in to vote for her. One caller said, quote, “If 
this is the voice of the future of this country, we don’t have 
much to worry about.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jennifer is a talented young woman. She is a 
cross-country runner, an accomplished pianist, a member of the 
human rights club, and on the debate team at Walter Murray 
Collegiate. She also sings in the choir, plays flute, and 
volunteers with Kids Help Phone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Monday night, listeners tuned in to hear 
Jennifer co-host the radio show. The program covered various 
issues ranging from a science project that explores the physical 
perils of Irish dancing, to the story of a group of teenagers 
helping undo the damage of Hurricane Ivan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jennifer asked tough questions posed by teens 
across the country, and is an excellent role model for youth who 
want to make a difference in the world. She is passionate about 
the influence and power that young people can have and 
encourages her peers to become involved in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
acknowledging Jennifer’s achievements and in congratulating 
her on the excellent job she did as co-host of the CBC’s As It 
Happens. I wish her the best of luck in her future endeavours. 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Hospitals of Regina Foundation 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Hospitals of 
Regina Foundation worked for the good of us all. More than 
465,000 people in southern Saskatchewan rely on the Regina 
General Hospital, the Pasqua Hospital, and the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre for specialized medical care. 
 
In 1987 a group of community-minded leaders joined together 
to form the Hospitals of Regina Foundation. It was their 
foresight that formed this organization. And they felt that there 
was a huge need for it because they felt the people of southern 
Saskatchewan deserved the best health care available, and that 
included access to state-of-the-art, life-saving medical 
equipment. 
 
Since its formation, the foundation has become one of 
Saskatchewan’s pre-eminent health care charities, raising more 
than $50 million to put to equipment into our hospitals. With 
strong support from individuals, community groups, and 
businesses, they are working together to improve health care for 
everyone in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Three of the special initiatives that this foundation puts together 
would be the recently completed Z99 radiothon, the Great West 
Life Charity Golf Classic, and of course, the Hospital of Regina 
Foundation’s home lottery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I shudder to think the shape of this health care 
system would be in if it wasn’t for the hard work and dedication 
of people like the people on this foundation as well as 
foundations around the province. Thank you for your hard work 
and your commitment to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Lac la Ronge Chief Retires 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I recently had the pleasure 
along with many from across the North and across the province, 
to attend the retirement dinner of Chief Harry Cook, who has 
been a leader of the Lac la Ronge Indian Band for the past 18 
years. Chief Cook was presented with the Saskatchewan 
centennial medal in recognition of his many contributions to his 
band and to the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during his tenure, Chief Harry Cook demonstrated 
what it is to be a leader. He showed that it is possible to do 
business, create jobs, generate revenues, and empower the 
community in a way that is respectful to the land, to partners, 
and to stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Chief Cook achieved a lot on behalf of the La 
Ronge Indian Band. One of his priorities was to build schools, 
and all six communities that are part of the band have good 

quality facilities. 
 
The band-owned Kitsaki Management Limited Partnership with 
its many business interests is one of the largest First Nations 
companies in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to note 
that on top of his accomplishments, Chief Harry Cook also has 
been a devoted husband, father, and grandfather. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing Chief 
Cook’s many contributions and in congratulating him on his 
retirement. His passion and leadership will be missed, but he 
has left a great legacy on which to build. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Mendel Art Gallery 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak about the 
Mendel Art Gallery in Saskatoon. The Mendel Art Gallery was 
opened in 1964. It was the brainchild of Fred Mendel, the 
founder of Intercontinental Packers which later became 
Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods. Fred Mendel and the Mendel family 
donated money and art. His descendants have been major 
patrons of the gallery since its opening in 1964. 
 
The gallery is proudly situated on the banks of the South 
Saskatchewan River and is built in conjunction with the 
Saskatoon Civic Conservatory. The gallery is a wonderful place 
to go at any time of the year, but it is particularly pleasant in the 
winter and at this time of the year when you can sit in the 
conservatory and enjoy the smells of summer and enjoy looking 
at the plants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Mendel Art Gallery has regularly received art 
donations and can now only display a very small portion of its 
collection at any one time. The gallery has literally outgrown 
itself. In conjunction with its 40th birthday, it is undertaking a 
multi-million dollar fundraising campaign for an expansion. 
The expansion will increase the gallery area and storage area, 
and will also include a public service area. 
 
I have seen many of the Saskatoon MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] at the gallery events in the past. I would 
like to challenge not just the Saskatoon MLAs, but all MLAs to 
make a generous personal donation to the Mendel Art Gallery 
in this year when they are needing money for their major capital 
expansion. 
 
Also I’d like to urge all MLAs to visit the gallery the next time 
that they’re in Saskatoon. And I would like to congratulate the 
gallery, its staff members, on their successful anniversary and 
fundraising initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

Taxation Policy 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 2003 
this Premier, this NDP [New Democratic Party] government, 
campaigned on lower taxes. They said they would continue to 
lower taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. Months later it 
brought down a budget though, Mr. Speaker, that actually 
increased the PST [provincial sales tax]. In that budget, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier took $140 million out of the pockets of 
Saskatchewan families and businesses and co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: can 
Saskatchewan families and businesses and co-operatives expect 
to get some or all of that $140 million back today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition I’m sure can wait another half an hour or so and he 
will see the full detail of the Minister of Finance’s budget as he 
speaks to it and reads it in this Chamber. 
 
But I can assure the Leader of the Opposition today that 
contained within this budget will be a significant tax reduction 
for the property tax payers of Saskatchewan. Through the 
provisions of this budget we will lower the property taxes on 
the people of Saskatchewan by a full 8 per cent. 
 
That is a commitment that we have made. It is a commitment 
we have made very publicly. It is a commitment that will be 
kept with resources in this budget, Mr. Speaker. That is a 
promise made and a promise kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well actually, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a promise 
kept. The Premier will remember clearly from that election 
campaign that he told the people of this province that his 
government, if elected, would accept the recommendations, 
could accept the recommendations of the Boughen report on the 
issue of property tax. 
 
You remember the Boughen report, Mr. Speaker. It 
recommended that the PST be increased and then that that 
increased revenue be passed along to property tax owners. 
 
We know from what the government’s announced already, by 
the way — and what the Premier’s talking about has already 
been announced — is that that is nowhere near the $140 million 
that this government took from the people of the province in 
terms of its PST increase. 
 
When revenues were down, the Premier increased taxes. He 
took $140 million from the pockets of Saskatchewan families. 
Revenues are not down. They are up. Will he give some of that 
back, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I note the contradiction in 
the member’s comments. He gets up — and he’s been up all 
week this week — saying we ought to lower the provincial sales 
tax. That’s what he says. 
 
And then he gets up and he says, but we should adopt the 
Boughen Commission, which was a commission that said we 
should increase the provincial sales tax, that we should expand 
the provincial sales tax, that we should put the provincial sales 
tax on restaurant meals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, which is it? Does he want an expansion of the 
provincial sales tax? Does he want the sales tax on restaurant 
meals, or does he want the sales tax lowered? It cannot be both, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have done is taken a very careful and balanced 
approach to the reduction of taxation in this province. We have 
cut personal income taxes in this province at a rate unequalled 
in Canada. We have lowered small-business taxes significantly. 
We have lowered manufacturing and process, targeted tax 
decreases, and in this budget, Mr. Speaker, the education 
portion of the property tax will be lowered by 8 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in point of fact it was actually 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan that said his 
government, if elected, would accept, would adopt the Boughen 
Commission report. And they did adopt half of it. They adopted 
the part about taxes going up, Mr. Speaker. They have failed to 
provide the attendant tax relief to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And maybe we know why he said that during the campaign and 
then increased taxes in the first budget thereafter. When in 
January 2004 his Finance minister — who later this day will 
bring down another budget — was asked about increasing taxes 
after they campaigned on lower taxes and he said this, I quote: 
 

I suspect that anyone who talks about tax hikes is not 
likely to be very popular during the course of an election 
campaign [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
That’s what the Minister of Finance said. The question to the 
Premier is very simple. He asked the people of the province for 
$140 million when revenues are down. Revenues are up. They 
are way up. Can the people, can the families of Saskatchewan 
expect to get some of that money back today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the families of 
Saskatchewan and — beyond the families of Saskatchewan — 
businesses in Saskatchewan will see taxation reduction as a 
result of measures in this budget. The answer is absolutely yes. 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

But they will also see the benefit of government who balances 
and plans to provide for the public service needs. They will see 
significant new dollars in health care. They will see significant 
new dollars in educational funding for the future of our 
province and the future of our young people. Yes, they will see 
the benefit of these revenues and these resources. They will see 
them in a very, very tangible way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally let me say this. What we have heard 
today is what we’ve heard all week — the Leader of the 
Opposition saying on one hand cut taxes, cut taxes, cut taxes; 
and on the other hand increase spending, increase spending, and 
increase spending. Well, Mr. Speaker, it just can’t work or we’ll 
be right back to where we were when that member and that 
party were in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, from time to time this week 
members opposite — maybe even the Premier — have been 
encouraging the Saskatchewan Party members to vote for the 
budget we’re going to hear about in a few moments. But I 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the member for P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Northcote is going to be here long enough to actually vote for 
this government’s budget. 
 
This morning in local P.A. media — and I’m quoting now, Mr. 
Speaker, from a transcript of a story on CKBI this morning — 
the quote is: 
 

Eldon Lautermilch has sold his home in Prince Albert . . . 
[and] says he will look at any job that comes along [Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 
People in the gallery have not yet seen the budget of this 
government but clearly the member for P.A. Northcote has seen 
this budget, Mr. Speaker. He’s selling his house and he’s 
looking for a new job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier give the people of the province 
some hope, some reasonable expectation that the money he took 
from them in a tax hike after promising lower taxes will be 
returned to them in a few minutes when his minister rises to 
present the budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no 
doubt about it, the member from Prince Albert Northcote will 
be in this House voting for this budget and we hope for a long 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, if anyone, if anyone 
in this House should be looking for a future job prospect I’m 

thinking more and more it should be, ought to be the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, last year we built a 
budget that provided human services to the people of 
Saskatchewan in record amounts. The monies that we take in 
revenue, whether it’s from provincial sales taxes, income taxes, 
business taxes, Mr. Speaker, you know how they’re spent and 
the people of Saskatchewan know how they’re spent. They’re 
spent in record amounts of money for health care. They were 
spent last year in record support for our farm families. They’ve 
been spent, Mr. Speaker, in record commitments to rebuilding 
the infrastructure of this province, its highways and its 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government takes very seriously the tax dollar 
provided to it from the people of Saskatchewan. Those tax 
dollars meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan first of 
all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Financial Support for Low-Income Earners 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This spring the 
official opposition outlined a plan to stop taxing the poor. We 
outlined a plan for a directed tax cut aimed at providing the 
most benefit to those who earn the least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government adopt the official 
opposition’s plan to cut taxes for low-income earners who pay 
the highest tax rates in the country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the 
House and I know many members of the general public 
remember so very, very well the campaign commitments that 
that party made in the last election, campaign commitments that 
said that they were going to cut $50 million out of the budget of 
Social Services, punishing and hurting the benefits to the very 
poorest of our poor. 
 
They talked about boot camps; now we think maybe they’re 
talking about food stamps, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate this 
road to Damascus conversion they seem to have had in their 
efforts to secure some public support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last number of years, regarding the poorest 
of the poor — our social assistance caseload — well they set a 
goal of reducing that caseload by 25 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we 
have reduced the families on social assistance in this province 
by a total of 41 per cent — 41 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we do it, Mr. Speaker, we do it not 
through work for welfare, we do it not through hacking and 
slashing. We do it by building independence. 
 
And just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we announced a package of 
initiatives unique in Canada that will supplement the rental 
housing allowances for the poorest of the poor in our province 
and for working poor families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, and what is the result? The 
highest usage rate of food banks in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier may not understand our plan or 
chooses not to, but people do. In a letter to the editor this week, 
Barbara Lee from Regina said: 
 

I have been waiting . . . [for] 10 years to hear a party 
propose a long-needed change to the basic personal . . . tax 
exemption. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Barbara Lee from Regina understands. 
 
To the Premier: how long will we have to wait for the long 
needed changes to the basic personal tax exemption? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
will know that we abolished, this government abolished the 
most regressive tax provision that was ever vested on the people 
of Saskatchewan — that flat tax of that member’s party’s 
government when they were in government. We have reduced 
personal income taxes that have benefited and in fact have taken 
thousands of families off the tax rolls in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but we believe in building independence. We 
believe in taking people from social assistance and bringing 
them into the workforce, into independence where they may 
contribute through their skills and their labour. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been able to take 41 per cent of the family caseload and 
move them from dependence to independence, to earning. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask that member as I ask every 
member over there . . . They’ve been calling for an increase. 
They’ve been calling for an increase to the basic allowance to 
social assistance; they’ve been calling for this increase. I’m 
going to ask that member and all members over there: if today 
in the Minister of Finance’s budget there is an increase in the 
basic allowance for social assistance, will you vote for this 
budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
 

Funding for Teachers’ Contracts 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this week the government 
announced it could not get a consensus on daylight savings 
time, so they were doing nothing. Well now they’ve achieved a 
true consensus among teachers — 93.7 per cent, over 11,000 
teachers, don’t think very much of this government’s bargaining 
strategy. Given the vote and the less than helpful comments 
from the minister of Education, some kind of action by teachers 
now seem inevitable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would only be prudent for this government to 
now set aside funds in the budget to pay for reasonable 
increases in a new contract for teachers. Is that being done? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we received this morning 
the results of the vote taken by the STF [Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation] and we will respect of course the result of 
that vote. I am encouraging all of the parties involved to take 
some time over the Easter period, over the Easter break, to think 
about our various positions. We know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
best deal will be a negotiated deal at the table. 
 
And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, since I’ve occupied the office of 
Premier in this province of Saskatchewan, we have, Mr. 
Speaker, achieved negotiated settlements with all of our public 
sector unions in every circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Even, Mr. Speaker, even when members 
opposite were calling upon myself and this government to 
legislate contracts, we stood by collective negotiation, 
collective bargaining, and have forged those contracts. In just 
the last few months, Mr. Speaker, we have negotiated 11 
separate new contracts. We believe in collective bargaining and 
that’s what we intend to do with the teachers of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s idea of 
negotiating is to impose a zero settlement on the teachers of this 
province. That isn’t negotiating, Mr. Speaker, it’s dictating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there seems to be an increased possibility that if 
this government doesn’t provide for increases for the teachers’ 
contract, that school boards are going to be left holding the bag 
for any increases that occur to their budgets. Mr. Speaker, has 
this government been prudent enough to set aside additional 
funds for the teachers’ contract and other costs that school 
boards are facing? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the member will well 
know, we have been able to successfully negotiate contracts 
with teachers, with nurses, with public sector employees across 
the way. In terms of our negotiations with teachers, the member 
will also know that we have always made good on whatever 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

those negotiated contracts have achieved. And the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, we don’t put into a budget a number 
because we’re in the process, the very process of negotiation. 
 
Now I find it passing strange, Mr. Speaker, I find it very 
interesting the new-found commitment from the Saskatchewan 
Party to the process of collective bargaining. It is a very 
interesting new commitment when this is the very party who 
say the first thing that they would do in government would be to 
tear up The Trade Union Act, the very provisions that provide 
for collective bargaining. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Post-Secondary Tuition 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, last month the Minister of 
Learning ruled out a tuition freeze for university students. He 
said that short-term tuition freezes are not the answer because 
they simply lead to larger increases in subsequent years. In fact, 
he told the Leader-Post, and I quote: 
 

“Anywhere that we’ve seen tuition freezes . . . in across 
the country, they just haven’t worked,” . . . “What usually 
ends up happening is there is a dramatic increase after the 
fact . . . ” 
 

Mr. Speaker, students in post-secondary institutions want a 
reliable, long-term funding commitment from this NDP 
government in this budget. My question for the Minister of 
Learning: will the NDP government meet their expectations 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to believe that 
a legislated freeze of tuition without adequate resources to your 
post-secondary institutions cannot work and can put you into a 
very difficult circumstance down the road. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I tell you what can work; it doesn’t 
seem to be grasped by the opposition. What can work is sitting 
down with people in partnership to find collective solutions to 
problems. It is in sitting down with the students of this 
province. It is sitting down with the administrations of our 
universities and post-secondary institutions. It is working 
together, Mr. Speaker, that we will achieve a solid go-forward 
for the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I invite that member and all members to just 
hang tough for a few more minutes and listen to the Minister of 
Finance as he speaks from this budget: a deeper commitment to 
the youth of this province as we go into our centennial year, a 
deeper commitment to the youth of Saskatchewan than I believe 
we have ever seen in any budget of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, two months ago the member 
for Saskatoon Sutherland participated in a debate at the 
University of Saskatchewan. He told the audience that, and I 
quote: 
 

“the government doesn’t favour a tuition freeze”, and “in 
other provinces it has been shown to be non-sustainable.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, representatives from our students’ unions are here 
today and are looking for a long-term commitment from this 
government to support post-secondary students, something they 
say was missing from last year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same NDP government that had close to 
1 billion dollars extra in this past year. Mr. Speaker, my 
question to the Minister of Learning: will there be a long-term 
support for students? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with the member opposite I 
want to recognize the large number of post-secondary students 
who are in this Chamber and in this building today and I want 
to welcome them here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If anyone has earned a place in this 
budget day, it is the student bodies of Saskatchewan. They have 
spoken with passion, they have spoken with clarity, and they 
have spoken pragmatically on dealing with the issues and 
accessibility issues to post-secondary in our province and I 
congratulate them for being here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I ask the member to be just a little bit more 
patient. We’re almost there; we’re almost there. Just six 
minutes, I’m told. Six minutes and they will see entirely the 
direction of this government in partnership with the students, in 
partnership with the post-secondary institutions of 
Saskatchewan. And I predict, Mr. Speaker, the opposition and 
those present will find this very, very good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Collective Bargaining with Public Sector Workers 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for the Minister of 
Labour. In the NDP’s third quarter financial report, there was 
almost $1 billion in extra revenue in the General Revenue Fund. 
The Finance minister said it was a great day for Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it has not been such a great spring for the 
public sector workers in this province. We have teachers voting 
overwhelmingly in favour of job action. We have nurses saying 
0, 1, and 1 just won’t cut it. We have labour leaders saying the 
NDP is dictating the outcome of collective bargaining before 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

bargaining even begins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Labour tell us if teachers and 
nurses will be getting the financial respect they deserve for their 
hard work on the front lines and in our classrooms? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the context of the 
bargaining with Saskatchewan’s teachers, we recognize full 
well the demand and the load that’s being placed on our 
teachers, particularly as we’re building to establish the 
SchoolPLUS model in our school. There is change; there are 
demands on our teachers and those are recognized. And it is at 
that bargaining table, it is at that bargaining table that I believe 
we will come to a mutually agreed collective agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now we heard a little more today though of the typical 
conservative economics. He talks about the dollars that came 
into the possession of this province last year because we 
worked hard. We worked hard. We worked hard together, Mr. 
Speaker, to achieve a fair return for some of our equalization 
dollars. But, Mr. Speaker, I point out to the members because 
they always forget it — these are one-time dollars and you 
don’t fund long-term programs on one-time dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m left wondering 
where the Premier is, what documents he’s looking at. When I 
look at the third quarter report and I see almost three-quarters of 
a billion dollars more in oil and gas and potash revenue, does he 
expect this to be one-time revenue? Suddenly we’re going to 
close the province down and we’re going to not achieve this 
kind of dollars? 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the Premier is that, does he not 
respect working people? First of all, does he plan any time soon 
— perhaps this afternoon — to announce that 0, 1, and 1 does 
not apply and that public sector workers in this province will 
get the respect they deserve? Will he commit to ending this 
government’s interference in free collective bargaining? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, through the process of free 
and collective bargaining — a concept that is entirely foreign to 
the Saskatchewan Party — through the process of free and 
collective bargaining we have signed 11 collective agreements 
in the last few months, 11 collective agreements — agreements 
that recognize the fiscal capacity of the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan and equally recognize the particular needs and 
requirements of each individual bargaining unit. That is 

collective bargaining. It is sitting down together and finding the 
deal. 
 
Now that is in complete contrast to the partisan political 
positions taken by the Saskatchewan Party. These are the 
people, Mr. Speaker, every time there is a piece of legislation in 
this House that might benefit working people, what do they 
say? They say it’s a job killer. They call the leadership of the 
trade union movement job killers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The leader over there says the first thing he would do in 
government is tear up and amend The Trade Union Act, the 
very Act that protects the process of collective bargaining. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a government that believes in collective 
bargaining with all of its public sector, and we have the proof to 
show it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
a negotiating team acting on behalf of the government is given a 
mandate that says, your mandate is zero, your mandate is 1 per 
cent, your mandate is a further 1 per cent — and then you 
suggest to them that they have the ability to conduct bargaining 
on a free and collective basis? 
 
Minister stands yesterday and says, oh but there’s a light at the 
end of the tunnel. There’s a light at the end of the tunnel that’s 
going to be addressed, and three years from now workers are 
going to enjoy the benefit of this so-called light in the tunnel. 
Well let me tell you, workers are going to be in that tunnel for 
the next three years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — They’re going to be paying, they’re going to 
be paying 91 cents a litre for a litre of gasoline while this 
government recoups $57 a barrel of oil, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
reality that workers are facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: will there be anything 
for teachers in this budget? Will there be anything for nurses in 
this budget? Or is he going to stick with a wage freeze that 
distorts free and collective bargaining? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, through the process of free 
and collective bargaining, I remind the member again, in just 
the last several months we have settled 11 contracts with 
valuable public servants, valuable public sector workers, social 
workers, people that work in our highways, people that work in 
our Crowns. Mr. Speaker, it is through that very process that we 
have achieved these contracts. And again I repeat, it is a 
concept entirely foreign, entirely foreign to the group of men 
and women who occupy opposition in this province, so foreign 
that the Leader of the Opposition travels all about the country 
saying that you shouldn’t come to Saskatchewan because our 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

labour laws are too friendly to the working people. 
 
These are rights that working people have earned over many, 
many years. Now in this goal of this party to become a little 
more palatable to the people of Saskatchewan, we have these 
conversions happening on a daily basis. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
proof in collective bargaining is doing collective bargaining and 
getting agreements. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table a response to written question 908. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to question 908 has been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
submit the estimates and supplementary estimates accompanied 
by a message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for the 
message from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 
follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2006, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for 12 months ending March 31, 2005, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
[Signed], Lynda Haverstock, Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Please be seated. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member 

for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to join with you in welcoming the very many 
guests that we have here today. Among those guests is my 
partner, my wife, Judy, and I wonder if she could give us a 
wave. And I would ask all of the members to please join me in 
welcoming Judy here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Also among our guests are 45 
grade 11 and 12 students from Miller Comprehensive High 
School in Regina in the constituency of Regina Douglas Park, 
along with their teachers Patrice Krueger and Lisa Brice. And 
again I would ask the members to join with me in welcoming 
these students here today and to wish them well in their studies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is an historic 
privilege to stand before you to deliver the 2005-2006 
provincial budget for this, Saskatchewan’s centennial year. As 
we celebrate 100 years of heart, many of us can only imagine 
what life was like for those who lived here 100 years ago. For 
our First Nations and Métis people and our pioneer settlers, we 
know it must have been a time of great struggle and hardship as 
they worked hard to make their living off the land. Mr. Speaker, 
living off the land in Saskatchewan has been and continues to 
be challenging. 
 
But it has also provided us with great opportunity. From the 
land we built our communities, our towns, our cities. We 
developed our resources. We created manufacturing and 
processing industries. We developed our universities. We 
developed medicare. We are intensely proud of our province 
and have every right to be. 
 
We are a land of diverse people all sharing a deep love of our 
home. We are a true reflection of Saskatchewan’s motto, “from 
many peoples, strength.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, our ability to build and plan a brighter future for 
the next 100 years has been strengthened by a remarkable year 
for the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Last year our finances saw an unprecedented turnaround. We 
achieved a surplus in both the General Revenue Fund and in the 
summary financial statements. There are many reasons for this 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

notable achievement. Our resource industries have been 
booming. Potash sales set a record for the second year in a row. 
Our oil and natural gas industries have enjoyed a period of high 
prices. All are doing very well with increasing world demand 
for our resources as well as for the products of our 
manufacturing and processing industries. 
 
Another factor in the extraordinary turnaround of our public 
finances was the work of our Premier. He called for fair 
treatment for Saskatchewan from the federal government. His 
dedication resulted in compensation for past equalization 
clawbacks of resource revenues. It also resulted in new federal 
funding for health care. 
 
These developments enabled us to balance the budget and to put 
money aside in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. We also retired 
$179 million of government debt — permanently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, heading into 
2005-06, government debt is now at its lowest point in 14 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Our current debt-to-GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratio is now at 28 per cent, a huge reduction 
from 69 per cent in 1993. That’s why our credit ratings, our 
standing in the world bond markets, have increased 11 times in 
the last 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this remarkable turn 
of events also enabled us to fund the lowest cost utility rate 
bundle for families and to set aside money for health care 
improvements. We committed $110 million to education 
property tax relief over two years, along with $190 million for 
capital and infrastructure projects. That includes a new 
provincial lab building and water bombers to fight forest fires 
and protect our northern communities and forests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a remarkable year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, equitable treatment under Canada’s equalization 
program remains a top priority for the government and the 
legislature. Last year our goal was to seek restitution for past 
clawbacks of resource revenues. We achieved that goal. And 
while we appreciate the one-time compensation from the federal 
government last year, it is time to look to the future. 
 
The equalization program continues to apply punishing 
claw-back rates to the revenues Saskatchewan people receive 
from their resources. A dollar earned is not a dollar made. It’s 
10 cents or less in the world of equalization. The federal 
government has now signed new agreements with 
Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia to make sure 
these provinces are able to exempt their energy resource 
revenues from equalization. They get to keep every dollar. We 
keep 10 cents or less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan deserves a deal similar to Atlantic 
Canada where we would be able to retain 100 per cent of our 

energy revenues. And we’re not talking about cents, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re talking about billions, billions of dollars. If 
Saskatchewan had received the same deal and retained 100 per 
cent of our resource revenues over the last 10 years, this 
province would have received an additional $4 billion in federal 
transfer payments. We want the same deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I promise you we will continue to 
push for a new deal for this province and for comprehensive 
reform of the equalization program. Mr. Speaker, I believe there 
is a strong consensus in Saskatchewan for such a change. It is 
that strong consensus that enabled us to present a united front at 
the Senate committee on finance a few weeks ago to make our 
case for fairness and equity. 
 
A few days ago we took our case to the House of Commons 
subcommittee on fiscal imbalance. In the near future we will be 
sharing our views with the federally appointed panel on 
equalization. And we will be meeting one-on-one with the 
federal government. Collectively our voices will be heard in 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in preparation for this budget, this milestone 
budget, I reviewed the works of Saskatchewan’s first provincial 
treasurer, J.A. Calder. In this province’s first full fiscal year, 
1906-1907, our total expenditures were $1.6 million — that’s 
million dollars. Today, it’s $7.2 billion. 
 
[14:30] 
 
I read with interest that public health expenditures that year — 
and I hope the Minister of Health is listening — the public 
health expenditures that year were little more than $25,000, not 
quite 2 per cent of budgeted expenditures. Today health funding 
is 44 per cent of our expenditures in Saskatchewan. Education 
funding on the other hand was $288,000, accounting for 18 per 
cent of total expenditures in 1906-07. Today it is 20 per cent. 
 
Members on both sides of this House will be interested to learn 
the federal government’s contribution to our provincial treasury 
made up nearly 80 per cent of Saskatchewan’s total revenue for 
that year. However in this year’s budget, federal transfers make 
up about 17.5 per cent of total revenue — quite a shift, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
How times have changed. So much has changed so 
dramatically, but what hasn’t changed are the fundamental 
values by which we live. Saskatchewan’s first budget similar to 
the one I will introduce today was a balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Saskatchewan’s first budget began 
the tradition of supporting vital social programs; the programs 
and services we will support again today with this budget. 
 
Saskatchewan’s first budget supported major commitments to 
public works, the long-term investments in public infrastructure 
that helped to ensure a bright future for generations to come. 
This budget too, Mr. Speaker, will support major commitments 
to public infrastructure. 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

Today’s budget builds on the strength of our history and looks 
ahead to plan for the future, with a special focus on our most 
valuable asset, our people, and particularly our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
present today our 12th consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — It is a budget that balances living 
within our means with the government’s commitment to make 
Saskatchewan an affordable place to live and raise a family, 
build a green and prosperous economy, provide the best health 
care in Canada, and build a future here for our young people. 
 
This year we are faced with balancing the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, their needs for priority social programs 
and services, with escalating costs and meeting our 
commitments for multi-year initiatives and doing so in the 
context of volatile revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we are experiencing a major drop in 
federal equalization revenues as compared to last year, from 
$582 million to $82 million — a drop of half a billion dollars. 
Unless our resource revenues remain high, Saskatchewan will 
be challenged to continue to fund our priorities, health care and 
education, in the coming year. 
 
In spite of this drop in equalization, we remain committed to 
supporting health care. This year significant investment will 
allow us to continue to make progress in providing the best 
health care in Canada. Mr. Speaker, this budget includes a 
record $2.9 billion for health care. That’s an increase of $192 
million, a 7.1 per cent increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We are also building for the 
future, creating legacies for generations to come with a $327 
million capital budget, one of the largest in the province’s 
history. Planning for the next 100 years, building a prosperous 
economy, requires modern, competitive infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are building for the future by investing in our 
future — that is, our young people — with numerous 
youth-related initiatives. What better way to celebrate our 
centennial than by focusing on the future, the next 100 years, 
and supporting our young people. 
 
In addition this year, we are making a substantial increase in 
our investment in education. Education plays a key role in 
building a future for our young people here in Saskatchewan. 
Education funding in this budget has increased $74 million or 
6.8 per cent to a record $1.2 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And, Mr. Speaker, as we shall see, 
this budget is also about improving opportunities and support 
for those who are in need of our social programs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to building a green 
and prosperous economy. The resource and export sector boom, 
which helped to fuel the billion dollar turnaround in 
Saskatchewan’s public finances last year, has opened many 
doors and has created exciting opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Our job numbers are increasing monthly. The economy is 
performing well and is forecast to grow another 3 per cent this 
coming year. We are buoyed by this success and are determined 
to build on the momentum, creating more opportunities, growth, 
and even more success. 
 
We strive to be competitive, to make Saskatchewan an 
attractive place in which to invest and to do business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is always open to suggestions and 
new ideas. That is why we listened to the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan regarding the business climate. 
That is why we are listening to suggestions from participants at 
our recent Centennial Summit on the economy. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to announce that this spring we will be establishing 
an independent committee to undertake a business tax review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This committee of independent 
tax experts will examine the impact of business tax on this 
province and considerations such as our overall level of 
business taxation in Saskatchewan and the competitiveness of 
our business taxes compared to other provinces. Our goal is to 
make our businesses more competitive, to further improve our 
economy, and to create additional job opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The committee will make its recommendations in time for 
consideration in developing the 2006-2007 budget. There will 
be a more detailed announcement about the review and the 
committee members early next week. 
 
Achieving our goal of maintaining a prosperous economy 
requires safe, modern infrastructure. This year we are investing 
$125 million in capital for our roads and highways. We are 
continuing accelerated twinning of our national highway 
system, Highway No. 1 east to the Manitoba border and 
Highway No. 16 between North Battleford and Lloydminster, 
both by 2007. We will also resurface approximately 330 
kilometres of paved highways. And, Mr. Speaker, I am also 
pleased to announce this budget includes almost $5 million to 
address congestion and safety concerns on Highway No. 11 
between Warman and Rosthern. This is the first step in a 
multi-year plan to twin this section of Highway 11. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we are on track to 
meet our commitments to invest $2.5 billion on highways and 
transportation over 10 years, a commitment made in the 
1997-1998 provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was the case in 1905, agriculture is a mainstay 
of the Saskatchewan economy. Saskatchewan continues to 
provide more agricultural programming relative to our fiscal 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

capacity than any other province or the federal government. In 
total, through both direct expenditure and tax expenditures, we 
will provide nearly $481 million in agricultural assistance. 
 
This year’s budget fully funds the province’s portion of crop 
insurance. We are maintaining the funding level for CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization program] at 98.8 
million for the 2004 claim year, and we will continue to work 
with the federal government for a more affordable, sustainable 
and fair program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to quote Saskatchewan’s longest serving Finance 
minister, the Hon. C.M. Fines from his 1953 budget address and 
he says, quote: 
 

We need then make no apology whatever, especially in 
this House, for continuing vigorously to urge upon Ottawa 
a full and proper recognition of the economic rights and 
social need of the prairie agriculture. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the success of rural Saskatchewan is entrenched in 
our history and no sector has faced more adversity throughout 
our history than agriculture. To help promote and revitalize our 
rural economy, we are creating a new department, Rural 
Development, as was announced earlier this month. This new 
department will work with businesses and co-operatives to 
enhance rural development, coordinating activities and 
programs. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to grow our 
agri-food industry through research programs and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the initiatives this budget supports are 
designed to build on the success of our economy. Combining 
our goal to achieve a green and prosperous economy, we are 
increasing the ethanol fuel tax rebate program in this budget. 
This increase is in anticipation of the expected opening of the 
two ethanol plants in Weyburn and Lloydminster later this 
fiscal year. This program will provide an estimated $4.9 million 
in rebates due to higher production of ethanol. That’s good for 
the economy and it’s good for the environment. 
 
Recently we announced a royalty and tax incentive strategy to 
improve the investment climate for enhanced oil recovery. To 
help increase oil production, investment, and employment in the 
province, this strategy focuses on encouraging new extraction 
technologies. Technologies such as carbon dioxide 
sequestration which safely sequesters large amounts of the most 
abundant greenhouse gas, that’s CO2 [carbon dioxide], 
underground. And that’s good for the environment, and that’s 
good for the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in last year’s budget we announced a review of the 
taxation status of resources trusts that own oil and natural gas 
producing properties in Saskatchewan. As promised, we 
consulted with the oil and gas industry. As a result, we are 
amending our corporation capital tax legislation, effective April 
1, to include resource trusts for the purposes of levying the CCT 
[corporation capital tax] resource surcharge. With this change 
we are restoring tax equity in the Saskatchewan oil and gas 
industry and creating a level playing field. In addition, this 
change will recoup lost tax revenue of up to $20 million 
annually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to ensuring that 

Saskatchewan is a competitive place for oil and gas investment. 
The upcoming review of business taxes by an independent 
committee will examine all aspects of business taxes, including 
the CCT and resource surcharge, and the industry will play an 
important consultative role in this review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — To increase aviation fuel sales in 
the province and improve service quality for Saskatchewan’s 
aviation sector, we are reducing tax on aviation fuel from 3.5 to 
1.5 cents per litre, and removing the fuel tax on aviation fuel 
used in international flights. Our goal is to encourage major 
airlines to see Saskatchewan as an economical place to do 
business and promote international flight service into 
Saskatchewan. Both of these measures are effective midnight 
tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This centennial year budget 
includes a $200,000 increase for the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership, or STEP. STEP is a unique 
industry-government partnership aimed at helping increase 
local businesses’ success in export markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is known as the Land of Living 
Skies. One of the key economic opportunities we hope to 
continue to tap into in our centennial year and beyond is 
tourism. That’s why this budget contains a $727,000 increase 
for Tourism Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Our goal of growing a prosperous 
economy includes an ongoing commitment to municipalities. In 
this budget we will continue to provide $85 million in revenue 
sharing for municipalities. Revenue-sharing grants to 
municipalities are currently 55 per cent or more than they were 
four years ago. And to help municipal governments, we are 
increasing support for priority infrastructure projects through 
cost-shared, federal-provincial-municipal infrastructure 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is fitting that Saskatchewan’s centennial year 
budget contains one of the largest capital budgets in the history 
of our province. We are building for the future, creating 
legacies for our children and their children, with a $327 million 
investment in capital spending, an investment in our next 100 
years. 
 
Funding for health facility capital is being increased by $18 
million or 45 per cent over last year. This budget will ensure 
that planning and/or construction can proceed on facilities in 
Swift Current, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Moosomin, Outlook, Maidstone, 
Preeceville, Humboldt, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This budget also increases funding 
for medical equipment, Mr. Speaker. 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

We are also committed to maintaining modern, well-equipped 
learning environments for Saskatchewan students. The budget 
contains $26.7 million in capital funding for kindergarten to 
grade 12 schools in Ile-a-la-Crosse, Warman, Saskatoon, La 
Loche, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw, and funding for 
maintenance and renovation projects throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We are supporting post-secondary 
capital projects as well. SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] and the regional colleges will 
receive $2.5 million. The University of Saskatchewan is 
receiving $15 million over three years for a major expansion at 
the Western College of Veterinary Medicine. And I am pleased 
to announce that we have provided $30 million to enable the 
University of Regina to begin construction on a new laboratory 
building, a top priority, capital project for the University of 
Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And, Mr. Speaker, we have also 
provided a further $27.6 million for renewal and capital 
maintenance at the two universities and federated colleges. 
 
Some other noteworthy capital investments include $3.9 million 
to begin replacement of the Regina Correctional Centre which 
was constructed in 1913; $3.4 million to complete the 
multi-purpose facility at Regina’s Exhibition Park in time for 
the Canada Summer Games, and also the riverfront 
development project in Saskatoon; and funds for the design and 
start-up costs for the new $27 million provincial laboratory 
building to improve vital testing facilities for our health system. 
 
And I am again pleased to emphasize that we are investing $327 
million in capital projects throughout this province, capital 
investments to ensure a legacy for future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, research and development and a growing 
economy go hand in hand. That’s why the research and 
development budget for this year is being increased to $137 
million. We are building on our successes such as the Canadian 
Light Source synchrotron, Canada’s largest science project, and 
the Petroleum Technology Research Centre in Regina. 
 
Earlier I mentioned increases in funding for the ethanol fuel tax 
rebate, STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 
Inc.], and Tourism Saskatchewan to support economic 
development. In addition, we will be allocating $8.9 million for 
the film employment tax credit and $6.3 million for the Western 
Economic Partnership agreements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to maintaining the 
successful momentum we’ve achieved in this economy. We’re 
committed to growing an even more prosperous economy in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, too often in our history, economic progress has 
come at a cost to our natural environment. This government’s 
commitment to build a green and prosperous economy heralds a 
determination to preserve and protect our natural environment. 
At the same time, we’re building green technologies and 

industries that will prove successful and profitable within the 
province and beyond. 
 
This year, SaskPower will complete the Rushlake Creek wind 
power facility which will add 150 megawatts of zero emission 
energy. That’s enough green power for 64,000 homes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And once this facility is complete, 
Saskatchewan will be the third largest producer of wind power 
in Canada. That is a significant achievement when you consider 
we only ventured into wind power less that four years ago. 
 
In this centennial year budget, we are spending $1.7 million to 
increase the energy efficiencies of government buildings. We 
also expect to begin cleanup of the abandoned uranium mines in 
northern Saskatchewan once the federal share of funding is in 
place, and to begin the first steps in a process to clean up 
abandoned non-uranium mines. 
 
One of the green programs that has proven very successful is 
the Energy Star PST rebate. This program encourages 
consumers to buy specific energy efficient appliances by 
providing a PST rebate. Effective April 1 we are making the 
rebate available at point of sale. Customers will no longer have 
to mail in their applications and wait for their cheques, and 
government administration will be reduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget will continue the implementation of 
the safe drinking water strategy, to improve our drinking water 
and waste water infrastructure, and improve water quality 
monitoring. Mr. Speaker, there is close to $1 million in this 
budget to begin a two-year Great Sand Hills regional 
environmental study. This study will determine future land uses 
within an about 140-square mile area of environmentally 
sensitive land. 
 
And there is funding in this budget to manage the increased 
costs of monitoring and testing for chronic wasting disease or 
CWD, with Saskatchewan leading the development of a 
national CWD strategy. Mr. Speaker, we firmly believe that 
Saskatchewan can have a green and prosperous economy by 
balancing the protection of our natural environment with new 
and exciting business opportunities. 
 
Medicare, Mr. Speaker, the very name is synonymous with 
Saskatchewan. Expectations are extremely high here in the 
birthplace of medicare, so we are faced with a delicate 
balancing act. We must meet the needs and expectations of 
Saskatchewan people while ensuring programs and services are 
delivered as efficiently as possible. At the same time, we’re 
battling against skyrocketing health care costs and striving to 
provide the best health care in Canada. 
 
Let me just provide some context, Mr. Speaker, regarding our 
ever increasing health care commitment. Last year we increased 
health spending by $264 million over actual spending in the 
previous year. That is a 10.5 per cent increase. The budget I am 
delivering today provides a $192 million increase over last 
year’s budget, an increase of 7.1 per cent. Over the last four 
years, health spending has grown by over 30 per cent or nearly 
$700 million. 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

With a record investment in health care of nearly $3 billion this 
year, I am pleased to say that Saskatchewan will meet its 
commitments to enhance services under the federal health 
accord and the agreement resulting from the first ministers 
meeting on health. 
 
This budget contains new funding for program and service 
enhancements including, as I have said, close to $18 million in 
increased funding for health capital — that’s building and 
medical equipment; almost $4 million for new childhood 
vaccines; funding to expand the range of home care services to 
nationally agreed upon levels; and funding to continue primary 
health care reform, including funding for 23 new primary health 
care sites by the end of this fiscal year. 
 
We are supporting the goals and initiatives set out in the Action 
Plan for Health Care 2001, our blueprint for a sustainable health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are listening to Saskatchewan people. We are 
reducing surgical and diagnostic waiting times, managing 
wait-lists, and implementing surgical registry initiatives. We are 
ensuring those who need surgery most urgently will receive it 
first. 
 
The demand for diagnostic imaging has risen dramatically. In 
the last six years the volume of CT [computerized tomography] 
scans performed has increased about 70 per cent. During the 
same period, the number of MRIs [magnetic resonance 
imaging] performed has increased a remarkable 210 per cent. 
To further increase diagnostic testing this year, we are investing 
$4.7 million. These increases include funding for 4,600 more 
MRI scans, 16,500 additional CT scans, and more than a 50 per 
cent increase in bone mineral density testing. 
 
To target patients who are waiting more than 12 months for 
surgery, we will add between 1,200 and 1,500 additional 
surgeries. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, there are not many people whose lives have 
not been touched by cancer. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 
is receiving a 15 per cent increase in funding over last year. We 
are expanding the capacity for cancer treatment. This expansion 
will allow room for close to 250 new patients, over 560 
additional chemotherapy visits, and close to 2,000 additional 
radiation treatments. 
 
With a new $2.8 million investment, we will increase dialysis 
treatments by 8,000 procedures annually, an 11 per cent 
increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget contains $1.8 million to enhance our 
provincial drug and alcohol strategy. 
 
To maintain a viable health care system and provide the best 
health care in the nation, obviously we need qualified health 
professionals. Mr. Speaker, that is why we’re providing 280 
new bursaries, as well as 109 continuing bursaries for students 
in various health disciplines including nursing and other health 
professions. The budget also includes 50 new and 65 continuing 
physician bursaries. We will also be increasing the number of 
spaces for nursing education. In addition, there’s funding for 
nine new residency seats at the College of Medicine. 

Health care, Mr. Speaker, one of the key priorities in this 
province during our first century, it will continue to play a vital 
role in our second century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this centennial year 
budget continues the government’s commitment to make our 
province an affordable place to live and raise a family. This 
budget builds on the many steps this government has taken to 
keep costs down for Saskatchewan families. 
 
That’s why in 2001 we began implementing the largest personal 
income tax reform in the province’s history. We continue to 
improve our personal income tax system by indexing 
components like the basic personal tax exemption to inflation. 
This protects taxpayers from inflation, especially low-income 
earners and senior citizens. 
 
In November, we made good on our commitment to provide the 
lowest utility rate bundle for families in the nation. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this centennial year budget contains no tax increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — In fact this budget provides $55 
million for the first of two years of education property tax relief 
for Saskatchewan families, farms, and businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — In 2005 the average property 
taxpayer will receive a credit of approximately 8 per cent of the 
education property tax levy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — To keep our families and 
communities safe, this year’s budget includes funding to add 18 
new police officers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — As promised we are extending the 
Sask 911 service to Lloydminster and northern communities, 
completing implementation to all but the most remote 
communities. That means 98 per cent of the province will have 
access to 911 service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, our centennial motto 
is, 100 years of heart. Saskatchewan people are known for their 
generosity and for caring for their neighbours. We are also 
known for innovation and social programming. In this budget 
we are continuing to invest in social programming to ensure 
that all Saskatchewan residents — regardless of level of 
income, regardless of where they live, regardless of abilities — 
enjoy a similar quality of life with access to the same vital 
programs and services. 
 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

This budget includes an additional $6 million for our Building 
Independence strategy, to help low-income families improve 
their ability to find work and to achieve independence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to 
announce that this budget includes an increase in benefits for all 
those who receive social assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there will also be a 
significant boost to the child nutrition and development 
program. This budget also contains other measures to help 
low-income families and persons with disabilities. The new 
family housing supplement will provide up to $113 per month 
for approximately 10,000 low-income families. 
 
The new disability housing supplement will mean up to $151 a 
month for 3,000 households for people with disabilities. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we will also develop 600 affordable housing units 
this year, working towards our goal of 2,000 units. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt Saskatchewan continues to be a 
leader in social programming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — In 2003 the Premier announced 
the largest child care expansion in the history of the province. 
This government made a commitment to establish 1,200 child 
care spaces over four years. We are meeting that commitment 
with $1.2 million in increased funding to develop 250 new 
spaces this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our youngest citizens, our babies, are our most 
precious resource. They’re also the most vulnerable among us. 
Mr. Speaker, we will be increasing funding to the Kids First 
program to increase the number of families participating in the 
home visiting program. This is a program that reaches out to 
improve the developmental opportunities for very young 
children. 
 
With federal funding of $22 million this year, we are investing 
in children through the early learning and child care initiative 
by developing a new, made-in-Saskatchewan system. We will 
increase our support by $1.1 million to First Nations child and 
family service agencies, ensuring our children are well 
protected. Community-based organizations that care for 
individuals with intellectual disabilities will see increased 
funding of $1.9 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s all about our first duty to protect the most 
vulnerable members of society. It’s all about helping 
Saskatchewan people build successful lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this government is 
committed to helping Saskatchewan’s young people find 
exciting opportunities when they complete their education and 
training, to build their careers and start their families right here 

at home. 
 
And it all begins with a high-quality education. That is why this 
budget includes a record $1.2 billion for education — a direct 
investment in the future of Saskatchewan. I am especially 
pleased to announce this budget includes a one-time 
Saskatchewan centennial university tuition grant of $6.7 
million. This grant will allow our two universities to freeze 
tuition fees in this, our centennial year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — That means no university tuition 
increases this year. During this year the Department of Learning 
will conduct a review of accessibility to post-secondary 
education, including student financial assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And all of this is in addition to 
other enhancements to student bursaries and student loans 
included in this year’s budget. Good news for Saskatchewan 
students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The tuition grant is in addition to a 2 per cent basic operating 
grant increase for universities, federated and affiliated colleges, 
to support approximately 33,000 students at these institutions. 
 
This centennial year budget also includes a 6.8 per cent increase 
in operating funding for SIAST, which provides learning 
opportunities to approximately 12,000 students at its four 
campuses, and a 3.7 per cent increase in operating funding for 
regional colleges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — This budget also includes an 8.3 
per cent increase in operating funding for the Apprenticeship 
and Trade Certification Commission to provide increased 
training opportunities for young people. 
 
We are meeting our commitment to expand the number of 
spaces in the Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan. 
There will be 100 new spaces this year and 40 new spaces in the 
northern nursing education program. In total, Mr. Speaker, this 
budget funds 1,000 new training opportunities to enable our 
young people to acquire the skills they need in today’s and 
tomorrow’s job market. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — As promised, we are addressing 
the planning and implementation of the accreditation plan for 
the College of Medicine with a total of $7 million in funding. 
 
Last May the government announced school division 
restructuring as part of a three-phase initiative to reform the K 
to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education system. To support 
school division restructuring, a more efficient administration of 
the system, we are providing $4.5 million in additional funding 
to school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of young people employed in 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

February was 6,000 more than in February of last year in 
Saskatchewan. In government, we want to maintain this 
momentum with plans to hire young interns to work in the 
Department of Agriculture and Food in the area of agribusiness 
development, to provide approximately 800 public sector jobs 
for young people through the centennial student employment 
program, and the Green Team for young people interested in 
environmental management and energy conservation, and jobs 
for young people in our Information Technology Office. 
 
As well, there are numerous employment initiatives in the 
Crown sector targeted towards young people and Aboriginal 
participation, including an Aboriginal bursary program and the 
gradworks intern program. Our Crown corporations are 
committed to providing quality employment opportunities for 
our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, building towards $1,000 in 2007, the graduate tax 
credit for post-secondary grads will increase to $675 this year. 
In plain language, Mr. Speaker, this tax credit will effectively 
add $6,136 to the amount of income a graduate can earn this 
year before having to pay Saskatchewan income tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We made this promise, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide additional financial incentives for our 
graduates to start their careers right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, centennial year marks a major milestone for our 
province. It is a time to look back with pride and to look ahead 
to a future full of hope and promise. Together we are 
celebrating our history and commemorating it with legacies for 
generations to come. 
 
September 4 is Saskatchewan’s 100th birthday. In recognition 
of our official birthday, the province is working with cities and 
northern communities to develop a province-wide celebration 
that allows everyone to participate in a community near them. 
The Centennial 2005 Office has registered more than 2,000 
events in 400 communities in every part of this province, 
including 300 homecomings. We are excited about this 
birthday. 
 
But even as we celebrate Saskatchewan’s centennial year, we 
reflect upon the many contributions Saskatchewan people have 
made for this province and for this country. Many of our 
veterans made the ultimate sacrifice to defend freedom and 
democracy. This year, we will acknowledge their contributions 
by supporting the creation of a war memorial in their honour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need the young people of our province to be 
our planners, our builders, and our visionaries as we move into 
our second century. Throughout our centennial year, we will be 
supporting many initiatives aimed at youth — led by our young 
people — and plans are under way to recognize all of 
Saskatchewan’s students from kindergarten to grade 12. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this centennial year budget marks year two of our 
four-year fiscal plan. I am proud of this budget. Each budgetary 
decision was carefully weighed to balance spending choices 
with revenue measures, to ensure the economy remains viable, 
the business climate is competitive, and the needs of 

Saskatchewan people are met now and in the future. That is 
why this budget includes record investments in health care and 
education. We did not make these spending choices lightly but 
in the context of what Saskatchewan people need, what they 
expect, and what this province can afford. 
 
We have a plan, Mr. Speaker. It is a plan that continues on the 
path that has turned our financial situation around, a plan that 
focuses on our four key commitments: building a green and 
prosperous economy, making Saskatchewan an affordable place 
to live and raise a family, providing the best health care in 
Canada, and building the future here for our young people. 
 
This plan has allowed us to continue investing in the important 
social and economic programs our families and communities 
need. It is a plan based on a balanced approach with prudent 
financial management. 
 
It is a plan that has succeeded because it encompasses 
Saskatchewan’s fundamental values — the same values that 
were entrenched in this province 100 years ago. It is a plan that 
is carrying Saskatchewan forward into its second century as a 
successful Canadian province built upon a strong foundation, 
prepared for and excited about the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking back 100 years ago, how amazing it is to 
see what we’ve achieved. From such humble beginnings, young 
people today have so many opportunities, so many choices. 
This second century in Saskatchewan is brimming with 
promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the Assembly approves in principle the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member 
for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the opposition Finance critic, the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise in this Assembly and respond to the budget for the first 
time as Finance critic for Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 
 
I’d like to begin by paying tribute to my predecessor, the 
member for Canora-Pelly. For the past number of years, he has 
defined the role of opposition Finance critic. He has done so 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

with such vigour and passion, not to mention credibility, that it 
will be a hard act to follow, Mr. Speaker. However, I will do 
my best to fulfill my duties in my own way, to take on this 
challenging yet very rewarding position. 
 
I’d also like to thank my leader, Mr. Speaker, the member for 
Swift Current, the Leader of the Official Opposition, and all 
members of the opposition caucus for the trust and confidence 
they have shown in me. I am very proud to be part of this team, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of Saskatoon Silver 
Springs for allowing me to serve as their first MLA. The brand 
new constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs, located in 
northeast Saskatoon, was created through redistribution. It’s a 
growing, vibrant part of our province and it’s a privilege to 
serve the residents as their voice in this Assembly. I want to 
thank the hard-working people of Saskatoon Silver Springs for 
placing their trust in me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to extend a sincere thank you to my 
constituency assistant, Beth Epp. I truly appreciate all the work 
she does in my constituency office. She is active in the 
community and is very good at what she does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a special thank you to my family: my wife, Trish 
— she is not able to be here today because budget day is a very 
busy day in her career as well — and my children. Carter, age 7, 
is in grade 2 at Cardinal Leger School and my daughter Paige, 
age 5, is in pre-kindergarten at Maria Montessori School in 
Saskatoon. 
 
I am most pleased, Mr. Speaker, to say that my mother, Lucy 
Cheveldayoff, is able to be here today to witness these 
proceedings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Building is 
filled this afternoon with people from across the province 
representing all aspects of life and work in Saskatchewan. 
Many thousands more will take the time from their busy day to 
watch this NDP government’s budget speech on television or 
the Internet, or to listen to the budget speech on the radio. And 
hundreds of thousands more Saskatchewan people will tune in 
to the news tonight or read the newspaper tomorrow. 
 
All of them, Mr. Speaker, are wondering the same thing. With 
$1 billion in windfall revenue, how will this NDP government 
use all that new money to improve our lives and the quality of 
life for our families and our communities? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have their 
answer. Never has a government done so little with so much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Last year, Mr. Speaker, when revenues 
were down and times were tight, this government took more 
money out of your pocket by raising taxes. This year, even with 
$1 billion more than they expected, the NDP isn’t giving any of 
your money back. Mr. Speaker, 71,000 low-income earners — 
many of them young people, single moms earning minimum 

wage or less who face the highest personal tax rates in Canada 
under this NDP government — they were hoping. They were 
hoping this NDP government would use some of its 
billion-dollar windfall to provide much-needed, low-income tax 
relief. 
 
But the NDP Finance minister just said, no. The Premier, the 
NDP Premier said, not a chance — not one dime of low-income 
tax relief for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What about our senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, who are on fixed 
incomes and struggling to make ends meet? They were hoping 
that this government would recognize their contributions to 
Saskatchewan’s first 100 years by lowering their income taxes, 
or reversing last year’s PST increase. But there is no tax relief 
for seniors in this budget. There is no income tax relief for 
seniors, no sales tax relief for anyone in this, our centennial 
year. 
 
For the almost 25,000 families in Saskatchewan with a loved 
one enduring the longest surgical waiting lists in Canada there 
was hope that finally this government would come up with a 
plan to make their wait shorter. But as we have just heard, Mr. 
Speaker, there is no specific plan for reducing Saskatchewan’s 
waiting lists, and little to give hope to those enduring the long 
waits for the surgery they need and deserve. What we did get is 
yet another vague commitment to monitor surgical waiting lists 
that are already the longest in Canada, and growing longer 
everyday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Families that own small businesses, the lifeblood of the 
Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker, were watching to see 
what the NDP government would do today with all that new 
government money to make the business climate more 
competitive. But what they heard was the NDP’s plan to launch 
yet another study of business taxation and a promise to consider 
the results in a year. A one-year delay while Saskatchewan 
businesses pay the highest business taxes in the country — 
shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the last time the NDP launched a 
taxation study, the Boughen Commission, it resulted in a 
provincial sales tax increase. University students in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who face the third highest tuition 
fees in Canada, were counting on the NDP to follow through 
with its commitment for long-term tuition fee relief. What they 
got was a one-year hold with absolutely no commitment to 
long-term tuition fee relief; and the universities got no 
long-term funding commitment. 
 
Nor was there any commitment in the NDP’s budget to 
establish a children’s hospital in Saskatoon, something near and 
dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker. And no commitment to move 
forward this year with the construction of a much needed 
integrated health sciences facility at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses, working harder and longer than they 
should, are on the front lines of the health care system. Nurses 
were watching today to see if the NDP government would 
recognize their contribution to our province by using some of 
that almost $1 billion in windfall government revenue to keep 
nursing salaries competitive. Well, Mr. Speaker, this NDP 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2005 

budget has no specific funding to cover a fair and competitive 
increase in nursing salaries, which means Saskatchewan may be 
headed for another nurses’ strike, and will also almost certainly 
continue to lose nurses to other provinces. 
 
Teachers, most of whom will not be watching the budget speech 
today because they are busy teaching our children, educating 
the next generation of doctors, nurses, community leaders, 
business owners, labour leaders, tradespeople, and yes, Mr. 
Speaker, even a few budding provincial politicians. 
 
Teachers will be anxious to hear about whether the NDP will 
make them a priority with $1 billion in windfall government 
revenue by putting some of that money aside to fund a fair and 
competitive salary increase. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid the 
news is bad for teachers as well, because the NDP government 
has decided to freeze the education foundation grants at last 
year’s level. What do teachers get — a freeze at last year’s 
level. 
 
So there is not one single cent in the Education budget to 
increase teachers’ salaries this year. Mr. Speaker, given that 
teachers have just given the STF a massive 93.7 per cent 
mandate for strike action, it appears almost inevitable that this 
NDP budget that completely ignores teachers will lead directly 
to a province-wide teachers’ strike. 
 
It gets worse, Mr. Speaker, because school boards were 
counting on the NDP government to use some of its record 
resources, its record revenues, to increase foundation operating 
grants to cover the increasing costs of educating our children. 
Now many school divisions will have little choice, Mr. Speaker, 
but to consider education property tax increases to make ends 
meet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mayors, reeves, councillors, who represent 
cities, towns, villages, rural municipalities, were looking to the 
budget for an increase in revenue sharing to hold the line on 
property tax increases, but the NDP also decided to freeze 
municipal revenue sharing grants at last year’s levels. And that 
will almost certainly drive property taxes even higher. 
 
In my city, Mr. Speaker, the city of Saskatoon, there’s a 
proposed 7 per cent property tax hike increase this year. 
Property taxpayers in Regina are facing a 4 per cent increase 
and the municipal funding freeze will force other communities 
and RMs [rural municipality] across the province to increase 
property taxes as well. So much for the NDP’s now-broken 
promise of property tax relief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party was also 
watching today for any sign, for a sign that the NDP 
government would use its billion-dollar windfall to present a 
bold vision for the future of our province and a long-term plan 
to achieve that vision. Well, Mr. Speaker, now everyone in 
Saskatchewan has the answer. The NDP promised a budget that 
would build Saskatchewan for the next 100 years, but this 
budget doesn’t have enough vision for the next 100 days, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — In this our centennial year, 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. This budget exposes, Mr. 
Speaker, this budget exposes an NDP government with no 
long-term vision for Saskatchewan and no plan to build our 
province. And it demonstrates once again that this government 
never misses an opportunity to miss an opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this budget that we have 
just heard rips hope away from thousands of Saskatchewan 
families and gives them nothing back. Mr. Speaker, never has a 
government done so little with so much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I move to adjourn debate on this motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs that debate on this motion be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the debate on the motion that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government be 
resumed on Thursday, March 24, 2005. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member 
for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the debate on the motion that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government be 
resumed on Thursday, March 24, 2005. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. Not yet, pardon me. The 
Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — My apologies to the members. It has been 
moved by the Government House Leader that this House do 
now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that 
motion? 
 



March 23, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — And on the basis of that motion, the House 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:29.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2183 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2183 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2183 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2183 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2183 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2183 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2183 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2184 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2184 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2184 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2184 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2184 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2184 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2185 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2185 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2185 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2185 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2185 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2185 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Mission to Mexico Volunteers Recognized 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2185 
 Impact of Research Parks on Saskatchewan’s Economy 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2186 
 Funding for Cypress Health Region 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2186 
 Saskatoon Student Co-Hosts CBC Radio Program 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2186 
 Hospitals of Regina Foundation 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2187 
 Lac la Ronge Chief Retires 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2187 
 Mendel Art Gallery 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2187 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Taxation Policy 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2188 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2188 
 Financial Support for Low-Income Earners 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2188 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2188 
 Funding for Teachers’ Contracts 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2190 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2190 
 Post-Secondary Tuition 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................2191 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2191 
 Collective Bargaining with Public Sector Workers 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2191 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2192 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2193 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2193 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2193 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2193 



 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2193 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2200 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2202 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


