















































Hansard: March 22, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 78A  TUESDAY, MARCH 22, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2153 
 March 22, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand here 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan regarding school amalgamations. The petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good citizens of 
Killaly. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
constituents concerned about the forced amalgamation of school 
districts in the Southwest: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Swift Current and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the 
communities of Wymark, Success, and the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I also present a petition on group home spaces in Swift Current. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise on behalf of 
people from the Kyle area to talk about the forced 
amalgamation issue: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue the reorganization of school districts on a strictly 
volunteer basis. 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
Amongst their concerns are that the size of the proposed school 
division is far too large to retain any local input into the 
education system. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are primarily from the community 
of Rosetown, although I also have signatures from Harris, 
Zealandia, and Sovereign. And I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bangor, Waldron, Grayson, Dubuc, and Broadview. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, as well, rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding forced amalgamation of school 
divisions, which I think it’s quite obvious there’s a lot of people 
stand against. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
of school divisions in Saskatchewan and continue 
reorganizing of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 
basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people in the Rosetown area. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I also have a petition to present 
regarding the Claybank Brick Plant. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who are very concerned about the forced amalgamation of the 
school divisions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents from Grenfell. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition today to present with citizens that are very concerned 
with the government not funding the new hospital in Humboldt 
for a number of years. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fulfill their commitment to the 
people of Humboldt and area in providing the funding 
necessary for a new hospital in Humboldt. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Jansen, Englefeld, 
Lanigan, Annaheim, and Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents who are very concerned about the 

forced amalgamation of schools. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force amalgamation 
of school divisions in Saskatchewan and continue 
reorganization of school divisions on a strictly voluntary 
basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Willow Bunch, St. 
Victor, and Scout Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of parents in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much 
needed elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. 
The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today live on Kenderdine Road, 
Mulcaster, Hogg, Horlick, and Wright crescents in northeast 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also on behalf 
of the citizens of Saskatchewan have a petition to halt the 
forced amalgamation of school divisions. And the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this also is signed by the good citizens of Killaly. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned about this 
government’s plan to force the amalgamation of school 
divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Melville, Grayson, and I am particularly 
pleased to be able to present the petition that was signed by the 
good citizens of Meadow Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
dealing with the growing problem on crystal meth. I will read 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine addiction and prevention 
and enforcement and treatment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens residing in 
Saskatoon Southeast, Saskatoon Greystone, and in particular 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 180, 637, 715, and 718. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly some guests seated in your gallery. We have a group 
of school trustees who have travelled the icy highways of 
Saskatchewan to meet with members of the opposition caucus 
this morning. They are, and I’d ask them to rise as I introduce 
them: Dell Schick, Daryl Harrison, John Treso, Ron Yarotsky. 
Back behind I believe is Larry Caswell, Michael Halyk, Marion 
Kreiser, and Shannon Fenn. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these 
school trustees to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too would like to join the members opposite in welcoming the 
trustees who are joining us today in the Assembly. I’m certain 

that they shared a number of different perspectives with the 
members of the opposition and I trust that they too will enjoy 
their time here in the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome today three 
people who are participating in the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program who are seated in your gallery, and I 
welcome them to the legislature and hope that their experience 
with the internship program is a positive and rewarding one. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association Finals 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Saturday I had the pleasure to attend and judge the 
Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association finals held at 
the Yorkton Regional High School in my constituency, where 
110 students debated. 
 
The association is a non-profit organization and promotes 
speech and debate activities for students grades 6 to 12 at our 
provincial schools and our two universities. For 31 years, our 
province’s young debaters have built their public speaking 
skills, fine-tuned their arguments, and competed throughout the 
country at national debating competitions. Our students have 
won and have been recognized for their outstanding debating 
skills, Mr. Speaker, and our students are coached by dedicated 
and hard-working educators in our province. 
 
The topic of Saturday’s debate was the Canadian federal 
electoral system, and every student who participated did a 
wonderful job. Mr. Speaker, following the debate, students and 
their families attended the banquet and awards ceremonies. 
 
In May the national debate seminar for division 3 will be held 
in Halifax. And congratulations go to Jason Cote and Dylan 
Hardy of Saskatoon; Megan Burns and Francois Schira of 
Saskatoon; Sian Barr and Hailey Michalishen of Melville; and 
coach Mauri Ingham of Yorkton who are representing 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatoon will host the national debate for division 4 in April. 
Saskatchewan will be represented by Whitney Skinner of 
Yorkton Regional High School; Jordan Rudderham of 
LeBoldus in Regina; Jennifer Wang of Walter Murray in 
Saskatoon; Iain Ireland and Megan Bollinger of Walter Murray 
of Saskatoon, who will debate in French. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every student who participated in this competition 
did exceptionally well. And no doubt the Saskatchewan 
students, Mr. Speaker, who are going to the nationals make all 
Saskatchewan residents proud of their centennial. I want to 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

congratulate all the students, Mr. Speaker, the educators for the 
wonderful job, the regional high school for this event. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Rural Women’s Achievement Awards 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The rural women 
of our province are indeed remarkable for their strength, their 
fortitude, their leadership abilities. They are not just the 
backbone of the family unit, but they’re also the pillars of the 
community. They are the volunteers, the organizers, the 
workers, the coaches, the mentors, and the list just goes on and 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, March is the month of recognition of rural 
women, and appropriately on March 12 I had the honour of 
attending the third annual Rural Women’s Achievement 
Awards in Humboldt. There can be no doubt that all of the 
women that were nominated were winners, and I’m sure that the 
judges had a very difficult time deciding who would actually be 
the recipient of the various awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Education Award was presented to Elsa 
Hancock of Watson; the Arts and Culture Award to Jakobina 
Keyser of Wynyard; the Agriculture Award to Guenette Bautz 
of Meadow Lake; the Volunteer Award to Sandra Kun of 
Humboldt; the Business Award to Shirley Seidel of Humboldt; 
the Sports Award to Carol Oleksyn of Humboldt; and last, but 
not least, the Woman of the Year Award was given to Mary 
Kehrig of Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to not only 
congratulate the winners, but to also thank all of the rural 
women of our province for their endless contributions to their 
families and to their communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

World Water Day 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is World Water Day. This day was recognized by the 
United Nations General Assembly and adopted as a resolution 
on December 22, 1992. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this day we celebrate by raising the public’s 
awareness of the importance that water plays in all aspects of 
life. It is a precious resource, a miraculous liquid that makes all 
life possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this day I would like to highlight the important 
work that this government is doing to ensure that water remains 
a sustainable resource for future generations. We have recently 

embarked on the strategy that will look at how to conserve our 
water. And we are continuing with our safe drinking water 
strategy which will define the steps that we need to take to 
make sure our water resources are used in the most sustainable 
way possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the objectives of the safe drinking water 
strategy is reduced consumption of water, reflecting our broad 
commitment to both water quality and quantity issues. This 
commitment to water conservation will play a significant role to 
ensure our commitment to a green and prosperous economy and 
to overall human health. 
 
So it is on this day, Mr. Speaker, that we give blessings for our 
abundant supply of water, which constitutes almost 7 per cent 
of the fresh water in Canada. It is a public trust, an essential part 
of our . . . [inaudible] . . . And, Mr. Speaker, if we each save a 
little, together we will save a lot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

March Designated Red Cross Month 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March is Red 
Cross month. In times of conflict and disaster and in peace time, 
the Red Cross helps the vulnerable in the communities across 
Canada and throughout the world. 
 
During March, which is Red Cross month, the Red Cross is 
encouraging Canadians to get to know the programs and 
services they offer throughout the world. Building community 
participation is one of our key strategies for helping vulnerable 
people. Training teams of disaster service volunteers, reducing 
and preventing relationship abuse and bullying through 
education, teaching water safety and first aid, and fundraising 
locally and large-scale disasters are some of the examples of 
how the Red Cross mobilizes people in the community to help 
their own people within their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just recently in February 15, Badger, 
Newfoundland experienced a devastating flood. The Red Cross 
volunteers providing shelter, food and clothing for more than 
1,000 people, this is just a recent example. And of course we all 
know the examples in Southeast Asia with the tsunami, and the 
Red Cross was there for those people as well. So whether it’s 
internationally, nationally, or locally the Red Cross is in every 
community to help the most vulnerable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Teaching Treaties in the Classroom 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for a number of years 
now the Office of the Treaty Commissioner has been working 
in partnership with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, the Government of Canada, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan to educate Saskatchewan students about the 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

treaty relationship between First Nations and non-First Nations. 
 
One of the education tools the Office of the Treaty 
Commissioner uses is a kit entitled Teaching Treaties in the 
Classroom, a resource binder developed by all the partners, 
including Saskatchewan Learning, that is designed to help 
students learn about the treaty relationship as a first step toward 
understanding the role of our treaties in our history, in our 
society today, and in our future — and a giant step in 
addressing racism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this initiative is part of a made-in-Saskatchewan 
process intended to foster understanding between Aboriginal 
and non-Aboriginal people in this province. This is one reason 
why the Office of the Treaty Commissioner was recently 
singled out in a United Nations report as an example of using 
innovative, community-based educational programming to fight 
racism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Teaching Treaties in the Classroom currently 
focuses on grades 7 to 12, but a module for kindergarten to 
grade 6 is being prepared and will soon be in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent evaluation of the program showed that 
while the uptake by teachers is very high, we need to move 
beyond a quick overview to working more intensively with the 
teachers to translate the learning into practice for the classroom. 
To further this initiative we were . . . and yesterday it was 
announced that the province is providing 100,000 to the Office 
of the Treaty Commissioner to increase awareness about treaty 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the relationship 
between education, respect, and social harmony. And I am 
extremely proud the role that this government has played and 
will continue to play in supporting the activities of the Office of 
the Treaty Commissioner. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Kidney Health Month 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
honoured to speak today in support of the month of March 
being recognized as kidney health month. Saskatchewan has 
been a leader in kidney disease treatment and transplants, and as 
such we should always be proud of the progress that has been 
made in this area. 
 
I am reminded of the Baltzan brothers, who were the two 
leading surgeons in Saskatoon whose commitment and 
dedication to kidney disease patients, led to Saskatchewan 
being at the forefront of treatment for kidney diseases. However 
we must be mindful that more needs to be done. There are a 
great number of patients in this province who depend on kidney 
dialysis machines in order to maintain a quality of life. Those 
machines and the professionals who operate them are their 
lifeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency of Estevan, people 

recognize the importance of dialysis and therefore have the 
funds necessary to purchase a dialysis unit for St. Joseph’s 
Hospital. Sadly the patients in the southeast corner of the 
province must continue the very trying commute to Regina to 
receive dialysis because of the shortage of the health care 
professionals needed to administer this treatment. 
 
We must all be grateful for the research and technology that led 
to the development of diagnostic and treatment equipment, but 
we must never forget another essential component, which is an 
adequate number of health care professionals. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Centennial Celebrations 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s centennial 
celebrations are all about people and the collective pride we 
have in this great province. And it is plain to see, Mr. Speaker, 
the centennial spirit has captured the hearts of individuals and 
community groups all across Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m very pleased to share with the Assembly today that just 
three months into our centennial year, Saskatchewan residents 
have already planned more than 2,005 events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Miller Elementary School in Melville had the 
honour of submitting Saskatchewan’s centennial event number 
2,005. The school celebration planning is already well 
underway and will be showcased on May 30 with special 
programs, including oratory about pioneer themes, a potluck 
dinner, creative dance presentations, and a family ball game. 
 
Students and staff will also be preparing special messages to be 
included in a time capsule as part of the community centennial 
plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Miller Elementary School celebrations differ 
in detail from other centennial celebrations, but they also share 
common characteristics like showing pride in the province, 
making connections to the community, connecting and learning 
about Saskatchewan’s heritage, and of course having fun while 
they’re doing it. 
 
Congratulations to the students and staff of Miller Elementary 
School for doing their part to help Saskatchewan celebrate 100 
years of heart. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, across 
Saskatchewan producers are trying to make some important 
decisions in advance of seeding. They’re trying to do 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

everything they possibly can to make this year better than last 
year, but there’s a problem. 
 
Many producers we are hearing can’t get credit. The banks 
don’t know when or if the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government, will live up to its 
contractual commitments on CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization program]. They’re asking for more 
collateral from farmers because they can’t believe the 
government’s empty promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The authors of this uncertainty on the farm today is the Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan and the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is simple. Will the 
Premier commit to fully funding the 2004 CAIS program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there are many reasons why producers are facing a difficult time 
this year. It is not one factor or two. There are factors of low 
commodity prices where producers are asking, what should I 
grow that is going to give me at least a basic return that will 
cover the cost of production. There is the US [United States] 
dollar relative to the Canadian dollar, which has impacted 
heavily on the commodity prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a variety of conditions that are 
impacting. But I can tell you this; we have stood by our farmers 
in the past, and we will stand by our farmers in the future. Mr. 
Speaker, we want to make sure that this sector of our economy 
again is a leader and productive. And we will do what is 
necessary to make sure that happens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
issues affecting producers, affecting agriculture in the province 
of Saskatchewan. That’s why you have a Farm Safety Net. 
That’s why you have the Canadian agriculture income 
stabilization. As imperfect as it is, that’s precisely the point. 
 
It took until December 2004, after playing games with the lives 
of farm families, for this government to finally agree to fund 
2003. The government seems to be indicating, this NDP 
government seems to be indicating they will simply not fulfill 
their share of the commitment for CAIS 2004. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in a pretty simple proposition when it 
comes to agriculture programs. If you sign on for the program, 
you sign the cheque, Mr. Speaker. Now more than ever, 
producers need to hear that basic commitment from this Premier 
and that minister. Will he give them that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
easy to sit on the other side of the House where you are not 
accountable and promise to sign any number of cheques, blank 
cheques; it doesn’t matter. We’ll give you all, whatever you 
want. Just ask us, we’ll sign the cheque, they say from that 
place where they don’t have accountability. 
 
We have accountability, Mr. Speaker. We cannot sign blank 
cheques. And when we found out what the numbers were or as 
close to them as we were going to get for 2003, we came 
through. 
 
Prior to that, Mr. Speaker, we made it very clear that we would 
follow through on our commitment to 100 million, and we 
would make those cheques available on a pro-rated basis once 
the forms were in and completed, Mr. Speaker. That, we did. 
And by the end of the year, Mr. Speaker, when we found out 
the real numbers, we came through and we funded it 
completely. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this NDP government negotiated 
changes to that very program, negotiated changes to CAIS 
which the opposition supported. They got the changes from the 
federal government. They knew when they signed on then, after 
those changes to the program, it was a 60/40 program. 
 
Notwithstanding whether 60/40 is right or wrong in terms of a 
funding formula, that minister and that Premier negotiated that 
agreement. We’re asking them to keep their commitment to 
Saskatchewan producers, to stand today — right now when 
farmers are having difficulty getting financing, getting loans to 
carry on with seeding because of uncertainty — to at least 
remove that little bit of uncertainty that is under their control, to 
keep their commitment and fund CAIS. Will he not commit to 
that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when you 
negotiate and sign on to an agreement and you’re told that that 
agreement is going to cost you $100 million, and you agree to 
make sure that you’ve got that in place, and then they come out 
and they tell you, well now that we’ve got this agreement 
together it’s going to cost you another 150 or $250 million. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not an agreement that we can sign. We cannot 
sign a blank cheque. 
 
The federal government has not come through for the farmers of 
this province. The federal government has not come through for 
the people of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s time they 
came through. We are paying 10 times — 10 times — the 
provincial per capita average to fund the CAIS program. We are 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

paying more than three times the provincial per capita average 
of any other province, Mr. Speaker, to fund our agriculture 
programs. We are there. We have been there, and we will be 
there in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Draude: — This government’s procrastination in 
supporting their portion of the CAIS program last year 
adversely affected farmers in Saskatchewan. Leonard Moroz, a 
farmer in the Wishart area, was out $7,500 from last year’s 
program. That money would have paid his taxes and the 
payment on his swather, which he had to give up because the 
money did not come in on time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Moroz questions why the Minister of 
Agriculture refused to fully commit to funding for the 2003 
CAIS program until the end of the year, the decision that 
delayed timely payments for his farm. Mr. Speaker, will the 
Minister of Agriculture commit to fully funding the 2004 CAIS 
program today and not hold farmers hostage again this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the federal government does provide the 
numbers for this program and the federal government is 
ultimately accountable for the way that this program will be 
paid out. It’s a 60/40 base today. That, Mr. Speaker, is wrong; 
60/40 base does not work for the people of Saskatchewan. If it 
doesn’t work for Saskatchewan where we have 43 per cent of 
the arable land in the country, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t work for 
Canada. And it doesn’t work for Canada. Every other 
Agriculture minister across this country is saying the same 
thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to funding this, we came 
through in 2003. At the beginning of the year we told people 
that we would pro-rate until we got to the end of the year; that 
amount of money they were able to work with. They are able to 
work with it again this year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Ag minister said that government stands behind 
farmers. I have yet to hear one farmer make that comment in 
Saskatchewan. In fact their comments are that this government 
never stands behind farmers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we all agree that the federal formula is not fair for 
Saskatchewan, but it’s the best one the farmers have and the 
Saskatchewan government has at this present time, and at the 
same time that government, that minister, are holding our 
farmers for ransom. When will that minister get to the table and 
when a program comes out sign on and back the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think the group of farmers that the member opposite is talking 
to are a very different group from the ones that I’m speaking 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard from many farmers how much they 
appreciate what we are doing. Yes, there is need for more, there 
is absolutely no question, Mr. Speaker, but when they look at 
the numbers and when they look at the commitment that we 
have had to try to make these programs work and to pressuring 
the federal government, they know that we are there working 
with them, for them, to try and get a better deal for all of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have no idea where that Ag minister is talking to 
farmers because it certainly isn’t in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also hearing rumours that there may be a 
federal cash injection for farmers this spring. And why we bring 
it up now is that the need is there and the need is needed very 
quickly. We need that money instantly because farmers have no 
idea, many of them, how they’re going to get money to put this 
crop in. So I ask the minister, do you know, Mr. Minister, is 
there going to be a cash injection from the federal government 
this spring? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at this time we have no confirmation from the federal 
government. We have heard rumours, as have the members 
opposite. We have pressed to try and get a commitment to more 
funding from the federal government for this spring. We have 
outlined what the situation is, Mr. Speaker, and it is our hope 
that the federal government will come through, recognizing the 
grave difficulty that many producers in this farm . . . in this 
province are facing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our hope and our trust that the federal 
government will come through for people who have been faced 
by such heavy impacts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to make the Agriculture minister somewhat 
aware of what our Saskatchewan farmers are saying. They’re 
telling me that diesel prices are up about 15 to 20 cents a litre 
this spring from last year. Fertilizer prices are going up. 
Chemical prices are going up. We still have the BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] — border closed. We have 
increased crop insurance costs from this government. Low grain 
prices, poor quality grain out there. 
 
The stress on farm families is growing, and they can’t take 
much more, Mr. Speaker. Last year’s bills have not been fully 
paid off at this point. Many farmers are telling us that. And now 
they’re expected to go out there and plant this crop. It’s just 
about an impossibility. They need help. They need help very 
quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If this government ever wanted to get behind farmers, it would 
get on the phone and get a hold of the federal government, find 
out what is coming down the tubes, and break it out — tell our 
farmers what is actually coming so they can finally rely on 
something that this government finally does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite does outline a number of the factors which 
are crucial this year. And as I also mentioned earlier on, there 
are other factors which are also impacting. I mean people are 
going through and they’re looking at how can we decide what 
crop to produce when we can’t get the cost of production out 
given today’s prices. 
 
There are so many things that are impacting on this industry 
today. And, Mr. Speaker, we do need that injection from the 
federal government. We are pressing for that injection. And, 
Mr. Speaker, knowing the federal government, if they’re going 
to come out with it — and I hope they do — they’re going to 
want to take all the credit themselves, Mr. Speaker. You can 
hardly blame them. But whoever takes the credit I don’t really 
care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I do want is to make sure that the funding is there to help 
the producers of Saskatchewan. And if the federal government 
takes the credit for it, so be it. I want the funding there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the big question I think 
that many farmers are saying out there — and they’re hearing 
the same rumours that we are — there may be a federal 
injection of money. They say it’s very much needed out there. 

But the other question they’re asking, Mr. Speaker, is what is 
that minister and that government going to do if the federal 
government does come out with a cash injection and says that it 
has to be cost shared by that government. 
 
Budget day tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, are they going to put 
money in there just in case a program like that comes about? 
Are they going to finally, just once, stand behind farm families 
in Saskatchewan instead of holding out until fall, be right at the 
table, assist the federal government and help our farmers in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite noted, budget day is tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, I 
think our record speaks very clearly that we have been there for 
farmers in the past. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to be 
there for our farmers in this province, providing what support 
we are able and struggling with our federal government to try 
and get a better deal for the farmers and for the people of this 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Renovation of Government Offices 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 
obvious that the farmers, the three biggest problems they have 
is summarized in the words, NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government keeps telling us that they have no 
money for teachers. They just say that they have no money for 
the CAIS program. They have no money for low-income tax 
breaks. But, Mr. Speaker, they have millions of dollars to play 
musical chairs with government employees in Regina — $15 
million to renovate the Department of Finance on College and 
Albert and move workers out of downtown Regina, just weeks 
after committing $11 million renovating the old Bay building. 
What sense does that make? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government says it has no money for 
teachers, no money for farmers, no money for low-income 
earners. Why do they have $26 million for office renovations? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the Minister of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m a little surprised at the question from the member 
from the opposition because all of us realize that maintaining 
the assets of the people and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan is a 
priority — whether it is the envelope of buildings that need to 
be upgraded, whether it’s to address occupational health and 
safety, whether it’s to address space requirements, Mr. Speaker. 
These are assets of the people of Saskatchewan, paid for by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and we’ll maintain those assets, Mr. 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obviously a 
question of priority. There’s more money for renovating offices 
and office space than there is for people in the province that 
need it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that one of the renovations taking 
place over at the Department of Finance is a fancy new 
boardroom. Mr. Speaker, last week we learned that the new 
president of SaskEnergy spent $560 to hand rub a desk and 
$11,000 to move the entrance to his office. This week, we hear 
the NDP may be spending thousands more on a new boardroom 
in the Finance building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister putting a new boardroom in the 
Finance building? How much will it cost and what’s wrong 
with the old one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corp. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been a number of 
articles that have been done on the building at 2350 Albert 
Street that the Department of Finance resides in. There’s a 
number of problems with the envelope of the building, with the 
energy efficiency. That building was one of the first 
skyscrapers, Mr. Speaker, in Regina. It is at an important 
location, and we need to invest the money into it to re-life the 
building so that the health of that building is retained and that 
there is a good space, and a healthy space, for those employees 
to reside in. 
 
And I will tell the member opposite that that is an outrageous 
amount of money that he is speculating is being spent on a 
boardroom, and that is inaccurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my questions are for the Minister of Labour. Last 
spring the NDP government decreed a 0, 1, and 1 wage mandate 
for all public sector employees. The NDP government says it 
respects the working people of this province, but in reality the 
NDP is dictating the outcome of collective bargaining before 
negotiations even start. 
 
Let’s review what our unions are saying. Bob Bymoen of 
SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union] says the NDP is undermining collective bargaining and 
that: 

Zero, one and one through the budget process is not 
acceptable for any government, anywhere, anytime. 

 
Murray Wall of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation says 
teachers are not prepared to accept the contract that is dictated 
to them by the NDP. His quote is: 
 

Collective bargaining is just that, it’s bargaining, it’s not a 
mandate. 

 
Does the Labour minister believe she is upholding the spirit of 
collective bargaining by dictating the results of negotiations 
before even sitting down at the table? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
Chair of the Public Sector Bargaining Committee, I want to 
reiterate what the discussion was that we had with all of the 
unions at the beginning of the budget period containing the 0, 1, 
and 1. 
 
What we discussed is the need to bring the overall sustainability 
of the budget into line with actual revenues of the province. 
And we talked about considerable flexibility on other matters. 
And there has been flexibility. There’s been 11 agreements 
concluded to date. And we have shown flexibility on meeting 
specific needs in different workplaces and around different parts 
of their agreements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Minister of Labour. In the last election this government 
campaigned on giving our young people reasons to stay in 
Saskatchewan. And now this NDP government is telling young 
teachers, nurses, and other public sector workers, that 0, 1, and 
1 is as good as it gets. That doesn’t sound like retaining 
professionals, Mr. Speaker, especially in light of the 
compensation packages being offered in our neighbouring 
provinces. Teachers in Manitoba just signed for 3, 3, and 3. 
Rosalee Longmoore, president of SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses], says, and I quote: “No, there isn’t any way the 
mandate will retain nurses.” 
 
Not only does 0, 1, and 1 turn the collective bargaining process 
on its head, it does nothing to make young people want to start 
their careers here in Saskatchewan. Why should young people 
believe the NDP government is interested in keeping them in 
Saskatchewan if the NDP doesn’t have the decency to respect 
the collective bargaining process and negotiate settlements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Now I have followed what young people are asking for in terms 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

of entry into the workplace. And there are certainly several 
things that they comment on. One of them is that they would 
like full-time employment so that they have predictability in 
meeting their financial obligations. Certainly they’re interested 
in professional employment that relates to their area of 
expertise. And wages are important, but I will point out we are 
living in the most affordable province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, right now the total bill for 
teachers’ salaries is about $600 million. A one percentage 
increase for teachers’ salaries will cost about $6 million. And 
right now this NDP government is telling teachers they can’t 
afford that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at all the money the NDP has 
thrown away on bad business deals. NDP chose to invest 12 
million in Navigata last month — the BC [British Columbia] 
company that loses $1 million per month. That’s almost 2 per 
cent. Twenty-three million on the failed Atlanta dot-com, 
Retx.com; almost four percentage points for teachers. 
Thirty-five million on SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company]; five percentage points for teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP more than willing to throw away 
money on bad business ventures all over the world but refuses 
to make the same investment in our teachers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I might 
mention that we have a very large public sector in 
Saskatchewan because we value the public sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — When others would have an ideology 
that would have us privatize and contract out, we have 
maintained a strong public sector. Eighty per cent of the money 
that is provided for those sectors is wages, and we certainly 
believe in collective bargaining. 
 
We have indicated flexibility, and we are willing to deal with a 
whole range of issues from health plans to recruitment and 
retention. These have all been the matter of agreements that 
we’ve already signed, and we’ll continue to show that 
flexibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the priorities 

of this NDP government. They’re willing to spend money 
moving employees around the city, but not on teachers. 
Remember how the NDP moved the Department of Learning 
into the building SaskEnergy once occupied? Well that move 
alone cost the taxpayers of this province almost $12 million. 
Mr. Speaker, $12 million is equivalent to nearly 2 per cent 
increase for all the teachers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To the minister: why does the NDP have the money to play 
musical chairs with employees at the Learning department but 
not enough to give teachers a fair and competitive wage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will just mention that 
these are the same members who produced a list of people with 
NDP sympathies within the public service that they would fire. 
So your wage is not going to do you much good if you get fired 
because of what you believe in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting listening to the 
answers from the ministers opposite. Now they’re back in a 
world where we’re not dealing with the future at all, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Yesterday, the Minister of Health for the province of 
Saskatchewan said that the Saskatchewan people expect too 
much from our health care system. Can you imagine, Mr. 
Speaker? The minister tells people on the longest waiting list in 
the country that their expectations are too high. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need more nurses in this province to deal with 
waiting lists. That’s plain and simple. Sources tell us that each 
percentage point of the nurses’ contract is worth about $4.3 
million. It’s about choices, Mr. Speaker. And this government 
chose to invest in rotting potatoes rather than offer competitive 
wages to much needed front-line workers like nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this NDP minister negotiate in good 
faith by instructing SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations] to discontinue this government’s 0, 1, 
and 1 mandate and allow for the negotiation process to produce 
a fair collective agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will remind the 
members opposite that we would have to live a long time to 
incur the kind of costs they incurred with 600 million a year in 
interest payments on the debt, which came about when they 
were the members in power. 
 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

And I will just say that we very much wish to work with all of 
our public servants to improve service to the public, to deal 
with workplace issues, and to ensure that they are appropriately 
compensated for the very important work they do in 
Saskatchewan’s public sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the Member of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 

Rental Housing Supplement 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to let you know a little bit about an announcement that we made 
today and to give some details to the House on this. And this 
may not be the question the members asked, but it’s a question 
they’re going to like the answer to. I want to announce today 
the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement that’ll very soon 
be available to low-income Saskatchewan families and persons 
with physical disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier announced a new and groundbreaking 
program that backs our belief that a safe and prosperous 
Saskatchewan begins at home. As we know, good housing 
provides the stability for people to attend education and work, 
and for children to be part of communities and schools in our 
province. And there are several unique features to this program 
that make it very special in Canada. 
 
First, this program will be available only to those households 
whose rental accommodations meet basic health and safety 
standards, and for disabled people’s specialized needs. This 
program is linked directly to quality of housing. The program 
provides both renters and landlords with some new programs 
and tools to accomplish this goal. 
 
Secondly, this assistance will go to households beyond those 
who are on social assistance to include those low-income 
households in the workforce. This program supports those 
households who are under the Building Independence program, 
have moved into education and employment, as well as those 
who are part of Saskatchewan’s growing labour force. 
 
Third, to connect with the province’s Building Independence 
initiative, these supplements go directly to the household. And 
that allows them the independence and flexibility to seek out 
the most appropriate housing to meet their needs in the open 
marketplace. People will have more options, Mr. Speaker, when 
it comes to finding a place to live. 
 
And finally, this supplement will be delivered in an innovative 
fashion through the Building Independence call centre. There’ll 
be no long forms to fill out, and all the information is taken 
over the telephone resulting in a very streamlined process. This 
program will directly support low-income households in 
meeting their affordability challenges relative to housing, while 
allowing them the opportunity to improve their quality of 
housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes that investing in 

Saskatchewan families today is an investment in our province’s 
future, and we believe the investments we are making through 
rental supplements is a solid investment in the future, and I’m 
very pleased to repeat that announcement today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to respond to the ministerial statement. 
 
There is no question that low-income individuals and families 
in Saskatchewan, particularly those who are disabled, face 
many challenges including the inability of many people to find 
high-quality, stable housing that is also affordable. So today’s 
announcement of additional funding for housing for 
low-income earners and the disabled is welcome. It is 
encouraging that the government recognizes that families face 
many challenges in our province and that families are struggling 
under this NDP government. 
 
On the surface, Mr. Speaker, it seems that this is only a rental 
supplement which would exclude those who make mortgage 
payments. If that’s the case it is unfortunate, because we know 
that home ownership and allowing low-income earners to build 
equity in their home and build assets is one of the best tools that 
we can provide families to get out of poverty. 
 
Enabling families to own their own homes is about creating 
independence, building strong community, and giving children 
the opportunity to attend the same school, providing stability 
and improved education for our children. Mr. Speaker, that is 
why the Saskatchewan Party recently put forward a policy to 
promote home ownership as an important element in 
achievement of family independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly agree that affordable housing is an 
important issue facing families but, unlike this government, we 
believe that a long-term strategy is necessary to tackle the issue. 
You cannot simply talk about affordable housing in isolation 
from the other factors that continue to create poverty and create 
barriers to opportunity for low-income families. That long-term 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, must start with allowing low-income 
families to keep more of what they earn. The Saskatchewan 
Party policy, in fact, policy no. 1 in our 100 ideas reads: 
“Reduce provincial income tax for low income residents.” The 
Saskatchewan Party believes minimum wage earners should 
pay no income tax and there should be a reduction in income 
tax to those earning under $35,000. 
 
It is shameful, Mr. Speaker, that this government continues to 
punish and penalize low-income earners at a time when it is 
flush with millions of dollars in unexpected oil and gas 
windfalls. Remember this fiscal year began with the NDP 
government hammering low-income earners by raising the PST 
[provincial sales tax]. It continued with the NDP punishing 
low-income earners by hiking utility rates and failing to keep its 
word to lower property taxes, which is one of the things needed 
to make housing affordable. So on one hand the NDP put 
forward a program like the minister announced today, but on 
the other hand they take it away. 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, last week the NDP voted against our idea no. 1 
and no. 3 of the Saskatchewan Party’s 100 ideas, which would 
have increased the personal exemption for low-income earners 
and raised the food allowance for those on social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support the measure to build independence and 
enhance the dignity of low-income earners and many policies in 
our 100 ideas would go a long way to achieving this. And so we 
will be looking at the details of the program announced today 
with the hope it will help many of those most in need in our 
province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party will continue to press the government 
to establish a long-term vision and a comprehensive plan to 
create opportunity for low-income earners, families, and 
children on social assistance, and the disabled in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, seated behind the 
bar on our side of the House is a former member of the House. 
His main occupation, I think, other than being a member, was to 
be a professor of history, I believe, at the University of Regina. 
He served in the years 1978 to 1982, represented the riding of 
Regina Wascana. He distinguished himself; he was a very solid, 
contributing member of the government in those days and I 
would ask all of the members to join with me in welcoming 
Clint White. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
House to move several motions regarding sitting hours. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
. . . 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Sitting Hours 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I would move, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, when the House 
adjourns on Thursday, March 24, it shall stand adjourned 
until Wednesday, March 30 at 1:30 p.m. 

 
The Speaker: — A motion by leave by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

Notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly, when the House adjourns on 
Thursday, March 24, it shall stand adjourned until 
Wednesday, March 30 at 1:30 p.m. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, when the House 
meets on Thursday, April 14, it shall meet from 10 a.m. to 
1 p.m. and, when the House adjourns on Thursday, April 
14, it shall adjourn until Monday, April 18 at 1:30 p.m. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member from Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, when the House 
meets on Thursday, April 14, it shall meet from 10 a.m. to 
1 p.m. and, when the House adjourns on Thursday, April 
14, it shall stand adjourned until Monday, April 18, at 1:30 
p.m. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, when the House 
adjourns on Tuesday, May 17, it shall stand adjourned 
until Tuesday, May 24, at 1:30 p.m. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, when the House 
adjourns on Tuesday, May 17, it shall stand adjourned 
until Tuesday, May 24 at 1:30 p.m. 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions nos. 906 and 907. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 906 and 907 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 
Act provides for the appointment of a personal or property 
co-decision-maker for an adult who requires assistance in 
decision making but does not need full guardianship services. 
 
It provides for the appointment of a personal or property 
guardian in a situation in which the adult is unable to make his 
or her own decisions, and it provides for the appointment of a 
temporary personal or property guardian in an emergency 
situation. 
 
The amendment Act will affect legal proceedings respecting 
contracts entered into by adults for whom property guardians, 
including temporary property guardians, have been appointed 
within a year after the execution of the contracts. Where the 
question of what the other party to the contract knew about the 
adult’s capacity arises, the other party will have the onus to 
show that he or she did not have reasonable grounds to believe 
the adult lacked capacity at the time of the contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the current law, a contract can be voided if a 
vulnerable adult or his or her representative establishes, first, 
that he or she was mentally incompetent at the time of the 
contract and, second, that this fact was known or ought to have 
been known to the other party. 
 
In situations where guardianship has been granted within a year 
of the contract, the amendment will shift the onus from the 
adult to the other party with respect to the second part of the 

test. Rather than requiring the adult prove the other party knew 
or ought to have known about his or her incompetence, the 
amendment will require that the other party show that he or she 
did not have reasonable grounds to believe the adult lacked the 
capacity at the time of the contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, abuse of vulnerable adults is often difficult to 
identify, prove, and stop. When adults have reduced capacity 
they become particularly susceptible to such abuse. This 
amendment will help to ensure the protection of vulnerable 
people who may be taken advantage of prior to coming under 
guardianship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the protection of 
the most vulnerable members of our society. We see this Bill as 
a step forward in that regard, one that will be welcomed by 
those providing services to and advocating for vulnerable 
adults, and by others who see the terrible effects of abuse of 
these individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 90, The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today and speak briefly on Bill No. 90, An Act to amend 
The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s comments he made a very 
important statement and that is that we all have to work very 
diligently to make sure that we protect the most vulnerable of 
our citizens against people being able to take advantage of them 
or of their situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s an important piece of legislation that’s 
being brought forward in that the whole issue of property 
guardianship is going to be clearly defined and the relationship 
between the knowledge that was provided at the time of the 
contract will be clearly laid out in this legislation so that any 
potential abuse of the system will be minimized and hopefully 
eliminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is important legislation that has ramifications 
for the way property is transferred in this province. And the 
official opposition looks forward to the opportunity for us to 
consult with the appropriate people in the province that may 
have some comment on this. And, therefore, in order to allow 
for that to happen, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 90, The Adult 
Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 
2005. 
 
The Land Surveys Act, 2000 was passed to modernize and 
update the laws and rules respecting surveying of lands in 
Saskatchewan, and to facilitate the implementation of the new 
LAND [Land Titles Automated Network Development] system 
in 2001. The land surveys system and related programs and 
services are administered and delivered through Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the significant benefits of the LAND system was the 
connection of titles to the cadastral parcel database. This 
provided information with respect not only to who owns the 
land but also the shape of the parcel and its relationship to 
adjacent land. The cadastral parcel database is essential to 
support the operations of the land registry and is a key element 
of the infrastructure relied on for economic development in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The current Act identifies the controller of surveys’ 
responsibilities for the survey system of the province and for 
operations of the land surveys directory. The land surveys 
directory is the public registry that contains traditional survey 
information including plans, field notes, orders, and other 
documents associated with legal surveys. 
 
Assignment of custodial responsibility for maintaining the 
official digital graphical representation of the province’s survey 
fabric and the cadastral parcel database is essential to support 
the land registry. Survey infrastructure and the Saskatchewan 
economy also are positively impacted. 
 
The database of survey and parcel information is currently 
operated and maintained by the geomatics unit at Information 
Services Corporation which, along with the controller of 
surveys, performs the functions and responsibilities assigned 
under The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill will facilitate the 
appropriate and efficient operation and maintenance of the 
cadastral database in support of the land registry and the 
economy of Saskatchewan. The proposed amendments will 
define and assign responsibility for ongoing maintenance of the 
cadastral parcel mapping system, provide regulation-making 
power respecting the establishment and maintenance of the 
cadastral parcel mapping system, and provide the controller of 
surveys with greater flexibility to determine and alter hours of 
operation of the controller’s office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 91, The Land Surveys Amendment 

Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise to respond today to Bill No. 91, The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has outlined a new function or an 
additional function that Information Services Corporation is 
making available in fulfilling their mandate to provide a land 
survey system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as soon as we mention ISC [Information Services 
Corporation] and talk about something new and efficient, the 
people of this province have reason to sort of be very, very 
nervous because I recall that initially in The Land Surveys Act 
that this is amending, in 2000, that ISC’s implementation cost 
was estimated to be something like $20 million and ended up to 
ballooning to over $100 million. And one has to worry that this 
same trend may indeed occur in the rolling out of this additional 
service from ISC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that we need to have an effective 
and efficient and very professional land mapping and title 
system in this province, but certainly from past history it is been 
shown that this government really does not have a clue as to 
how effectively and efficiently to roll out these kinds of 
programs. So we have to register our concern about this new 
cadastral mapping system that will be used to identify 
subdivisions and parcels of land, and we have to be very 
concerned that this system is going to not, as well as the 
original rollout of ISC, end up being a very expensive 
boondoggle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so that we can properly investigate and 
communicate with the people that are very professional in this 
regard, and neighbouring jurisdictions as to how they are 
providing these same kinds of services, time will be needed for 
that consultation. And to allow that to happen, I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 91 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act/Loi de mise en 

oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection 
internationale des adultes 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The International Protection of Adults 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The International Protection of Adults (Hague 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

Convention Implementation) Act is based on a new format 
prepared by the Uniform Law Conference of Canada. The 
purpose of the uniform Act is to provide Canadian jurisdictions 
with a framework for implementation of the 2000 Hague 
Convention on the International Protection of Adults. The Act 
is a short Act that gives a force of law to the convention, which 
is set out in schedule A of the Act. 
 
The convention provides for the protection of those adults who, 
by reason of an impairment or insufficiency of faculties, are not 
in a position to protect their person or property. The convention 
addresses problems raised by the transborder movement of 
vulnerable adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the convention addresses such issues as 
jurisdiction to take measures to protect the person or property of 
vulnerable adults, the law to be applied and exercised in 
jurisdiction, the interjurisdictional recognition and enforcement 
of protective measures, and co-operation between state 
authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the Act, a central authority will be 
designated to carry out the duties under the convention. This 
central authority will be the Minister of Justice, but the duties of 
the central authority will be delegated to the Public Guardian 
and Trustee in Saskatchewan. These duties relate to 
interjurisdictional dealings with respect to the protection of 
vulnerable adults. This legislation will be implemented in 
English and French, and will demonstrate to all Saskatchewan 
residents this government’s ongoing commitment to the 
protection of our most vulnerable citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act 
respecting the Application to Saskatchewan of the Hague 
Convention on the International Protection of Adults. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 92, The International Protection of Adults (Hague 
Convention Implementation) Act, be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I’m 
pleased to rise and speak briefly on Bill 92, the Bill respecting 
the application of Saskatchewan to the Hague Convention on 
the International Protection of Adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our understanding that this is a Bill that is, and 
the basic premise of this Bill is something that comes under the 
Hague convention that is being implemented virtually in every 
jurisdiction around the world to extend a similar set of 
protection guidelines for adults in the way they are treated by 
legal systems and those sorts of jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that Saskatchewan wants to be very 
much a part of the world community in extending this 
international convention to adults in our jurisdiction, and that 
similar terms and conditions as exist in other jurisdictions 
should apply to the citizens and people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are quite certain that this Bill will receive the 

support of all of the people in Saskatchewan. However, as part 
of the process of due diligence that is required of us, we 
certainly want to take an opportunity to communicate with 
people in the legal profession to make sure that the wording of 
the Bill in our circumstance is appropriate and thorough. And in 
order to do that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask to adjourn debate. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 92 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 93 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust 
Fund Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 93, 
amendment to The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund 
Act, addresses the manner in which members are appointed to 
the trust board of directors. The C.C.U.B. [Christian 
Community of Universal Brotherhood] Trust Fund was 
established from the proceeds when a Doukhobor co-operative 
operating in Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia was 
wound down. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan established a corporate entity 
to govern the use of the trust by enacting The Doukhobors of 
Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act in 1980. Profits from the trust 
fund are to be used to support activities that further develop 
Doukhobor culture and heritage. The board consists of nine 
members. In the past, these members were appointed by the 
attorneys general of each of the participating provinces. In 
recent years, the Government of Alberta and British Columbia 
have expressed concern about the board nomination process. 
Generally names were just provided to these governments, and 
each government forwarded the names to the minister 
responsible in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to address concerns such as this, this amendment 
proposes that Doukhobor organizations in the provinces of 
Alberta, British Columbia, and Saskatchewan establish 
processes in each jurisdiction to nominate members to the 
board, and that those names be provided to the minister 
responsible in Saskatchewan for appointment by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. This amendment removes any 
responsibility for board appointments from the governments of 
Alberta and British Columbia, but preserves the right of each 
province to have representation on the board of the trust fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Bill 
No. 93, The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, that Bill No. 93, The Doukhobors of 
Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 be now 



2168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am again pleased 
to rise to speak to Bill 93, An Act to amend The Doukhobors of 
Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Act, and to comment briefly on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note the points that the 
minister made in her speech, that this trust fund was created as a 
result of winding down of an agricultural activity in the three 
provinces, and that the proceeds of this fund are used to 
celebrate our diverse culture and heritage and recognizes the 
very important part that the Doukhobors have played in our 
social fabric over the years. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, at the request of the parties involved, it’s 
important to note that this Bill is housekeeping in nature and 
that it streamlines the way representation is appointed on this 
trust fund. And I think that that will be a more effective and 
efficient way of operating this fund to maintain these cultural 
links to the past and make that very important going forward to 
the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to speak to some of the people that 
are involved with the decisions that are involved with this trust 
fund. And in order to facilitate that, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill 93 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 59 — The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour to enter into the debate on an Act that has been before 
us for nearly a year. It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that I had an 
opportunity to read the Minister of Health’s comments last May 
31 when he rose in this House and spoke to second reading of 
this Bill. Since then, Mr. Speaker, I do want to indicate that the 
file on this Bill, on Bill No. 59, as far as the opposition material 
that has been received, is overloaded. It’s a huge file, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think it’s a very sensitive issue. 
 
And the point that many in the province of Saskatchewan are 
making, whether or not they’re representatives of SEMSA, the 

Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association, or 
whether or not they’re ambulance operators in over 80 of 
Saskatchewan’s communities, they all say the same thing: there 
needs to be an improvement to The Ambulance Act. 
 
The Ambulance Act has been in place since 1986 and it has 
served Saskatchewan well. There is a strong desire to ensure 
that if there needs to be changes to certain clauses of that Act 
regarding accountability, that in fact that take place. Every 
operator that I’ve spoken with, everyone who has sent us 
material says to the official opposition, and I’m sure they’ve 
said that to the Minister of Health as well, is that they want to 
be held accountable in that indeed there needs to be a 
clarification of clauses within The Ambulance Act that ensures 
that accountability is put forward. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns is that . . . of ambulance 
operators is that this Act will indeed put them in a very negative 
position. And while the Act overall contains a lot of clauses that 
need to be enacted, I think it is time for the Minister of Health 
to take a good, hard look at this Act and look at the possibility 
of amendments. 
 
And I won’t refer to them as friendly amendments because 
they’re going to change the context of this Bill. But as was the 
case yesterday, when we listened to the minister responsible for 
Municipal Affairs . . . and in fact two Bills were removed from 
the order paper because there needs to be improvement in those 
Bills. There needs to be changes made to those Bills. And we 
understand that those Bills may in fact come back within this 
session that will make the Bill and the people who are involved 
and affected by that Bill, it will make it a better Bill. 
 
And what we’re saying to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, 
is that this Act needs to be looked at in that similar fashion. 
There’s a great concern from the SEMSA organization and 
individuals that there wasn’t the consultation necessary to 
ensure that the right conditions were put forward. 
 
When the people at SEMSA raised concerns about fairness, 
they raised concerns about the dismantling of The Ambulance 
Act. They raised concerns about how the changes that are being 
put forward in Bill No. 59 are in fact going to destabilize and 
demoralize the entire industry. That should be a red flag for the 
Minister of Health to say, is this the way that I, as the Minister 
of Health, want to go? I think that’s the question that has to be 
asked. The people in . . . I’m sure the people in Saskatchewan 
Health need to ask that very same question of, why was this Bill 
put forward with those conditions that are there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at sections 10 and sections 18 of the 
Act, we note that of course section 10 is going to be 
considerably rewritten, and so will section 18 as well. Both of 
those sections are very important to ambulance operators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have . . . As the representative for Canora-Pelly 
constituency I’m very fortunate to have excellent ambulance 
services in Canora-Pelly from the Canora Ambulance Care Ltd., 
operating with its main base out of Canora, and the Duck 
Mountain Ambulance service operating out of Kamsack. Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you that it wasn’t a short two and a half 
weeks ago I guess when I actually took . . . made myself avail 
their services. And in fact, I had an ambulance trip from Canora 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

hospital to here in Regina on a Monday morning when things 
weren’t going as well as they should be for myself and I . . . and 
the doctor insisted that I travel by ambulance to Canora . . . 
from Canora to Regina. I can tell you that the service that is 
there is first rate. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that a number of 
letters have been written by ambulance operators. One of the 
letters was addressed to myself and it has been sent to the 
Minister of Health as well — so it’s not, it’s not just a letter that 
I have; he has it as well — where the operator, the 
owner/operator of Canora Ambulance Care, Mr. Wally Huebert 
indicates the problems that he as the operator of the Canora 
ambulance will incur as soon as this Act is passed. And he’s 
very critical of section no. 10 which informs him that as long as 
I continue to provide high-quality service, I will receive 
ongoing service agreements. This will be removed. 
 
So there’s no, there’s no guarantee that even though he provides 
exactly as the service that is requested by Saskatchewan Health 
that in fact his service contract will continue. Now if that’s not 
there as a written guarantee . . . And you know, Mr. Speaker, 
we were talking in this House during question period about the 
problems facing farmers and their ability to go to the bank with 
something that they can assure their financial institution that 
indeed there is a payment being made under CAIS. The very 
same thing is true for these ambulance operators. 
 
If they don’t have the ability to go to a financial institution and 
indicate that their contract of service is going to be maintained, 
why would a financial institution risk loaning huge amounts of 
money to them to update equipment? It’s not a very cheap 
system, Mr. Speaker. Costs of ambulances, the costs of the 
machines in those ambulances are huge. And the ambulance 
operator must be able to provide updated changes in vehicles to 
ensure that his service that he provides to the people is first rate. 
 
This ambulance Act change under Bill 59 will take that away, 
will not allow ambulance operators the ability to have an 
ongoing contract. And as I indicated at the very beginning, Mr. 
Speaker, accountability, if that . . . if the concern of the minister 
and the concerns of officials is that some operators are not 
being held accountable and their level of service to the people 
of Saskatchewan is inadequate, there needs to be changes to the 
Act that ensure that that is in fact reality. And no one in the 
industry is opposed to that. They want to have a process 
whereby there is a level of accountability, there is a level of 
service, and there’s a measuring stick to ensure that if someone 
isn’t meeting the needs and isn’t meeting the service 
requirements of the area, that that will be changed and that they 
will be held accountable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at all of those concerns 
that have been brought forward, I also, you know . . . when we 
start to look at ambulance care and ambulance operators we 
have to recognize that of course communities are going to be 
affected. And I have a letter dated June 4, 2004, from the town 
of Canora. It’s been cc’d to the Premier and the Health minister 
and the Deputy Premier, so it’s within the members opposite’s 
files, I’m sure. And this letter says this; and I want to quote a 
paragraph from it. It says: 
 

The council of the Town of Canora would like to express 

its concern regarding recently proposed changes to The 
Ambulance Act. As you know, ambulance services in 
Canora and district are currently provided through a 
private company which offers a high quality of service and 
gainfully employs several residents of our community. 
Proposed amendments to the above legislation, 
specifically the elimination of deemed renewal terms and 
the potential lack of legal recourse in the event of contract 
termination, may have serious repercussions in our small, 
rural town, including a decreased ability for the ambulance 
to secure financing or a reduced value of their business. 

 
Next paragraph says: 
 

It is also our worry that these changes could lead to the 
Sunrise Health Region assuming direct control of local 
ambulance services, which could cause Canora to suffer 
the loss of yet another viable local business and possibly 
result in a reduction to EMS units or staff. Business 
closures or staff reductions like this ultimately translate 
into families leaving our community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Mayor Dennis for indeed sending 
that letter to the Minister of Health and others, to encourage 
him and the members of Saskatchewan Health to think about 
what this Act is really going to do for those communities, not 
just for Saskatchewan Health and the implications of whether or 
not EMS [Emergency Medical Services] providers are going to 
become part of that larger group called health organizers. 
 
They need to be aware that these viable, private businesses are 
doing their job right now. They’re doing it well. They’re doing 
it under an Act that has been in place since 1986. They want to 
have improvements to the Act to ensure that there are 
accountability measures and that there are conditions whereby 
services must be met, or there will be a consequence. They want 
those conditions, and they want those changes to the Act. But 
they don’t want to have put in place something that jeopardizes 
their future, that puts them at risk because they can’t update 
their fleet. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mean, and I think it’s very clear that if an 
ambulance operator concludes that an aging vehicle needs to be 
replaced today to offer a better service and he can’t do that 
because the financial institution reads this Act and says, you 
don’t have a continuous contract anymore, obviously that 
vehicle is going to deteriorate next year and the year after. And 
if it’s Saskatchewan Health’s intention, then, to evaluate these 
ambulance providers in two, or three, or four years after they’ve 
been unable to update their fleets, you know as well as I do 
what the outcome of that evaluation will be. It will be negative. 
And that will be, maybe, what this government is intending to 
do. 
 
So the question that EMS is asking, is why is this legislation 
being put forward? If it’s to improve accountability, if it’s to 
make the changes that are needed, EMS is willing to sit down 
with officials from the Minister of Health’s office, from the 
Saskatchewan Health, and ensure that the clauses that are put 
into this Act are correct. Currently, they are not. 
 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I ask that the Minister of Health 
reconsider this Bill, not for the purpose of withdrawing the 
entire Bill because as I’ve indicated there are many good 
sections in this Bill, but there needs to be changes. There needs 
to be amendments. There needs to be an effort put forward by 
the Minister of Health with all of the people involved in the 
emergency medical services association to bring forward an Act 
that everyone is able to work with. That’s the least that I think 
we can ask of the minister. So, Mr. Minister, until that happens, 
I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Canora-Pelly that debate on Bill No. 59, The Ambulance 
Amendment Act 2004 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 67 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 67 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 
modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to speak to Bill No. 67, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulations Amendment Act. It’s been spoken to by a number 
of my colleagues and addresses a number of issues that are 
affecting the casinos and VLTs [video lottery terminal] today. 
 
The Act gives casinos the authority to ban people from 
Saskatchewan’s casinos, and it also sets out the appeal process 
for people who have actually been banned. The Bill also sets 
the parameters for the introduction of an electronic application 
system for commercial liquor permits, and it puts existing 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] policies 
into legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has spoken to a number of 
stakeholders who are really in favour of these amendments. So 
at the end of my comments, I’ll move that we send this Bill to 
committee to answer specific questions and details. However, 
Mr. Speaker, the issue that I and the people of Saskatchewan 
question and basically take offence with is this Premier’s 
refusal to be up front with the people of Saskatchewan about 
gaming. 
 
We know that the government is dependent on gaming revenues 
as a way to fund social programs. But in opposition in the ’80s, 
our now Premier was leading the fight against the dangers of 
gambling, the effect gambling had on society, and the effect it 
had on individuals directly. In fact, the Premier asked if any 
study had been done on the adverse effects of gambling. Mr. 
Speaker, today I’d like to ask the very same question. What has 
this government done with regard to this study? What have they 
done to determine the social/economic impact of gambling on 

our province? What does gambling really cost the people of this 
province? 
 
In our policy convention in February, the Saskatchewan Party 
stated the beliefs and feelings of not only our members but I 
daresay the feelings of many of the people in Saskatchewan. 
We all know that the Saskatchewan NDP government is 
addicted to gambling. Since the NDP took power in 1991, 
Saskatchewan has experienced a massive explosion of gambling 
that, combined with the proceeds from liquor sales, now 
generates more than $700 million in revenue each year for the 
government. 
 
It is impossible to understand the impact gaming expansion has 
had on families and communities without a comprehensive 
social impact study. Most experts indicate it’ll take years of 
study to get a complete picture of the social impact of gaming. 
However virtually everyone consulted on the issue of gaming 
agreed a social impact study is fundamental to the development 
of a long-term gaming strategy for our province. 
 
So one of the policies that we passed at our convention, Mr. 
Speaker, was that a Saskatchewan Party government would 
honour all existing casino development agreements but a 
complete, comprehensive study of the social impact that gaming 
expansion is having on Saskatchewan, before considering the 
approval of any other casino development or expansion in the 
number of VLTs, would happen in this province. And 
importantly, the study would be made public. 
 
We also heard that Saskatchewan is not providing adequate 
addiction services and doesn’t have adequate addiction 
treatment facilities. Some of government revenues generated by 
liquor sales and gaming activities should be dedicated to 
strengthening our addictions treatment centres and programs. 
So we passed another resolution, that is a Saskatchewan Party 
government would dedicate a percentage of liquor and gaming 
revenues to addiction programs and facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent a small . . . the part of the constituency 
that doesn’t have any large centre. In fact our largest town has 
about 1,400 people. We know that the total VLT revenues from 
what is considered the rest of the province, that’s areas that 
don’t have a large centre, works out to about $84.759 million. 
And there we have VLTs numbering 1,686. So per VLT, that’s 
about $50,000. 
 
So although I can’t get the exact numbers, I do know that the 
town of Kelvington, with six VLTs, will bring into this 
government about $300,000. Wadena will bring in over 
$500,000 and Porcupine Plain will bring in over $200,000. 
That’s money that comes directly from the community, and our 
people would like to know where that money goes directly and 
how it is actually adding value to our area. 
 
At one time this government promised to set aside 10 per cent 
of the gaming incomes for communities. That was a promise 
made but it wasn’t a promise that was kept. There are nearly 
4,000 VLTs in Saskatchewan right now, now collecting over 
$266 million a year. 
 
Harold Wynne of the Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse has 
already authored one report on gambling in this province. His 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

study in 2002 found that as many as 13,000 Saskatchewan 
residents had serious gambling problems and that more than 
122,000 people were at risk of developing gambling problems. 
 
Mr. Wynne said in August of that year that the Saskatchewan 
government should put the brakes on casino expansion until the 
study did . . . until the province actually did a study on the 
social impact. But the NDP government has decided to go 
ahead with the expansion even though the study could be at 
least five years away. 
 
Another quote from Mr. Wynne is, he said, and I quote: 
 

. . . in 2002 and I say . . . [it again] now — that there 
should be a moratorium on gambling expansion until these 
kind of impact studies are done. 
 

The government has had several years to put this process in 
place. And I still ask, what’s been done to date? 
 
In August 1989 the Premier had this to say about another . . . 
Bill 67, an Act respecting gambling and the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Commission. He called it at that time, bad news. Why? 
I quote, he quoted: 
 

One, it provides for an expansion of gambling in the 
province of Saskatchewan; and secondly, it provides that 
government opposite in fact can become a player, [and] a 
manager within the gambling industry. 

 
It is his government that expanded the industry. And not only is 
this government a player, they are the industry. 
 
He also stated: 
 

We have a situation where literally thousands of people 
are leaving our province in record numbers and the 
government opposite seems to say the answer is, what do 
we need? — more gambling. 
 

That was the answer on August 1, 1989. But you know what, 
Mr. Speaker? That’s the answer today too. 
 

. . . if this government, now so desperate for cash, thinks it 
can find a cash bonanza in . . . [the] field by going directly 
into gambling and looking for revenues through gambling, 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you, they’re mistaken. 

 
That was said on August 1, 1989. Mr. Speaker, I daresay that 
that’s nothing less than a flip-flop. 
 
The Premier has shown not only on this issue but on others 
that he will say one thing in opposition when he marches in 
downtown Moose Jaw and do another when in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these questions must be answered sooner or later 
for the people of our province. In the meantime, I move that this 
Bill move into committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that 
Bill No. 67, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 
Act, 2004 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 67, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Industry and Resources that Bill No. 67, The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004 be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 86 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity 
to speak to this Bill. 
 
This Bill has been put forward as a Bill that deals with the usual 
routine amendments. It’s a labour related Bill. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve got growing fear whenever this government 
introduces or does anything to deal with labour issues. Because 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour has now 
developed the uncanny ability of . . . able to introduce things 
that are able to simultaneously upset both labour and the 
business sector at the same time. And incredibly enough, I think 
this may be another one that’s headed the same way as some of 
the earlier things that have been done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill is largely treated as being a housekeeping type of Bill. 
But one of the things, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill does is it gives 
the adjudicators under the Act the same powers and same 
abilities as The Public Inquiries Act. 
 
And clearly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is directed at the litigation 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

that recently took place regarding Wal-Mart and the attempts to 
unionize Wal-Mart so that the judicators, when they’re dealing 
with these things, will be able to go on what may very well be a 
fishing expedition to try and obtain policy and practice manuals 
from Wal-Mart and from other large corporate employers that 
have developed very sophisticated and highly confidential 
policies dealing with labour relations matters. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I find it troubling and disconcerting that this 
government would put forward that type of legislation that 
would enable those type of bodies to have that kind of power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the type of thing that could be dealt with is the 
things that are the usual corporate privacy issues that we should 
be very reluctant to see eroded. The things that could come out 
as a result of that type of power would be information that 
would deal with pricing practices, confidential market shares, 
any number of other things that that type of tribunal would feel 
would be necessary to deal with. If they’re trying to overrule 
the litigation that’s taking place, it could give them virtually 
unfettered discretion to go on a fishing trip through the books 
and through the personnel, through the labour relations, through 
the practices, through the advertising things that large 
corporations have developed and spent large amounts of money. 
 
Another troubling aspect dealing with that same section is it 
allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations 
allow other things to be produced. And, Mr. Speaker, whenever 
I see legislation that allows other things to be developed by 
regulations, you know that the Bill has effectively become open 
ended and is in a situation where this government could, if they 
chose to, by regulation do any number of other things. We saw 
that happen with the other Bill that was passed in 1996 — was 
left open with the potential for regulations to come later on — 
and it wasn’t until this year we were dealing with the available 
hours issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill has got the open-ended 
situation again where once again the regulations could come 
forward and could produce the incredible problems that were 
manifest for this minister when she was dealing with the 
available hours legislation. And I find it highly troubling that 
we’re putting forward legislation that has an open-ended ability 
to proclaim or pass regulations. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
regulations do not come back to this House for scrutiny. They 
give incredible powers to both the government and to the 
tribunals that are empowered by that. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of concern when a Bill is 
put forward that allows that type of thing to take place. And we 
as a legislative body should be loath to see that type of thing 
being passed or put forward, particularly given the current 
record of this government in dealing with labour. 
 
The troubling aspect that this government had in dealing with 
available hours is that they alienated the SFL [Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour], they alienated the business community, 
they alienated virtually every public employer in the province. 
The city of Saskatoon, the city of Regina. the city of Moose 
Jaw, the University of Saskatchewan, a number of other public 
entities came forward and said this is not a workable piece of 
legislation. The regulations aren’t workable. I read the 

regulations that came out with that piece of legislation. 
 
If, with this type of legislation, similar regulations are passed or 
proclaimed, we’ll be in the same type of problem all over again, 
Mr. Speaker. I find this something that should cause the 
residents of Saskatchewan a significant deal of concern. 
 
There appears to be on the part of this government a plan for a 
large number of pieces of labour legislation to come in, where 
they are passed, not necessarily proclaimed in force, or are left 
open ended with the ability to pass regulations later on. And 
what it does, Mr. Speaker, is it sets a chill in the labour-business 
community, in the labour-business relationship, something that 
we as citizens and business people should all be concerned 
about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other provisions in this 
legislation that I would like to comment on briefly. Section 62 
deals with paying money in, in satisfaction of a labour standards 
claim while the appeal is being processed through. Mr. Speaker, 
the initial theory behind that is it will protect the employer . . . 
or the employee in case the employer is unable to pay later on, 
and will take away the incentive for the employer to use the 
appeal to drag out the requirement to pay the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in cases of businesses that are downsizing or 
having problems this could pose a significant financial hurdle 
for those businesses. Well maybe something the . . . [inaudible] 
. . . government might want to consider as an alternative, would 
be the ability to post security for costs or post other forms of 
security to ensure that payments are made later on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this could affect the ability of a business to carry 
on and is something that is troubling as well. And I would like 
to invite the Labour minister to try and consider some other 
options that might make it less onerous and less difficult for 
employers to deal with. 
 
Another troubling aspect of this Bill is the addition of section 
62.4(3) where it talks about the money being placed as security. 
Under the old Act, it was either going to go to the employer or 
the employee. Under this Act, the new provision is maybe it 
could be kept by the director, a new section saying that the 
government may glom on to this money and keep it. It doesn’t 
say, necessarily, under what circumstances or why that would 
happen. And, Mr. Speaker, for the life of me, if the money is 
posted by an employer, why it wouldn’t either go back to the 
employer or to the employee if the employee is found right, I 
don’t know. But when the government comes along and says 
but we’ll allow the director to keep it, certainly not something 
that’s an appropriate use of this amount of money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government wanted to deal with this portion 
of the Act and do some upgrading, what they might want to do 
as an alternative would be to develop a system where this type 
of appeal process, Mr. Speaker, is expedited, or some kind of an 
expedited process. Because during the period of time where an 
employer does not pay an employee and the Act is under active 
dispute, the employee is without the money, the employer is 
without the money, and both entities — both the employer and 
the employee — would be well served by a process that could 
resolve this within a matter of hours or days rather than weeks 
or months. And the time periods in there allow for a fairly 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

significant delay in appointing adjudicators and appointing 
appeals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another aspect of this legislation is it allows and 
includes provisions under the whistle-blower process and it 
allows appeals to the Court of Queen’s Bench. Mr. Speaker, the 
appeals to the Court of Queen’s Bench are limited to appeals on 
questions of law or jurisdiction of the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they might want to consider would be an 
appeal that would amount to, on some circumstances, a trial de 
novo, so that new evidence could be introduced or that other 
evidence could be reduced and that the Court of Queen’s Bench 
could sit as a court that would hear all of the evidence that was 
there, rather than just looking at the narrow determination that 
was made in determining whether there was a jurisdictional 
error. And I would submit that that may add a greater element 
of fairness for both the employer and the employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes that are proposed are done sort of 
under the theory that we’re trying to include the changes made 
for the whistle-blower portion of the legislation, but what the 
minister should have done in preparing this draft might well 
have been to look at other aspects or other things that might be 
necessary in trying to have a streamlined, coherent, 
comprehensive process for prompt, efficient appeals that will 
adequately protect both employers and employees. And I’m not 
sure that this does. 
 
Prior to being elected, I frequently had both employers and 
employees come to my office with problems that they had with 
labour standards. And usually the problems were as a result of 
delays or time problems, or as a result of evidentiary issues, 
certificates that were incorrect, and would suggest to Mr. 
Speaker that it may be appropriate to allow new trials in 
Queen’s Bench if the Court of Queen’s Bench was convinced 
that that was an appropriate use of their jurisdiction. And would 
suggest as well, Mr. Speaker, that if we left that jurisdiction to 
the Court of Queen’s Bench as a discretionary thing, we could 
certainly leave ourselves in a better position than we are now by 
dealing strictly with the director and the adjudicator that’s going 
to be . . . And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill as well allows for a panel 
of adjudicators to be put forward by way of order in council. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m troubled and concerned whenever I see 
legislation that allows for tribunals or officials to be named 
without dealing with what their educational criteria might be, 
what their professional qualifications or experience might be. 
There may well be that the panel becomes biased or is subject 
to allegations of bias or less than total partiality . . . impartiality 
and, Mr. Speaker, would think that this Bill may well be 
amended to include something that would require minimum 
qualifications and people that are also some distance from 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there also is provisions in here for 
enforcement of awards once awards have been made for . . . 
Excuse me, the members opposite, I’d certainly like to give 
them a break so that they might want to take some notes. 
Because I know that the points I’m making I’m sure have 
significant importance to them and I think maybe what might be 
appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is if I go back to the 
beginning and start again so that they get a full, complete 

opportunity to review and hear everything that I’m putting 
forward for them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the point I was making, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that my concern is the enforceability of the awards that are 
made by these tribunals. 
 
Typically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these awards are judgments and 
are registered as judgments of the Court of Queen’s Bench. The 
problem that they have is that they are expensive and 
time-consuming for an employee to, to try and enforce them. 
And what this legislation might have done was to include a 
waiver of court filing fees and might also have included some 
expedited process to try and allow for the more prompt 
collection of these outstanding sums that are owed to 
employees. 
 
And I’m surprised and troubled, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
Bill did not address any of the remedies that might be necessary 
to an employee to try and collect it. One of the remedies that 
might have been available might have been an automatic 
garnishee process or a continuing garnishee process or 
something that would give some assistance for the ability of 
those employees to try and collect those, those funds, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last thing that I would like to comment on is 
section 74 which deals with the whistle-blower portion and 
talks about . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — And I thank you for that, members opposite. It 
talks about who might be a person in lawful authority that an 
aggrieved employee might wish to go to when, when they have 
a complaint or wish to go forward with information. And under 
the proposed new legislation it will be any police or law 
enforcement agency with respect to an offence within the 
power, and any person whose duties include the enforcement of 
those statutes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s troubling on this is it only deals 
with specific individuals that they can go to. It doesn’t deal with 
members of the opposition, members of the media, or even 
somebody that might be a cabinet minister or someone that’s 
higher up in the government or another government official. 
 
One of the cases that recently was dealt with in the courts was 
the Merk decision where we’re before the Supreme Court right 
now and what the decision has come down to is the employee 
that was fired for having gone two or three steps up in the 
management chain and this, this legislation will give that 
employee no help whatsoever because what that employee 
chose to do, quite rightly, was to bump up a couple of people in 
the management chain and say, this has, this has happened. 
 
And now we’re talking about the use of words directly or 
indirectly responsible for supervising. Well if that isn’t part of 
somebody’s job description, they go to a district manager or a 
district supervisor. They may very well not have any protection 
whatsoever from this piece of legislation and may well find 
themselves back in court seeking a judicial interpretation of this 
section. 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, we put forward a piece of legislation, a private 
member’s Bill, that offered some assistance in this area. The 
minister chose not to look at that and instead went with 
something that was a much broader approach but a much 
thinner remedy and actually, Mr. Speaker, probably minimal or 
no benefit to the employees that are effected by this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would like to suggest to the Minister of 
Labour is that they may want to reconsider this legislation and 
they might want to focus their work in the labour area on trying 
to rehabilitate the relationships between labour and between 
business and employees and between unions. Because what 
they’ve done right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they have 
driven a wedge — and a significant wedge — between unions, 
between management, between the business sector and the 
private sector, that are unnecessary things to do. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they have done it for political grounds. And they 
haven’t even done that successfully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that’s part of a larger scheme of other 
legislation that’s intended to deal with labour in this province. 
And I don’t think this is the type of legislation that should be 
going forward at the present time, and would like to urge the 
members opposite to reconsider some aspects of it. And 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of this 
Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast 
has moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 87 — The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
it certainly is a pleasure to . . . or, Deputy Speaker, to enter into 
debate on Bill No. 87. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when one looks at the accompanying news 
release that the government issued upon introduction of this Bill 
it would seem that this is a fairly benign Bill. It’s going to help 
get things done in a timely fashion. It’s going to clarify some 
procedural powers and duties of the Labour Relations Board, 
and goes on again to talk about more timely rulings and 
reducing costs and those sorts of things. 
 
But this Bill is anything but benign. There are some pretty 
onerous sections to this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think 
both employees and employers in this province need to be 
aware of. And we certainly will be taking our time to review 
each section of this Bill and get a full understanding of what the 

implications contained within the Bill might be. And I will 
highlight a few of these today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
sure we will be discussing this Bill in this Assembly in a 
number of days during this session. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Section 17 talks about amending a number of subsections of 
section 17, which talks about some of the powers of the 
chairperson of the Board of Labour Relations, and making that 
individual, that board Chair, responsible for prescribing 
regulations and so on. Which one might ask, well why are those 
powers being given to the board Chair? Should that not be 
Department of Labour and the government’s responsibility, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
Section 18 goes on and talks about the Canada Labour Code, 
which is the national legislation that deals with the Canadian 
Industrial Relations Board and talks about taking some of the 
provisions, if not perhaps all of them, from the Canada Labour 
Code and incorporating them into this amendment. And we 
need to really think about that. The Canada Labour Code was 
designed to deal with employers and employees that have a 
national presence — large employers such as Air Canada, the 
banks, as a couple of examples who have employees across this 
country — and both sides, whether it be the employees or the 
employers have the ability to have expertise at their command 
to help them with various issues, whether it be within contract 
negotiations, or labour standard issues, and so on. 
 
And it seems that this, by incorporating some of the Canadian 
labour code provisions into a provincial Act, may be a bit of 
overkill. In fact it probably is. It would, it could prevent a 
number of employees from representing themselves before the 
Labour Relations Board. It could be very onerous for 
employers, small businesses who may be what we commonly 
refer to as a mom-and-pop operation. They may be required to 
hire expertise, which they really can’t afford, to settle some 
minor issues. So that’s a section that really needs to be 
reviewed and looked at very closely. 
 
That section 17 also talks about the powers of the Labour 
Relations Board to enter the premises of both the employer and 
the premises of trade unions. And these are powers that 
shouldn’t be given lightly. These are very onerous powers given 
to a board, a quasi-judicial board, that in practice most of the 
times are kept for very specific purposes and are usually only 
given to peace officers and safety regulators under very limited 
circumstances. 
 
So we certainly have some major concerns with that provision 
of the Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would suggest that both 
employers and the unions and employees should be certainly 
aware of some of these new powers that are being contemplated 
given to the Labour Relations Board. 
 
What this Bill doesn’t talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
anything to improve the timeliness in which the Labour 
Relations Board renders its decisions. This is an issue that, as a 
past Labour critic and current deputy Labour critic, I hear on a 
fairly continuous basis. I hear from parties that have cases heard 
by the Labour Relations Board and are sitting and waiting for a 
decision from that body. And they’re waiting, and they’re 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

waiting, and they continue to wait. 
 
In fact I had a call just the other day from an individual who 
had their case heard some 17 months ago — I repeat that, 17 
months ago — and they still haven’t had a decision. And from 
what I’ve been told about the case, it’s not a complicated case. 
It’s not a case between a large employer and a large union. It’s 
an individual who brought a case before the Labour Relations 
Board. Their life is on hold. And when I raised this issue in the 
past with the Minister of Labour and the Minister of Labour 
paid some lip service to say, well yes, we’re going to try and get 
these decisions in a timely fashion. But it’s easy to say one 
thing, but the evidence just isn’t there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But as I said, in this Bill I see nothing that addresses that issue. 
Certainly there’s exceptions to every . . . There are some 
exceptional circumstances where decisions maybe need to delay 
for six months or perhaps even a year. But as I said, this 
particular case that has been before the Labour Relations Board 
for some 17 months isn’t a complicated case. I don’t know what 
the holdup is, but when you raise the issue with the Minister of 
Labour, you don’t get any answers. 
 
So then you raise the issue with the Chair of the Labour 
Relations Board; you don’t even get a courtesy of a reply to 
your letters. In fact when you call that office, you’re told you 
have no business in inquiring as to when perhaps a decision 
could be rendered. And I don’t think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
that is the appropriate answer that an individual in that position 
should be giving when asked when can a party expect to receive 
their decision. The individuals aren’t asking for a specific date 
or say give me a time frame — two or three weeks or a month 
perhaps — but 17 months and they still don’t have a decision, 
and have no idea when the decision is going to be rendered, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So like I said, there’s nothing in this Bill that addresses that. No 
attempt. It was mentioned to the minister on a number of 
occasions, but we see nothing in it. This is the same 
incompetence from this minister that we’ve seen in recent 
history, in recent past, and it’s continuing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another provision in this Bill talks about, as I had mentioned, 
timeliness of contract negotiations. And it talks about, if 
bargaining doesn’t start within 20 days after a workplace is 
certified, that the Labour Relations Board will be given some 
powers to interfere in the collective bargaining process, 
something that this government likes to do on a regular basis. 
Whether it’s the Minister of Labour or the Minister of Learning, 
they like to interfere in the collective bargaining process, as I 
said, very regularly. 
 
And then it goes . . . this Bill also says that if the two parties 
can’t reach that first contract, that first agreement, within 90 
days that the Labour Relations Board will step in and impose a 
contract. Well I’m told by those people who practice labour law 
and who bargain on behalf of unions that 90 days just isn’t 
realistic — particularly for a first contract when a workplace is 
certified. Well once again it appears that this Minister of Labour 
hasn’t done her homework and just pulled some numbers out of 
the air and said well that looks good, so we’ll put it in this Bill, 
and we’ll see if the Bill flies, and with little concern about the 
impact it will have on negotiations and labour relations in this 

province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve said there are a number of 
concerns that need to be addressed, and we will certainly be 
dealing with stakeholders in this area. So I would then move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood has moved that debate be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 80 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand and speak in the House today regarding Bill 
No. 80, An Act to amend The Education Act, 1995. 
 
This Act is not a very long . . . this Bill is not a very long Bill. 
It’s only really a section long, only about a half a page or a page 
long. It doesn’t really say a whole lot other than dealing with 
the election date of school trustees. 
 
The interesting part of the election date, dealing with the 
election date of school trustees even though that isn’t significant 
. . . The reason that this Bill is before the House is very 
significant. Whether the elections go ahead on the prescribed 
day and this Bill changes that for new school divisions, the 
most interesting part is why this Bill is in the House in the first 
place. 
 
And the Bill is in the House because of the forced 
amalgamation that this government has forced school divisions 
into that started . . . I guess the debate started in May of last 
year shortly after I was named the Learning critic, when the 
minister responded to the Boughen Commission. I think we all 
remember what the Boughen Commission was set up to do. 
 
The Boughen Commission was set up to look at how do we 
fund education in our province. People on this side of the 
House, people on that side of the House . . . I believe that we 
rely far too much on property tax to fund education. So how are 
we going to properly fund education? 
 
I remember about four years ago or five years ago when the 
government had a little extra money, they decided to put about 
$50 million over two years to address the problem. That was 
$25 million a year. And they did that through the Department of 
Municipal Affairs, and people got a bit of a rebate on their 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

property tax, regarding the education portion of their property 
tax. And that’s how they addressed the funding issues. 
 
But the problem with that is, it was a short-term solution, and 
two years passed quite quickly. Then they were left with no 
extra money. So now how are they going to address funding of 
education? So instead of addressing the problem, what they said 
is, let’s strike a commission. Let’s ask Ray Boughen to strike 
this commission and travel the province and see how we should 
properly fund education. 
 
Well the Boughen Commission came back with a report a year 
ago January, which outlined the whole issue of property tax, the 
overreliance of Saskatchewan on property tax to fund 
education. We are far more reliant in our province of 
Saskatchewan than any province in the nation, far more reliant 
on property tax to fund education. No other province is 
anywhere close to relying on the property tax base to fund 
education. Every other province, the provincial government, the 
provincial government of that province funds a larger portion of 
the education. Therefore there is not near the reliance on 
property tax. So the Boughen Commission looked at that and 
said, how do we turn that around? And they came out with a 
number of recommendations — many, many recommendations. 
 
Now unfortunately the government of the day, this NDP 
government, decided to ignore all the recommendations, well 
except for I guess two. They remembered that . . . They 
followed that report and said, well let’s raise the PST by 1 per 
cent even though we’re not going to put it towards education 
because that was one of the recommendations of the Boughen 
report . . . was to raise the PST by 1 per cent and expand it on to 
restaurant meals. Well they left the restaurant meals out of it, 
but they did raise the PST from 6 per cent to 7 per cent last 
provincial budget. Unfortunately it didn’t do one thing for the 
property tax . . . for the property owner . . . or the property 
taxpayer in our province because not 1 cent of it went to 
education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other idea that this government picked up on, that the 
minister picked up on, was the issue of the fact that maybe we 
have too many school divisions in our province. Perhaps we are 
over-governed as far as school divisions in our province, so 
let’s address that issue. Let’s change the debate which was 
around how do we fund education. Let’s change the debate 
from that over to an issue of governance and how many school 
divisions should we have in our province. 
 
And I guess if I was to rate the minister on effectiveness, he 
was very effective because he did change the debate. People in 
the province for the last six months or seven months have been 
furious, for the most part, furious over the way the government 
has handled the whole amalgamation issue. 
 
Now what we have to remember is it’s not the issue of 
amalgamation that people were originally upset about. It was 
about funding education. But because this provincial 
government couldn’t deal with the issue of funding education, it 
decided to change the debate. It changed the debate into 
amalgamation. 
 
Amalgamation certainly isn’t a new issue in our province. 
We’ve been dealing with school board amalgamations for the 

last 10 years at least in our province or longer, longer, far 
longer than that when you think that we went from school units 
to divisions to all . . . you know from single schools to units to 
divisions. There have been amalgamations going on for decades 
and decades and decades in this province. 
 
And I would say over the last — we’ll say decade — over the 
last 10 years it has sped up a little bit where . . . and part of that 
was driven by this provincial government. The minister before 
this present minister stood in this House, and I remember him 
standing in this House saying, we need 25 per cent fewer school 
divisions in the next four or five years. That’s what we need; we 
need to see the number of school divisions drop down by 25 per 
cent in the next four years. 
 
And when you look at how many school divisions we had at 
that time and how many school divisions we had about four 
years later, it was very, very close to that 25 per cent target that 
the former minister, who no longer sits in this House . . . But 
apparently he was just appointed to oversee a study on a health 
facility in Saskatoon. It’s funny how the apples don’t fall too far 
from the tree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Anyway that is a different issue, and it wouldn’t be speaking to 
this Bill. And I know I want to continue speaking to this Bill. 
So I won’t talk about the former minister of Education, Jim 
Melenchuk, and his new appointment by this provincial 
government. 
 
But what I do want to talk about is how school divisions took 
what the former minister said and took it to heart. And they 
worked and they worked and they worked and they 
amalgamated many, many divisions. I can think of one school 
division in the constituency that I represent, the constituency of 
Indian Head-Milestone, where the school division of Indian 
Head along with the school division of Cupar and the school 
division of Buffalo Plains, all three went together and formed 
one school division, Regina Qu’Appelle, or Qu’Appelle Valley 
School Division it is called. 
 
Now that division did exactly what the minister had asked them 
to do. It cost hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars to 
do what the minister had asked them to do. And they’d been in 
force for about a year and a half before this minister comes 
along and says, I’m sorry, that was all fine and dandy but let’s 
just kind of pretend that was a practice run because it has 
absolutely no bearing on what we’re going to do from now on, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s really, really unfortunate that if it was a 
practice run, they could have gone through the steps, maybe not 
spent as much time, as much energy, and as much money on it, 
and just kind of went through the process, if the government 
had any sort of foresight as to what it wanted in education, 
because it truly didn’t. 
 
You’ve got a minister four years ago setting a target which the 
school divisions met, and now a new minister coming along and 
saying, I’m sorry, that target does mean absolutely nothing and 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the minister says he never 
said he was sorry; he doesn’t really care of the amount of work 
that was done. And I think the boards of education around the 
province would be very interested to hear the minister say that 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

outside of this House. 
 
In fact, you know, I don’t think that the boards of education nor 
the teachers of this province need to hear the minister say it 
outside the House because he’s said enough inside this House 
that it got them ticked off, whether it’s he doesn’t want to see 
boards of education squander money any more . . . And I would 
ask the minister, and I have asked the minister in this House, 
which boards did he exactly mean? Which boards did he mean 
were squandering the provincial tax dollars, the very limited 
provincial tax dollars they received? Which division was 
squandering the property tax dollars that they’ve asked property 
owners in their division for? Which division was it that was 
squandering it? Let alone his statements most recently about 
teachers driving up property tax. It’s the teachers that are 
driving up property tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So when I hear 
the minister say I wouldn’t apologize for the way things have 
gone in education over the last four years, I believe boards 
would believe that, and also teachers would believe that, Mr. 
Speaker, because they’ve heard enough from this minister that I 
think it has given them a pretty good idea of the minister’s 
intent on this whole issue. 
 
But I want to get back to the fact that school divisions in this 
province have done exactly what the provincial government has 
asked; they have amalgamated. And I think of the one example 
. . . There are many, many examples of school divisions. For 
example, there was Timberline, Canora, Kamsack, Wapella, 
Shamrock, and Yorkdale that were school divisions that 
amalgamated once and then amalgamated a second time. There 
were six divisions that amalgamated into two or three divisions, 
and then those two or three divisions amalgamated again, all 
within the last six or seven years doing exactly what the NDP 
government had asked them. And then this minister comes 
along and says, I am sorry; that makes absolutely no sense 
whatsoever — we know what’s best for all the school divisions 
in the province, we know how it should be run, and quite 
frankly you don’t, and you wouldn’t get to where we want you 
to go, so we’ll do it for you. 
 
And that was the response to the Boughen Commission which, 
again, I cannot stress enough the Boughen Commission was set 
up to look at how do we fund education, not the governance and 
structure of school divisions, but how do we fund education. 
The minister has had the debate in this province for the last six 
months on the structure and governance of school divisions 
which has done very, very little to address the real problem. 
 
Now it’s interesting that this provincial government has just 
received another windfall. And I remember about a year and a 
half ago they said, well we’re going to put one-third of any 
transfer payment we get from the federal government towards 
education, not really ever expecting to get the windfall of 
transfer payment that they got. They didn’t have a clue that that 
money was coming. Now that that money came — they ended 
up with a little over $300 million — now they’re saying, oh you 
know we did say that. We were going to give one-third to 
property tax. Now, I guess, we’re going to have to. 
 
So they’re putting I guess about $100 million into property tax 
and it’s going to be done over two years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They’re putting $100 million into property tax that will be used 
up $55 million a year — 110 million — $55 million a year for 

two years. 
 
I would like to go back to a little bit earlier in my speech when I 
said they had $50 million, they put it in for two years; now 
they’ve got 110 million and they’re putting it in for two years. 
Guess what’s going to happen after the two years, Mr. Speaker? 
My prediction is what’s going to happen after the two years that 
this $110 million has been spent, they’re going to say, well 
geez, maybe we should strike another commission on looking 
on how do we properly fund education in this province because 
the government for years and years and years have failed to deal 
with the root cause. And that is getting the reliance of funding 
education off of property tax and more on to the provincial 
government’s coffers where it belongs and exactly where it is in 
every other province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So on the first point on my sheet here . . . Of all the points of 
about 15 that I want to talk about, the first point was that we 
disagree with the whole concept of forcing amalgamation. You 
know, I’ve heard the minister different times say, well we think 
that forced . . . voluntary amalgamation has gone as far as it can 
go. And there could have been nothing from the truth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, absolutely nothing from the truth. 
 
He said it over and over again, that we have gone down the 
voluntary amalgamation path as far as we possibly can, and 
there would be no more voluntary amalgamation. Well I would 
have asked the minister to come down to Assiniboia with the 
Minister of Labour and myself and the member from Wood 
River and listen to three boards of education in that area that 
had been working for the last six months to a year, working on 
an amalgamation plan to amalgamate three boards into one. 
 
In fact when you talk to a number of boards around in the 
SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association] there was as 
many as 12 to 13 boards looking at further amalgamation on 
their own. So whoever gave the advice to the minister, whoever 
led the minister to believe that there would be no more 
voluntary amalgamation, was either misleading the minister or 
the minister was misled on his own because there are many, 
many boards of education that were in the process of furthering 
the amalgamation agenda in the province. 
 
And I think it’s very, very important to take into consideration 
not just the numbers of amalgamation and not just looking at 
the map and the structure of school divisions after. But if you 
talk to the trustees that have been through the amalgamation 
issue, if you talk to the trustees of the Indian Head School 
Division, the Cupar School Division, and the Buffalo Plains 
School Division, if you talk to those members when they were 
going through the whole process and negotiating to amalgamate 
and you talk to them after, they felt that they’ve built a culture 
within that division, that new Qu’Appelle Valley School 
Division because they worked on the issue, issue by issue by 
issue to make it work. They took ownership of it, and it would 
be and has been a very successful board for the limited time that 
it got to operate — two years — because of the culture that they 
set up when they were going through the amalgamation. 
 
Now the minister seems to believe that if we strike a task force 
that looks at the map — which he’s done, and the map has 
come out — and said, we only have really room for 12 rural 
boards in our province, that’s all we need. I would guarantee it 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

will take years and years, if it ever happens, to have the culture, 
the camaraderie, the trust of trustees on a board, which is 
extremely important to have those boards function properly. 
 
Unfortunately this minister has not considered any of that or his 
department has considered none of that because we’re hearing 
right now from trustees that are saying, yes, I’m thinking about 
running. I’m going to go and sit on this board, I’m going to 
have to drive an hour and a half, two hours, to the board 
meeting. I don’t have a clue where the other people are going to 
be from. I’ve never met them. I guess we’re going to try and 
make this thing work. We’ve got no corporate history. We’ve 
got nothing. We are starting from scratch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is why amalgamation worked in this province, because 
boards took ownership of that process and they made those new 
boards work because they were the architects of it, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is completely lost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are many, many other 
issues. Today we had the opportunity of meeting with a number 
of trustees from around the province that came and still wanted 
to show their displeasure and, you know, disagreement with the 
whole process that this provincial government has gone 
through. I asked them, had they met with the minister, because 
frankly, when the rubber hits the pavement, who’s going to 
make this final decision? I mean, he’s already made it, I guess. 
But it’s the minister that makes the final decision. And I said, 
have you talked to the minister about that? Well no, he doesn’t 
want to meet with us. He doesn’t want to meet with us because 
they disagree with his vision. 
 
And I remember talking to this very issue different times here 
and the minister would stand up and say, watch what you’re 
saying because there’s a lot of boards in favour. 
 
I would submit that there are a lot of boards in this province — 
there are 58 boards that are being affected — by far the majority 
of those boards may be silent, but don’t mistake that silence for 
agreement with your plan, Mr. Speaker, because that silence 
means absolutely nothing when it comes to agreeing with the 
whole issue of forced amalgamation. They don’t agree with it 
but board after board and trustee after trustee that we’ve talked 
to are simply saying, it’s a done deal. We can’t go against it. If 
we go against it, we’re going to be punished somewhere down 
the line because that’s exactly the way this government 
operates. And so they’re absolutely scared to come out and 
voice their true displeasure with the process. They’ve thrown up 
their hands and they’ve said, you know, he’s going to do it; he’s 
not listening to any of our concerns; he’s not looking at the 
Manitoba experience. 
 
We are talking to the delegates, the trustees that were in today 
and the . . . for example, a number of trustees from the 
Melville-Deer Park school board along with the director in 
talking about some of the cons. I mean it’s easy to hear the 
minister talk about the pros of this whole amalgamation issue, 
but they were talking about all the different negatives that I 
don’t believe that the department looked at and I don’t believe 
that the minister looked at when it went down this path. 
 

And the Melville situation is a classic example and I wish the 
Deputy Premier would comment on that. I was going to . . . I 
wish the Deputy Premier would comment on that, that very 
thing. 
 
Because the Melville issue is a very unique issue. They’ve got a 
comprehensive board there that is combined with the Catholic, 
the separate board. And what has happened on this new process 
is that the Catholic board does not feel comfortable entering 
into an agreement, a partnership with the Melville 
Comprehensive School any more, because it’s not the Melville 
Comprehensive School they’re entering into any more. It’s the 
bigger division as a whole. And they feel that they don’t feel 
comfortable with that. 
 
So what they’ve done is the Catholic section in Melville is 
joining with Yorkton. They had a perfectly great situation 
operating there and I know, I know it was probably not unique 
in the province. There are many other examples of it. But it’s an 
example that, because of the forced amalgamation, the 
short-sightedness, not looking at every issue, that is being 
blown apart. It was a perfectly working operation that is blown 
apart because I truly do not believe the minister of the 
department gave it a minute’s thought. 
 
They didn’t look at it. And you know, it’s funny that they didn’t 
give it a minute’s thought because the minister was gracious 
enough to go out and meet with them, but after that meeting 
obviously went back to Regina and somewhere around Fort 
Qu’Appelle forgot everything that the board said, because it 
never did make it to Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this number of trustees that were in Regina today that were 
talking about the different experiences that is going to affect 
their board . . . but also more importantly let’s look around us at 
other provinces that have gone through the whole amalgamation 
process. 
 
The province of Manitoba, which is of similar size . . . Often we 
get blamed for looking west and comparing ourselves to 
Alberta. We’re not going to do that; we’re going to look to 
Manitoba. They feel a little more comfortable when we look to 
Manitoba. And it’s probably a better comparison because 
they’ve got an NDP government there that went through the 
whole process of forced amalgamation. We have an NDP 
government here, far too long I would submit, but we do have 
an NDP government here, and we’re going through the same 
process. The only difference is, is that Manitoba was a couple 
of years in advance. Manitoba has been through this process a 
couple of years ago; we’re entering into this process now. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And some of the points that have come from Manitoba . . . Now 
we should be able to learn from the experience that has 
happened in Manitoba, but we have to look at the results before 
we can learn from them. And that’s exactly what the trustees 
that were in meeting with our caucus today were explaining — 
the Manitoba experience; what has happened over the last 
number of years through the forced amalgamation in Manitoba. 
 
Now Manitoba school boards were told that forced 
amalgamation would save $10 million. They were told that they 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

would save $10 million. Now let’s compare that to what the 
minister in our province has said. What has the minister in our 
province said about forced amalgamation? Well there’s three 
reasons, there’s three reasons for this forced amalgamation. 
 
One of the main reasons was that we will save money, that 
there’ll be more money that will go to the classroom. Well now 
for some reason, we can do it in Saskatchewan when Manitoba 
has been through it for the last number of years, said they would 
save $10 million. In the first year the cost was $17.1 million 
extra, with a minimum of $7.8 million spent annually more 
because of the amalgamation process that Manitoba has entered 
through. 
 
Now for some reason, some reason, we feel in our province of 
Saskatchewan that this NDP government is so much smarter 
than the NDP government in Manitoba that they will save a 
whole bunch of money when we know for a fact that Manitoba 
NDP government, it cost them more. So, Mr. Speaker, the 
whole issue around, there is huge savings to be gained by 
amalgamation, is really questioned. But it’s not only questioned 
by the people that were in today, it’s questioned by every board. 
 
And like I said, this minister cannot take the fact that boards are 
silent or not opposing as a form of agreement with what he’s 
doing. Because boards all over the province are saying that, you 
can have economies of scale, but when you get past a certain 
size those economies are thrown out the window and it starts 
costing more. And it truly does cost more, and I think we see 
that in Manitoba in the very example that we have right next 
door to us. 
 
A number of other issues, after three years the Manitoba 
government now questions the increased costs in education. 
Many people in that province were saying: why weren’t we 
told? Well, we have an opportunity now to tell people in our 
province of Saskatchewan. Perhaps Manitoba didn’t . . . hadn’t 
done all the background work, all the homework — oh boy, it 
sounds a little similar to where we are right now in our province 
— but we’ve got the Manitoba experience to learn from. 
 
And the people in the Manitoba education system are saying: 
why weren’t we given all the facts, why weren’t we given the 
full bill of goods on this issue? You know, and I think that’s 
what we’re going to be hearing in this province. I have heard 
from trustee after trustee saying, you know, I disagree with the 
whole point about forced amalgamation but the minister is 
saying we’re going to save some money. I can’t see how it’s 
going to happen, it just doesn’t make sense, but I guess it’s 
going to happen. 
 
But unfortunately, if we look just next door we’ll find that the 
amount of saving that the minister said we were going to see 
just isn’t there. In fact, it’s going to go the opposite direction 
and we’re going to end up . . . it’s going to end up costing us 
more. 
 
And the minister questions that. He says you think that it’s 
going to cost more. Well again, I would like to know the 
evidence that’s he’s got to show the savings that he’s 
projecting. He’s projecting millions and millions of dollars of 
savings. And I would like to know where that is. 
 

You know, I remember a number of years ago, just shortly after 
I was elected to this House, when the whole issue of forced 
amalgamation of rural municipalities . . . And although, I would 
say most municipalities were opposed to it right off the bat, 
there were a number of councillors that were saying show us 
where we can save the money by amalgamating. If you’d come 
with a case study of how we save money by amalgamating 
there’d be many, many rural municipalities that would have 
looked at that. 
 
But this is no different than the municipal amalgamation debate. 
The minister is saying we can save all this money, but they have 
not once come with a case study to say here’s the amount of 
money this area can expect to see, that this area can expect to go 
back to education. 
 
And without that — there’s a good reason why the government 
won’t do that, Mr. Speaker, I’d submit there’s a very good 
reason why the government won’t do that — because it sets a 
benchmark and it gives us something in two years time, in three 
years time, to call the government to account for. The 
government does not have to account, in three years time, 
because it’s never set a benchmark as to how much money they 
expect to save. There’s no way the government’s going to come 
out and say each school division going from 58 now down to 
12, these school divisions, 12 school divisions are going to find 
— pick a number — $15 million extra that they can put right 
into the classroom. The minister will not come out and say that 
and neither will the department. And there’s a very good reason 
for it because, in three year’s time, they know they can’t back 
up the numbers that they say are there. And it’s evident when 
you take the example right here in Manitoba . . . right there in 
Manitoba. Okay, Mr. Speaker? So definitely, the cost was one 
of the issues. The cost was one of the issues. 
 
Another issue was better education. It’s going to create a better 
education for students in the province. I won’t disagree that 
there are, that there are areas where because of low, low 
enrolment, perhaps not all the programs were offered; that may 
be an issue. But by increasing the governance of a school 
division does not necessarily increase the quality of education. 
 
We’re dealing with the number of trustees in a school division. 
Now he’s saying that in an area of the Southwest, for example, 
we can’t have 10 school divisions with 8 trustees per school 
division, 80 trustees. We’ve got to have 1 or 2 school divisions 
with maybe 10 to 20 . . . or, I guess 2 school divisions, 20 
trustees. So you’ve dropped from 80 to 20 trustees. That all 
makes sense, but where does that deal with the whole issue of 
better education? 
 
Better education is not telling the teachers that they’re the 
reason for driving up property tax. Better education is treating 
teachers like professionals and complimenting them for the job 
that they’re doing and giving them professional development so 
that they are able to bring the latest technologies and teaching 
procedures into the classroom. That’s how you better education. 
Not by taking a shot at; we’ve got too many school trustees in 
the Southwest, we can’t have 80, we can only have 20. That 
does not dictate better education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, the minister says there’s only 12. We go from 80 down to 
12. We can play the numbers game and the numbers game, we 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2005 

can play all day. Does that dictate better education in the 
classroom? And no, it doesn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s the issue of we’re going to save a lot of money, the 
issue that we have, there’ll be better education. And the third 
issue for the amalgamation is escaping me now. 
 
I certainly do know that one of the major issues, one of the 
major issues that . . . around the whole amalgamation piece was 
the whole fact of equity in taxation and dealing with equity in 
taxation. Now the minister says by, instead of having 58 tax 
regions, we are down to 12 tax regions and that’s going to 
address zero or negative grant boards because that’s what it was 
directed at, that was one of the biggest problems. When you go 
to the Southeast, around the Estevan area and the Weyburn area, 
it just absolutely drove the minister nuts when he’d look at the 
map and seeing the mill rate in the Estevan-Weyburn area, and 
he would realize that those are negative grant boards. In other 
words they were . . . we could probably squeeze quite a bit 
more money in property tax out of those people. 
 
And if you go over to the Kindersley area and the Lloydminster 
area, there’s areas there that were negative tax and just drives 
the minister nuts to think that he couldn’t squeeze, squeeze a 
little more tax dollars out of that property tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the only way he could do that is he couldn’t go to his 
division board and say, I’m sorry you cannot be a negative 
grant board. You have to raise your mill rate to 19 mills or 20 
mills. That is the provincial average, even though that the 
Weyburn area might have been . . . the Weyburn area may have 
been at 16 and the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The minister 
is trying to tell me what the provincial average is. 
 
And he wants . . . but what they’re saying is that you can’t stand 
to have one area quite a bit lower because of the oil revenues 
and it would be unfair. So let’s address that issue. And let’s put 
that . . . spread that tax dollar over a bigger region — a much 
bigger region; in fact 12 regions in our province. And so that’s 
what’s they’ve done. 
 
But what they failed to realize is that given oil at $57 a barrel 
right now, given some of the areas where agriculture is on the 
decline — partially thanks to this provincial government and 
the lack of funding for CAIS . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Now they laugh, they laugh at that. Obviously they weren’t here 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Agriculture’s a big joke over there. 
None of them understand agriculture and it’s a joke. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The member from . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You are laughing at agriculture. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres, the 
agriculture guru from that side of the, from that side of the 
House, is laughing at the fact that they had nothing to do with 
some of the hurt on the farms here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have stood in this House day after day and told 
about the problems that farmers are facing because this 

government failed to fund the CAIS program like it signed on. 
It’s great to sign a contract, it sure wasn’t so good to sign a 
cheque, Mr. Speaker. It’s great to sign the contract but not so 
good to sign the cheque. 
 
But let me get back to the point that I was talking about because 
that’s certainly more important to the Bill, is the fact that the 
minister couldn’t stand having negative grant boards so he 
squeezed them out and he got more revenue over 12 regions. 
And what I was saying is that when you take certain areas with 
oil prices rising and population declining, guess what position 
those school boards, even though there may be 12, there may be 
one or two of those school boards predicted in the next two or 
three years that are going to be in what type of position. They’re 
going to be in the negative grant position. So all the issue . . . 
this whole issue of why the government decided to force 
amalgamation was to deal with zero grant boards or negative 
grant boards, will simply be out the window within two or three 
years. 
 
So you know if I was a person going to run as a school trustee 
in the area that I happen to represent as an MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly], if I was going to be a school trustee 
in that area, I would go to that school board — if I happen to 
get elected — and we’d start sitting around the table, and we’d 
come up with a name for our school division, and we’d start 
working on the LINC [Local Implementation and Negotiation 
Committee] agreements. And we’d start doing all this work and 
we’d work for probably two to three years. We’ll get everything 
put together. And then the minister would say, oh, oh, we’ve 
got negative grant boards again. We got zero grant boards 
again. Well how are we going to address that issue? 
 
We’re going to address that issue . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
we’re going to address by amalgamating again. Wouldn’t that 
do it? If we amalgamated again, if we amalgamated again, we 
could address that issue. So you’ve got . . . And doesn’t that 
sound very, very similar. And you know that people say that 
history has a habit of repeating itself. 
 
Let’s go back five years ago when school divisions did exactly 
what the government did, amalgamated, went through the 
process, and then were told, sorry, that’s not good enough; 
we’re going to force you into amalgamation. 
 
Now these people are going through the whole, exactly the 
same process. They’re coming up with a new name. They’re 
going through the LINC agreements. They’re creating a culture 
within their division. And oh no, here it comes again. We’re a 
negative grant board, guess what’s going to happen? The 
minister is going to come out and say, geez, you know, I’m 
sorry, 12 boards weren’t quite right. Let’s go to six boards now. 
And they’ll go through the whole process again, Mr. Speaker, 
all because the very first point that I made, the very first point, 
is that this provincial government does not know how to 
address the issue of overreliance of property tax for education. 
 
So instead of going through the last 10 or 15 minutes that I’ve 
been speaking, had they addressed the first issue, if they would 
have addressed the first issue on properly funding education, we 
wouldn’t have had to worry about Bill No. 80. We wouldn’t 
have had to worry about the whole issue of amalgamation and 
forced amalgamation. And you wouldn’t have had to listen to 



March 22, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

me here speak about the issues that are faced all over rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because the true issue is, when is 
this province going to take the responsibility for funding 
education through its coffers and not the property tax owners of 
this province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
[16:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 80 
until we hear from many, many more stakeholders in the 
education system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that debate on Bill No. 80, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2004 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:16.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2153 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2153 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2153 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2153 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2153 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2153 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2154 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2154 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2154 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2154 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2154 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2154 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2154 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2155 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2155 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2155 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2155 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2155 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2164 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association Finals 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................2155 
 Rural Women’s Achievement Awards 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2156 
 World Water Day 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2156 
 March Designated Red Cross Month 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2156 
 Teaching Treaties in the Classroom 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2156 
 Kidney Health Month 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2157 
 Saskatchewan’s Centennial Celebrations 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2157 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Canadian Agricultural Income Stabilization Program 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2157 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2157 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2159 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2159 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2159 
 Renovation of Government Offices 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2160 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2160 
 Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2161 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2161 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Rental Housing Supplement 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2163 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2163 
MOTIONS 
 Sitting Hours 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2164 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2165 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2165 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 90 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2165 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2165 
 Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2166 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2166 
 Bill No. 92 — The International Protection of Adults (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi de mise en oeuvre de la Convention de la Haye sur la protection internationale des adultes 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2166 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2167 
 Bill No. 93 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2005 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2167 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2168 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2168 
 Bill No. 67 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2170 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2171 
 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2174 
 Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2175 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


