

















































Hansard: May 02, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 103B  MONDAY, MAY 2, 2005, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2797 
 May 2, 2005 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee is 
Department of Agriculture. Would the Minister like to 
introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
would like to introduce, to my right, Hal Cushon, who is 
assistant deputy minister;, and to my left, Stan Benjamin, who 
is the general manager for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation. 
 
Behind Hal is Jack Zepp, who is the acting assistant deputy 
minister, and next to him, directly behind me is Paul Johnson, 
who is manager of economic and commodity analysis unit for 
the policy branch. In the back row is Dave Boehm, who is 
director of the financial programs branch and Karen Aulie, who 
is director of the corporate services branch. 
 
I’d like to welcome the officials to the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Item 1 is vote (AG01). I recognize the 
member from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I would also like 
to welcome the minister and his officials here tonight. I was the 
lucky one that gets to go first as far as giving questions. There’s 
a number of us tonight that’s interested in asking questions. 
 
I’m going to start off with some crop insurance questions 
regarding the forest rainfall insurance program. Now this 
program, I believe, was introduced last year and there is a group 
of households or farmers in the Shell Lake area that applied for 
this program. Now the program says the producers will pay 
38.4 per cent while government pays 61.6 per cent. 
 
Now these officials or these farmers apparently paid their 
allotment into the program. As you know, in August of last year 
there was a killing frost and 99.99 per cent of the crop in that 
area got froze. Now according to the crop insurance adjusters, 
they also said the same thing, that 99.9 per cent of the crop was 
froze. Yet the Crop Insurance will not pay out on this program 
because the station that records the temperatures said that it was 
just slightly below the freezing point, and therefore these 
farmers who should qualify for this program are not. Can the 
minister explain why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just a note that the forage rainfall does 
not cover frost damage. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I guess that’s my point, is why would this 
program come in and yet not cover frost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The program was basically designed 

to support the growth of forage and it’s to cover if there’s a 
shortage of rainfall so the forage will not grow properly. And if 
there is a shortage of rainfall, it’s covered in the program then. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. According to the 
farmers in that area when reading and going back and rereading 
the documentation regarding this, I don’t believe it says 
anywhere in there that frost is not covered. Can the minister 
elaborate on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would ask the member to clarify. 
You started off talking about rainfall and now there is also a 
weather-based program and there is the rainfall program for 
forage. Could you identify which of those it is that you’re 
actually asking the question around, please? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
believe that it would fall under the rainfall insurance program. I 
wasn’t aware of the other two programs. Could you elaborate 
on the other two programs and what they cover? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — So the first program that I assumed 
from what you were saying was that you were referring to the 
rainfall forage program. I’ve already indicated what that is 
about. Second one is a crop weather-based program and that 
does have a frost component in it. And that may be the one that 
you are referring to then. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well in regard to that, Mr. Minister, I will 
check with my counterparts back in Shell Lake to see which 
program they were talking about. I was sure that they were 
talking about the forest rainfall insurance program and 
therefore, if frost is not covered under that, then I would have to 
check with them to find out exactly what it was that they were 
inquiring about. And I will get back with you with questions 
regarding that at a later date. 
 
In continuation with crop insurance, in my area, Spiritwood and 
area, last year due to the frost and the . . . [inaudible] . . . 
weather that we had, many crops stayed out over winter. As you 
know, in many of the areas around Spiritwood, we are 
forbidden with the fact that we have a lot of wildlife. And there 
was a tremendous amount of wildlife damage in the area. 
 
Now a few farmers have contacted me because their crop stayed 
out all winter and yet Crop Insurance would not sign off until 
the spring had come about and they could see what damage is 
there. As you know, through the crop insurance program the 
farmers have to combine that crop. The problem lies with the 
farmers and has been for many, many years that when they 
combine this crop, they get a lot of wildlife manure in their 
grain. Therefore it is condemned. There is no sale for it. The 
farmer has to go through the aspects of combining it, extra costs 
contribute to what they have already been through last year, and 
yet this grain is useless. 
 
Can you specify for me to the farmers listening what can be 
done in regards to this where the farmer wouldn’t have to spend 
extra costs in combining this crop to find out that the end result 
is worth nothing in the end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — If the producer does not have crop 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

insurance, we’re just dealing with a wildlife damage claim, it 
does not necessarily have to be harvested. It would get an 
inspection, a visual inspection, and the assessment would be 
made at that point. Now if there is crop there that’s not . . . the 
assessment says that there is excreta in it, then there would be 
coverage for the cleaning of the grain. And then as the year 
moved forward, if there was market then the assessment would 
be made on what the damage is and the loss was later on. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
cleaning of the grain, I know Crop Insurance has occasionally, 
in fact many times, paid for cleaning of the grain. The problem 
lies though is after the grain is cleaned, it is still unsatisfactory 
that could be used for saleable produce. No one will take it. 
There are many farmers in my area who have grain from five 
years ago, and it’s not saleable — nobody wants it. That’s my 
point. 
 
When you have a wildlife claim and the crop is infected, then 
what good is that crop, because it cannot be sold? Therefore if 
that is the case, then why won’t the insurance pay for it as a 
total writeoff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think what’s important to note is that 
for those people who are dealing with wildlife damage who also 
have crop insurance, that then there is coverage if they can’t get 
the value for their grain, but they have to pay the premium for 
that. 
 
If it is simply on the wildlife damage, then the assessment is 
made. If there is damage, the grain is cleaned. And then it really 
is, after the grain is cleaned, it really is up to the producer to 
move that grain in whatever way they can. It can’t be sold into 
the elevator system, I understand, but it still can be dealt with. 
 
Mr. Chair, can I ask is there . . . if we can get the microphone 
sound turned down. There’s a lot of feedback here. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You said there is 
places where this grain could be marketed. Can you give an 
example where this grain could be marketed, other than the fact 
that elevators will not take it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’m told by the officials that there are 
a number of places where these grains can be marketed. There 
are actually . . . If you’ve got producers who are in that 
dilemma, if you would have them call the Crop Insurance 
office, they do have a list of brokers who actually contact Crop 
Insurance, who are looking for grain that can be blended off, 
can be used for a variety of different purposes. 
 
So if you can have your folks call the Crop Insurance office, I 
know that they’ll provide for them a list of the brokers who are 
interested. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A couple of 
answers ago, you mentioned that they had to pay the premium. 
What were you referring to when you said you had to pay the 
premium, and for what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Simply the crop insurance premium 
for the crop insurance program — the premium for the crop 
insurance program. 

Mr. Allchurch: — Would there be 100 per cent payout then, if 
that was the case? 
 
[19:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — If you had 100 per cent loss, if there 
was simply no market for the grain after a year, then they would 
be paid out fully for the loss, and generally would be asked then 
to destroy the unmarketable grain. 
 
If there were just some kind of proportional loss, then they 
would be paid out in accordance with the proportion of loss 
there was. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Thanks, Mr. Minister. If there was, 
according to the adjusters, some grain there, which as we know 
is no good because of it being contamination, would that 
portion of the grain that he would look at and say there is 10 
bushel an acre, 20 bushel an acre, or whatever, would that come 
off the claim as invaluable grain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is an assessment that’s done in 
the field. The crop is assessed and evaluated, but there is no 
payout until the crop is harvested and the payout then is based 
on what the assessment was. If it was 10 bushel to the acre, it 
would be paid out on that basis. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well I guess that’s my point, Mr. Minister. 
If there is some grain of some potential value there and the crop 
insurance adjuster says no, it has to be combined . . . Because 
this is what’s happened in many, many cases. The grain has to 
be combined. It’s combined. The grain is unsaleable because of 
the deer manure in it or whatever. Crop Insurance then will pay 
to clean it. You still have that granary full of clean grain which 
is still unsaleable, yet it ties up the claim. At what point in time 
is the claim settled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — If you want Crop Insurance to declare 
a zero value, then you must harvest the grain. You have to 
harvest it to get a zero. If you will settle for the appraised value 
plus the quality factor, then the claim is done in the field. The 
assessment is done, you get a quality factor added, and the 
claim is done in the field. Okay? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, isn’t that the same as a 
deductible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well the officials made it quite clear 
that it’s not the same as a deductible. I mean the fact is you’ve 
got a crop that’s been out over the winter. You’ve got difficult 
circumstances, and the Crop Insurance folks are simply trying 
to get a clear adjustment under difficult circumstances. 
 
If in fact you as a farmer were saying, look there’s no value in 
this; I’ve got no value. Then the adjuster would say to you, then 
you have to harvest it to show that there’s no value, unless of 
course the adjuster in doing the assessment in the field said to 
you as a producer, no I agree; there is zero value in this. Then 
you’re going to be paid. But if there is a difference between 
your assessment and the adjuster’s assessment, then it has to be 
harvested in order to determine what is the value of the crop. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe the 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

payout is 85 per cent. And that’s my point with the farmers 
having to harvest the crop. If there was no wildlife damage to it, 
yes there is a value to that crop, so they would harvest it. But 
when you’re dealing with wildlife damage, there is no value to 
that crop, and yet you’re saying that they still have to combine 
it just to get the full value of the crop. All you’re doing is 
causing the farmer extra expense to prove a point that it’s not 
worth nothing. This is a problem that farmers are facing. 
 
Why is it like that? And why won’t the government realize that, 
when you’re dealing with wildlife insurance claims, it’s a 
different scenario than straight crop insurance where there is no 
wildlife damage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Okay, I think we’ve identified which 
program you’re talking about now. You’re talking about strictly 
the wildlife damage program which is not 85 per cent any 
longer, but 80 per cent. And it is based on an assessment that is 
done in the field. I believe there are a number of determinations 
done to get the complete picture, and then it is paid out at 80 per 
cent. Now we did have it at 85, but the federal government is 
part of the program, and we had to adjust downwards in order to 
comply. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So the value is dropped to 80 per cent which 
makes it that much more worse. How much does it cost Crop 
Insurance to clean this grain that is infested with deer manure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Just to be clear, are you asking in the 
circumstances that the crop is harvested and it’s cleaned, and 
Crop Insurance pays for the cleaning? Were you asking, like, 
does that come out of the 80 per cent? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — No. What I’m asking is, is that there’s the 
cost of cleaning. Now the farmer will pay for that cleaning bill, 
and then Crop Insurance will reimburse him. Is that not how it 
works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Correct. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So do you have any idea what the average 
cost is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Basically what officials are saying is, 
we don’t have the numbers. It’s the average going rate within 
the province, and it’s paid on that basis. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well to a few of the farmers in the area that 
have been doing a little bit of this . . . and they found out it 
doesn’t pay. It’s averaging anywhere from 35 to 42 cents per 
bushel. When you look at the price of grain at what it is today, 
does it really pay them to go this route? It adds that much more 
to the argument that they’re trying to make to Crop Insurance 
that, when there’s a claim put in regarding wildlife damage, 
why does a farmer have to go through the extra expenses? Why 
can’t this department enforce to the crop adjusters to come out 
and use common sense and just write it off and pay the farmers 
out at the 80 per cent that they’re qualified for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well the assessment is that if it’s zero 
value, that it would be paid out. If the assessor, the adjuster 
comes out, evaluates it, it’s zero value, that it would be paid 
out. Those who have taken the steps of purchasing crop 

insurance are in a different category than those who simply are 
relying on the wildlife protection side of things. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re exactly right in 
the question. But the problem is that they’ve still got to go 
through the role of combining it. And that’s the problem. 
There’s an extra expense the farmer has to incur just to get to 80 
per cent. He still has to combine it. And as you know, the cost 
of combining is very, very expensive. So that’s an added cost 
that he has to forgo just to get his 80 per cent. Why won’t the 
government enforce that they don’t have to go through the 
combining procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well as I indicated earlier in terms of 
dealing with this program, it is a federal-provincial program. 
We simply are not allowed to do that. And it’s based on, I 
gather, long-term experience that there are, believe it or not, 
there are those people who would actually make a claim and 
then go out and harvest it later . . . at least the suspicions are 
there that that would happen. And the federal government just 
simply won’t allow that to be a part of the process. So that, I 
mean, it’s within the agreement that we are compelled to 
demand that, unless there is an assessed value of zero, that it 
must be harvested and the real value given. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So in this program, Mr. Minister, the federal 
government lays down the rules and regulations. Or is it the 
provincial government lays down the rules and regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As a federal-provincial program, as 
with most programs, there’s a lot of discussion, negotiation 
goes on. And in order to have the federal government putting in 
their portion of the plan, when it comes down to it we basically 
have to comply with the rules that they insist on. And though 
we do negotiate around those rules, this is what we have as 
rules today that we have to comply with in order to have the 
federal government participate. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. Is this the same in 
every province, Saskatchewan agriculture is affected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, we have the same basic program. 
I was just recalling from some of the work previously that 
Alberta’s program is somewhat different, but they top up in a 
number of areas which is what the province can do. But 
everybody across the country has to comply with the basic 
program rules. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, what do you mean by topping 
up, and what areas do you know that there’s topping up in crop 
insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — One factor for Alberta is that they, 
rather than going at 80 per cent, they cover 100 per cent, and 
that anything over the 80 per cent is purely a provincial top-up. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, may I make a 
suggestion to the government then? Maybe in Saskatchewan 
where we have a lot of wildlife damage, maybe this may be a 
way to help compensate the farmer in regards to a losing 
situation . . . is to top it up from 80 per cent to 100 per cent. I 



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

think it would be a great opportunity to show the farmers that, 
in dealing with crop insurance issues, that you’re listening. 
 
Another area I want to go to is in crop insurance. Does wind 
damage and snowmobile damage on crops in the field . . . is that 
covered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — If the wind or snowmobile damage 
were the reason why your crop was below the production 
guarantee, then it is covered. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr, Minister. I know 
there’s a lot of farmers out there that have had a great deal of 
snowmobile damage would be interested in that comment. 
 
That concludes my questioning for today, and I will pass it on 
to another member. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, another 
question on crop insurance — weather station reporting. 
 
In the Biggar area, Crop Insurance has said that the first frost 
was September 21, and the first killing frost was at least a 
month earlier than that, possibly up to six weeks earlier than 
that. And the proof is, that if a killing frost never took place till 
September 21, all the grain in the area would be no. 1 high 
protein, and it just isn’t. It’s feed or it’s no. 3 at the very best. 
 
And I’ve wrote you a letter, and I realize you responded to that 
letter, but it’s . . . I just ask you again, how could that reporting 
be so inaccurate and especially in a year where we had such 
severe frost? And the people, quite frankly, in the Biggar area, 
in the Rosemount RM [rural municipality] are really at a 
disadvantage because of that type of reporting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I think to some extent, one has to 
acknowledge that there was nothing hidden in terms of the 
program. Everybody that participated in it knew that what had 
to be applied was the weather reports, the conditions from a 
given weather station, not from anywhere around it but just 
from that weather station. And we had to use, for the program, 
the official weather data reported from Environment Canada 
from the station. Everybody going into the program I think 
understood that that was the basis upon which the program 
would operate. 
 
And there’s no dispute. I mean there is . . . certainly there was 
crop frozen around. But we only have . . . in terms of payout on 
this, we must rely on the data from the weather station. That 
was what the agreement was about, and as I think I indicated in 
the letter and in a number of discussions, frost really is a 
difficult thing to assess. I mean it can change from a few yards 
to — in height — it can change in just a matter of a foot or less. 
 
And so there’re all kinds of things that impact what the weather 
station reports, but in terms of the program itself we are 
compelled by the nature of the program to rely on the data from 
the Environment Canada stations. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Again, I can . . . That’s a 
reasonable answer on any year except last year when it’s so 

obvious that it was so far out. It’s not out by a week or 10 days. 
It’s out by a month to six weeks. And I have to accept your 
answer, but I would suggest that if you’re relying on 
Environment Canada, I think there should be some discussion 
with them as who is to do the reporting and what’s their 
location, their elevation because it was dramatically out. And 
you can talk to anybody in the Biggar area — quite frankly, 
west central Saskatchewan — who would disagree with those 
types of reporting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think the member identifies 
something which is a concern in the program, and location of 
station does make a significant difference which we’re seeing. I 
think one of the, one of the elements of developing program is 
to see what the impacts are and try where we can to adjust to 
better meet the needs. But as I indicated at the beginning of my 
comments on this item, that everybody going in knew that it 
would be based on the weather stations in their area that was 
selected. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well again certainly everyone knew what they 
were signing onto except they were expecting an accurate 
reading. And there’s no way that reading was accurate under 
any conditions because there just was frost in the whole area 
that was considerably earlier than was reported. 
 
I’d like to go on to another topic, Mr. Minister. Saskatchewan 
administered pastures, lands branch land. I’ve been told by a 
constituent that the patron has to supply bulls for the pastures. 
There’s certain breeds — Charolais pasture or Hereford pasture 
or Angus pasture, whatever it may be. And I understand that the 
patrons have to supply the bull. 
 
There are some requirements. They have to be tested for certain 
diseases. They have to be semen-tested for fertility. But I 
understand that these bulls do not have to be registered, 
purebred animals. And I’d just like to confirm that with you. 
And if that is the case, I would like to just put this case to you. 
 
Because of the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] 
situation, like all of the livestock industry, the purebred industry 
is undergoing difficult times too, and there’s just not a lot of 
animals being registered. They may be purebreds, and the 
associations are under financial difficulty, and this would be 
one way to not only guarantee quality and the bloodlines, but 
also to help out the associations and keep the industry vibrant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think overall in the program it has 
been left up to the pasture patrons to determine what type of 
bull they would like to use. I think that from the department 
point of view there certainly . . . where support or guidance can 
be offered, the department would be prepared to do that, but 
really it is a patrons’ decision. They’ve put their cows in there 
and they can make a determination. But I have to say, though I 
am probably a little biased, but I kind of think, you know, 
having a purebred bull in there is a good idea as well, especially 
if it’s a Hereford. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you for that. I think that’s the point 
and that’s where your department needs to come into play. 
You’re setting the rules, your department is setting the rules, 
and I believe if it is, you’re saying that it is not a strict rule that 
they have to be registered animals. When someone wants their 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

cows bred to a Charolais bull or an Angus bull or a Hereford 
bull, that’s what they expect. They could put their cows in to be 
bred to a half Charolais bull and still, according to what you’re 
saying, would it be still acceptable requirements. And my point 
is, for the reasons that I gave, I believe your department should 
look at ensuring that they are purebred registered animals that 
are put into these pastures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think overall, and you’ll know this in 
the industry, that there are a variety of different preferences. I 
indicated of course what my bias might be but there are 
certainly those who have been into a number of different 
breeding programs that are not looking for purebred. They’re 
looking at better gain from some of the commercial bulls. 
 
And I think that what we have at this point, the position that we 
would hold is that the patrons know what they want and they 
really do have a right to make some choices. And we don’t want 
to be too heavy-handed in terms of the guidelines, but provide 
for them freedom to make some choices as well. But I think you 
know it’s worth continued discussions with community pastures 
and I think the department certainly is engaged there and we’ll 
continue at this point anyway to allow the patrons the choice 
rather than using a heavy hand. But I think your point in terms 
of making sure that we have good quality bulls is very 
important. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On to another topic 
— the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 
program. We’ve asked you, Minister, in question period a 
number of times about the CAIS. I believe you said last week 
that there was . . . I think, I believe your comments were that all 
the 2003 CAIS applications were done except the large, more 
complicated applications. 
 
And I would suggest to you that probably most of them are 
people that are in the livestock industry and they’re the ones 
that are in the most need of CAIS payments — cow-calf 
producers, backgrounders, and feedlots. From my own personal 
experience, I know they’re in desperate financial situation. 
 
And I’ll just tell you the . . . what the observation I’ve had and 
what I’ve been told is in Alberta, Alberta administrates their 
own CAIS program. They also top it up with provincial funds 
— more than Saskatchewan gets. And I know for a fact that 
their program is being paid on a much more timely basis. Their 
feedlot industry would be screaming bloody murder if they still 
hadn’t got payments for back to ’03 or even before that. 
 
And I know from my contacts in the Winnipeg office that, 
exactly what you said, the larger, more complicated 
applications are being left to the last. And I would just impress 
upon the minister that I would ask you to talk to your federal 
counterpart and the people in the CAIS . . . that administrate 
CAIS that that’s, that is not fair. 
 
I believe that people have applied probably should be on a . . . 
earlier should be on a list that’s higher up the chain to get 
payments earlier because this is very serious. It’s one thing to 
be talking about, people need money to seed this spring, but it 
also goes into the livestock industry. It’s not a matter of just 
buying a new turn of cattle. It’s survival. I mean, it’s 
bankruptcy. It’s facing producers and the banks are counting on 

this money to be sent to their customers to survive. That’s 
where the industry’s at. It’s survival. 
 
And not only we don’t have 2003. What about the 2004 
payments? And I’d just like you to comment on that and again 
just emphasize how serious it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I appreciate the comments 
from the member and there are a couple of things that I would 
say . . . are clearly you need to check your sources because your 
information on Alberta is absolutely not accurate. 
 
When we were at . . . last week when the numbers came in, we 
were at 94. They were somewhere in the neighbourhood of 64 
per cent paid out and we’re approaching 95 per cent at this 
point. And I haven’t got latest numbers on Alberta, but they are 
significantly behind where Saskatchewan is in overall 
payments. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Now in terms of the numbers that are paid out to this time, just 
so that it’s accurate, the majority of those that are left to pay, 
the remaining 5 per cent roughly, will be — primarily, not 
exclusively — but they’ll be primarily the larger, more complex 
claims. There are some that are on appeal that are left to be paid 
out, and there will be some that would be later applications that 
still just haven’t quite made it through. So that would be the 
composition of the 5 per cent. 
 
But I think the other point that you make is significant and that 
is that with all of the impacts that there have been there, there 
are people who are hurting. And so those who are moving their 
applications in — and I indicated this today in question period 
— those who are putting their applications in, moving them 
through as quickly as possible for 2004, then will be, as soon as 
their forms are processed, they are eligible for the initial 
payment of 70 per cent of their claim. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The fact is 
though, I’ve had a number of people come to me. They’ve 
applied for 2003 a year ago, and just recently have had 
questions from CAIS about their application a year later. And 
they are already applying for 2004 and 2003 hasn’t been 
processed; and they’re not going to get any payments for 2004 
until they get 2003 processed. 
 
And it’s been 10 to 12 months later that the office gets to them 
with questions, and then they supply the answers. Totally 
unacceptable. And these are applications that are made early; 
they’re not late applications. They’re made by accountants who 
deal with literally hundreds of these applications, and these 
accountants and people that are dealing with this are literally 
pulling their hair out about how the system is not working for 
their clients. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Again I think the member identifies a 
real concern. I’m not sure whether I’ve had opportunity to 
indicate, but certainly I have not only written to the federal 
minister but spoken to him on a number of occasions about the 
need for a really timely processing of these. 
 
I’ll make just a couple of points. One is very clearly that, 



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

though this system is not working in as smooth a way as what 
we’d like or in as timely a way, it still is substantially ahead of 
the system that Alberta is using. 
 
And I think overall, when you look at the fact that 95 per cent 
of the claims compared to somewhere in the 60 to 70 range that 
Alberta is at, that’s significant, but it’s not really overall 
acceptable when you’ve got people who’ve been waiting, as 
you indicate, who’ve got their claims in a year ago and are now 
filing their 2004 claims. 
 
And certainly that is a point that I’ve made on numerous 
occasions with the federal minister. Last time when he flew 
down to the tri-national meeting that we were having in 
Sacramento, we met from 10 o’clock at night until 12:30 and 
that was one of the issues that we pressed with him and he is, 
with his officials, trying to find a way to move these through in 
a more timely manner. 
 
So I know that we have been heard and I’m hoping that, 
working with his officials, they will find some way of moving 
this along in a more timely manner. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — My sources inside CAIS out of the Winnipeg 
office is that the vast majority of the bureaucrats, though 
well-intentioned, don’t have a clue about agriculture. They 
don’t, they’re not . . . they have no farm background. They 
don’t know the difference between a bushel of grain or a tonne 
of grain or even the difference between various species of 
animals. 
 
And I’m wondering, has your government ever considered 
administrating CAIS itself for Saskatchewan producers? And if 
not, will you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We clearly did examine the possibility 
of administering the system ourselves and we . . . you know, as 
this has unfolded we’ve watched British Columbia for example 
actually hired Alberta to administer their system to begin with 
but realized this was not effective. They also moved into the 
national system. 
 
Factors in that are around not having to duplicate computer 
systems, and secondly I think the fact that it’s based off the 
income tax system and will probably, as we progress, become a 
supplementary form with the income tax. It is probably overall 
better than administered in a national system. 
 
In the early years of a program, there are always a number of 
elements that have to be worked out and I suspect that some of 
those elements are educating those people who are doing the 
work so that they understand what it is that they are dealing 
with. 
 
From what we’re . . . the feedback that we’re getting overall is 
that things are moving, that the anticipation is that we will see a 
smoother flow in 2004 and an even smoother flow in 2005. One 
of the other things that we have done, and I think it also speaks 
to your question about whether or not we would consider doing 
the administration here, is that we pressed the federal 
government for as much of the administration as possible to be 
done here in Saskatchewan. And, in fact, there is a significant 
portion that is done in the Regina offices as well. 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. 
 
I have a number of constituents that have phoned in to my 
office, quite a number of them, in the last while. We call them 
claims. I know your office calls them claims, but they’re 
actually farmers. They’re farm families. And each one of them 
that have called in to my office and my colleagues’ offices are 
families that are hurting. 
 
I know that you talked about a smooth and timely payment, but 
I know that also these farmers that have phoned in to my office 
have talked about the inadequate payment. Because we have a 
crisis out here, again, that we have talked about for the last 
number of years. But we don’t say it as often any more, because 
people don’t have any hope left. Never in the 10 years since 
I’ve been elected have I seen farmers that were less interested in 
even getting out to the field this year, because they just don’t 
believe there’s any hope for them at all. 
 
Some of the comments that I’ve heard are: the farm income 
program is a joke; there isn’t even enough money in it to cover 
the fuel bill for one tank of diesel. The farm income program, 
by choosing the December 23 date, many farmers with cattle 
won’t get very much funding because the calves are sold in the 
fall. There’s no funding for mature cows. 
 
The crop insurance issue that you discussed with my colleague 
from Shellbrook — there are a number of farmers have phoned 
in to my office in the last little while saying, okay, we still have 
to combine it, we have to get it cleaned, and then we’re going to 
store it for two years. And then maybe somebody will believe it 
has no value. Wheat that weighs 42 pounds doesn’t have any 
value, Mr. Minister. So these farmers are hurting. 
 
Another group of farmers that have phoned in to my office are 
concerned because they just got their reassessment, and you’re 
not dealing with the education tax. Because of reassessment, 
these farmers are paying up to $170 a quarter more for land tax 
— just the education portion of it — this year. These are 
farmers that are already hurting. And when they go to their 
banks they have to explain or do a cash flow projection, and it’s 
just not possible. 
 
You indicated a few minutes ago that Alberta had topped up 
their program to their farmers to 100 per cent. And farmers in 
Saskatchewan feel like your government hasn’t been there for 
them for a number of years, and you sure aren’t there right now 
when they really are in a hopeless situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you’re aware that, with the 
CAIS program right now, that the people who actually make the 
decision on each claim never see the original form. It’s all 
entered by computer, and the handwritten form that the farmers 
send in is never seen by the person that actually makes the 
decision. And there’s often some misinformation, or some 
wrong information could have been inputted. And it means that 
when you have to go for an appeal, you’re not even talking to 
the same person. I understand that there’s . . . up to three people 
work on each one of these files, and farmers are lost again 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

trying to figure out who they can talk to for help at this time of 
the year. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like you to answer the CAIS issue. 
And while you’re doing that, maybe your officials can tell me 
what the bankers are saying to your department right now. I 
know that the individuals that go into the banks to get their line 
of credits in the last month have been distraught, to say the 
least. And I imagine your department must work with the banks 
and credit unions across the province. What percentage of our 
farmers are not going to be able to get their line of credit this 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well the member raised a number of 
items, not least of which was a comment about the people who 
are in our offices who are dealing with farmers and a comment 
about, they deal with them . . . they just call them claims. Well 
you know that’s not my experience. My experience is that the 
people in our offices are compassionate. They are thoughtful. 
They listen to the farmers who call in and take the time to hear 
and try and track down answers and provide support where they 
can. 
 
I think there are a number of factors around CAIS. And I mean, 
in many ways it’s similar to income tax, that when the data 
comes in, it comes in on either a handwritten form or with 
income tax electric computer forms. But when the data comes 
in to the CAIS program, it is entered. And the data that is 
correct, when it moves through, it moves through quite quickly 
if it’s all correct and there’s not questions, and then the cheque 
is issued on that basis. 
 
It is unfortunate that human beings, being what we are, that 
occasionally there are mistakes made as data is entered. And 
then people come into the scene again when they’re having to 
deal with appeals. 
 
But there’s certainly nothing malicious in the way the process is 
handled. It seems to me that people are there working, trying to 
provide the services that are important for farmers, to try and 
help this industry through very, very difficult times. 
 
The member talks about the issues of hope, and I can say that 
there are a variety of different responses and attitudes that are 
apparent all across the province. Some of it depends on regions. 
Some of it depends on years of what has happened in the 
farmers’ personal history and in their business history. 
 
But one of the things that we are finding . . . You’re trying to 
look at indicators, what is actually, what is actually happening 
out there. And so in calls to input providers, retailers and 
wholesalers, what we’re finding is that sales are still up. The 
Wheat Pool reported to us that their sales are still up. 
 
And there are farmers that we’re meeting with that are hopeful. 
They are putting in their crops, looking forward to putting in 
their crops. And others are looking at it and just going, man, 
you know, with all the challenges of low commodity prices and 
these higher input costs, it’s going to be very, very difficult. 
Yes, it is. 
 
But I think contrary to what the member said . . . and very 
important for the people of this province to know, to get 

through misinformation and a lack of information, to 
understand that this government — with the capacity that we 
have, on any kind of rational basis — has been far ahead of 
other provincial governments in terms of the amount of 
payments we’re making per capita and in terms of the amount 
generally last year, $650 million . . . significantly above any 
funding in previous years. I think that this challenge will 
continue for us. It’s not going to be easy to make it through 
these times, but the one thing I can say without any hesitation is 
that this government that I’m a part of has been there and will 
continue to be there for farmers. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, one of the things that farmers 
really get frustrated about is the government saying that things 
are a challenge. There’s very few challenges, lots of problems 
out there. Just say it the way it is. We’ve got problems out 
there. The indicators are such that farm income is down. That’s 
a well-known fact; it was published in the paper not too long 
ago. Input costs are up. Prices are down. There is so many 
issues. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I didn’t make the comment that your 
officials treated people like claims instead of farm families. I 
said that it was something that you had said just a minute ago, 
something that I believe is hurtful to the farmers out there when 
they are trying so hard and trying to get information. Farm 
service centres, rural service centres were closed last year — 13 
of them. They were one of the ways that we got information out 
to farmers, and now we go into the city to get information for 
our farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you, besides the CAIS workers . . . 
and I do understand that human beings can make mistakes. But 
when human beings make mistakes inputting information, that 
hurts other ones down the road. And that’s the farmer that’s 
standing at someplace waiting for a cheque so that he can pay 
the next person that’s got their hand out. Mr. Minister, can you 
please tell me what your indication is from financial institutions 
on the credit rates and the line of credits that were accepted this 
year in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well we have been in ongoing contact 
with lenders. I will be meeting with them in the near future as 
well. And certainly the indications that we are getting is that 
there are some farmers who having problems, and the banks are 
there trying to help them work through their problems and find 
ways of making it into the future. 
 
That said, there are also those who are not having trouble 
accessing credit. And from the perspective that we’ve got so far 
— and I’ll find out, you know, how valid this is with all the 
lenders in the near future — but the perspective we’re getting 
from those that we’ve spoken with is that things generally are 
moving ahead. Credit is available for most. But as has always 
been the case, there will be those who cannot access credit, and 
we want to find out the depth of that. At this point, the 
indications have been that it’s not significantly different than 
what we’ve faced in other years. 
 
The other item that the member mentioned was in terms of 
providing information for farmers and what we were finding in 



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

our surveying — and I think the member is aware of this 
because we certainly named it last year — that over 70 per cent 
of the contacts were by phone or through Internet. And we’ve 
increased the levels of those services, and we think that we have 
a very good way of communicating with farmers, and it is being 
accessed and well used. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, not too long ago we had an 
opportunity to meet with some of the credit union managers 
right here in this Legislative Building. And that night I spoke to 
a number of them and asked them what they were finding, and 
they definitely did not indicate to me that it was a small 
percentage of people that were having difficulty getting a line of 
credit. 
 
They were very concerned about the huge percentage of farmers 
. . . whether they were small farmers or large farmers, they were 
having a difficult time getting their crop in the ground this year 
because by far the majority of them had not paid for last year’s 
expenses. So the question is right now, do they put money on 
last year’s bills or this year’s bill, and is there any hope for the 
future? 
 
Mr. Minister, with the resources that you have in your 
department, you must have some indications of what percentage 
of the farmers in this province you think are in financial 
difficulty. What percentage is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — What we’re hearing from the financial 
institutions is that their arrears are not generally higher than 
what they have been in the past; that though there are some who 
are having problems and are having trouble accessing credit, 
that still the majority are able to access credit, and the number 
of acres that are planned to be seeded this year are not down. 
And generally people are able to move ahead, though there are 
those who have some, some significant problems. 
 
So these are the comments that we’re getting from the lenders. 
And that’s what they’re telling us, so I’ll report it back to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, does your 
department have a percentage of . . . Do they have in their 
books a number of farmers that are not getting their credit? 
What percentage of farmers are in trouble in Saskatchewan 
right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No, we do not have that. Nobody 
collects that information. It is generally private information, and 
the banks would hold it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many farm suicides have 
there been in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We do not have a listing of suicides 
for whatever cause, whatever location. I expect that, you know, 
through checking with funeral homes a person could find that 
out. But no, we don’t have . . . And yes, there are suicides that 
happen, and yes, they happen for a wide variety of reasons. 
Some of those are business-related reasons. Some are family 
related. Some are stress related, and they happen all across the 
sectors of society I’m sorry to say. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me what the farm stress line . . . 

the usage of that, has it increased in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The volume of calls is down the last 
couple of years. And there are a variety of concerns that are 
raised, a variety of problems that come in to the farm stress line 
and I think are capably dealt with by the folks who look after 
those phones, and so all I can tell you really is that the numbers 
are down somewhat. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the nature valley processing 
plant is a new business, or hopefully a new business that is 
trying to get underway, and I know that one of the concerns 
they have is the PST [provincial sales tax] that is making a 
difference between this project getting started or not. Have you 
talked to this corporation about the PST on this processing 
plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have over the past months, over 
the past year, had significant conversations, confidential 
business conversations with a number of companies including 
Natural Valley, some 31 community groups that have expressed 
interest, larger processors, some national, some international 
processors. We’ve had a variety of discussions about the kind of 
structures that will work most effectively to help these 
operations move ahead. 
 
Certainly it is our desire to, as we have stated in a variety of 
different ways and as we have invested . . . shown that we want 
this industry to move forward, and the Premier has announced a 
six-point plan, and we will see further initiatives in the not too 
distant future. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that the shareholders of 
the Natural Valley processing plant will be waiting with bated 
breath to see what the Premier is going to say about this issue. 
 
We were talking to a feedlot owner, and I was told the 
difference per head for a feed set-aside program is $200 per 
head more in Alberta than in Saskatchewan. The question that 
the feedlot owner is saying is, how can we compete? How are 
we going to grow this industry with the difference in this price 
per head? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — A couple of things that are important 
to note — one that this only applies to animals that are in the 
set-aside, about 8 per cent of animals. And I think also to note 
that in our ongoing discussions around making these programs 
as effective as possible we, along with most of the other 
provincial governments, committed to the fact that we would be 
involved in these programs as national programs. 
 
In fact Alberta was on that plane to begin with, but they have 
chosen to do one-offs. And if there is an advantage, that 
advantage would be assessed at closer to $100. But what we’re 
seeing is that Saskatchewan operations are still accessing the 
program. And Alberta does have a treasury that is second to 
none in the country, and they choose to use that as they will. 
 
That said, we think that the program that is in place, as it was 
structured, people knew that it would work, and Saskatchewan 
folks have been participating in it as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you had indicated it’s 8 per cent 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

of cattle. Can you tell me what percentage that is of the actual 
feeder cattle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — 8 per cent feeder cattle. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have just a 
quick question on the CASS program, the Canadian agricultural 
skills services. It was announced on March 17, 2005, by the 
federal government. And the information that I have states that 
it’s currently being developed and is designed to help farm 
families increase their income through skills development and 
training. And the focus will be improving the farm business or 
seeking other employment options. 
 
Could the minister tell us the status of that program and if the 
province will be contributing funds towards that program. And 
if so, how much has he budgeted to put into this particular 
program? 
 
[20:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Saskatchewan’s contribution to the 
CASS program is front administration, provision of staff for 
that. It is a federal program, and we just need to finalize 
agreements, and this plan should be able to roll forward. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the minister give us an estimate of the 
deadline of when it will be rolling forward? When will they be 
accepting and processing applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s anticipated we should be able to 
move this forward fairly soon. We just have to finalize some of 
the agreements around the contribution agreements. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I know we have an awful lot of questions on CAIS. 
And my colleagues probably have more questions on it. I know 
that’s one of the big things that I get questioned about. 
 
But there’s one specific one that was brought up the other day 
that an individual with negative margins, his file was shipped to 
Crop Insurance, and Crop Insurance would not release the 
figures back to CAIS. And he talked to people in Crop 
Insurance, and they said it would be very, very simple. He said, 
all we have to do is just enter it, press send, and it would be 
back to CAIS, and you would have your money coming ASAP 
[as soon as possible]. 
 
And I’d like the minister’s comments on this, and if that is a 
problem or if this is a one or two or three people that this has 
happened to or what the problem is with Crop Insurance 
releasing figures to CAIS. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Stan, our director for Crop Insurance, 
says that basically there should be no problem. If you have 
particular constituents or folks that you know who are having 
trouble, if you can just provide them with the name, they’ll 

expedite them as quickly as they can. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because it 
has been a problem. That’s why I elected to bring it up here this 
evening. And it’s quite frustrating because he said it wasn’t a 
huge pile of money, but it was the process, and he’s been 
waiting and waiting and waiting and waiting, and so if we can 
expedite it in any which way. But I wonder if there is a 
systematic problem with Crop Insurance not releasing, because 
this is just one case, one instance. I’m wondering if there is 
more instances such as this one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, there are some difficulties that 
they have to make that have caused some problems. Some of it 
is matching up the way the data is given through CAIS and 
through Crop Insurance and making sure that they are matching 
up properly. But on a one-to-one basis, they can sort those out. 
And I think as this program is developing. As CAIS is 
developing and as Crop Insurance and CAIS are learning how 
to flow best together, it will take a little bit of time to work that 
out. But again, if you have individuals who are struggling, if 
you can pass the names on I know that Crop Insurance will try 
and move those ahead just as quickly as they can. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you 
have a name of somebody that I could have them contact 
because he has contacted everybody it seems like, and the 
problem is there, and it wasn’t moving even though he was . . . 
as a last resort is why he came to me. And so if you can give me 
a name, or call your office directly . . . or to whom should they 
direct the call? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — This fine gentleman sitting 
immediately to my left, Stan Benjamin, the director of the 
program. If they would call him, he will make sure that it’s 
moved through. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Minister, just to 
follow up on my colleague’s questions, could you give us an 
indication as to how many CAIS applications Crop Insurance is 
dealing with. I understand Crop Insurance becomes involved 
with CAIS applications when the applicant is in the negative 
margin position. Could you give us some statistics as to how 
many you’ve handled in that area to date, and how many files 
are waiting to be processed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is 1,672, and they have 
processed about 40 per cent of them so far. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Good, thank you for that information. I wonder if 
you could provide us with the most up-to-date figures for the 
2004 crop insurance program as to the total payout to date and, 
if not all claims have been settled at this time, what you’re 
projecting for a total payout. And how does that compare to the 
total amount of premiums collected in 2004? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We would be looking at those 
processed now about 378.988 million plus, and the total 
estimate now would put us somewhere in the 394 million range. 
So we’re looking in the high 90s in terms of the per cent payout 



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

now. The total premiums are 292. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister, for that information. So 
what we’re looking at for 2004 is that the crop insurance 
program will run a deficit of about, for round numbers, $100 
million if my math is correct. And I see that you’re agreeing 
with me. 
 
I have some concerns when I look at these figures, given the 
fact of the extensive crop damage that we’ve had in 2004. We 
had a frost on August 20, an abnormally early frost in a year 
when our crops were late, and we know the devastation that 
took place all across the eastern side of our province, across the 
North. And in fact it did move into . . . subsequent later frost I 
believe did some reasonable damage in the western part of the 
province or at least in portions of the western part of the 
province. 
 
And yet when we have such significant damage you would 
think that the program would sustain a larger deficit. To me that 
speaks of the perhaps ineffectiveness of the program. I think I 
would compare . . . Perhaps a comparison that I heard recently 
over the winter months may be appropriate. The individual was 
surmising that perhaps this may be the situation and likened it 
to homeowners suffering substantial damage to their home due 
to fire and the insurance company was coming along and 
offering to replace the shingles. It just seems that the program 
isn’t adequate. 
 
If there is a year when we think . . . you would imagine that 
payouts would be much larger in a year of such devastation like 
we’ve just witnessed. It tells me a couple of things — that first 
of all our level of coverages are not where they should be and 
that perhaps acceptance by producers or sign up by producers in 
the program is not at the level that it should be, whether that be 
the actual number of producers or the level of coverage 
selected. 
 
And I would like your comments on those areas, Minister. I 
have some other opinions, but I would appreciate your 
comments and perhaps your officials’ analysis of why the 
program isn’t more effective than what it appears to be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think there is a significant factor in 
that prior to the damage from the frost we really were looking at 
an amazing bumper crop all across the province. So quantity, as 
I know that you’re aware, was very high compared to your 
normal years. 
 
The other thing that, in terms of the overall picture of crop 
insurance, when you look at the province, there are certainly 
areas that had far below normal payouts as well. And I think it’s 
because of that whole picture. Though quality was damaged, 
quantity was way up. 
 
And I mean I think of, you know, just one example where I was 
travelling with a farmer in his combine, and he was probably 
bringing in somewhere in the neighbourhood of 35 bushels to 
the acre that was damaged by frost. And I don’t know the 
percent damage, but it was going to be all right. He was going 
to get a return on that one, but quality was certainly down. His 
wheat was sampled, crops side by side. His neighbour who is 
just north of him had no damage in the wheat, no damage in his 

canola. And you know, given the temperatures, I mean that’s 
amazing. There wasn’t any apparent geographic difference that 
would have explained it, but there, right in that one small area 
north of Melville, significant differences in the impacts. 
 
And so this . . . I mean we’ve seen some of this across the 
province, but it’s how it averaged out, and it is the quantity 
which I think kept it from being huge numbers in the end. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, I’m sure that, you know, those certainly 
were instances, and certainly, yes, part of the reason why the 
payouts aren’t larger is because of the volume. 
 
But also I think that the problem runs deeper than that. I’ve 
spoken to many producers in this province, many of them in my 
own constituency, which was . . . a good chunk of my 
constituency was hit very hard by the frost. And yet quite a 
number of the producers did not trigger any payouts under the 
crop insurance program, particularly for their cereal grains and 
particularly for spring wheat. 
 
And one of the reasons they didn’t is because a lot of them, or 
quite a number of them, only selected the 50 per cent level of 
coverage. And so therefore if you had a 35- or 40- or 
45-bushel-an-acre crop of feed wheat and under the coverage 
levels at 50 per cent, it’s highly unlikely that they would trigger 
a payout. 
 
So then the question is, well why would they select such low 
coverages? That would be a natural question that one might ask. 
Well I can tell you why they selected such low coverages. 
Because many producers, particularly on the eastern side of the 
province, over the years the greatest threat to crop loss is hail. 
And when your government removed the spot loss hail 
coverage out of the crop insurance program, you added millions 
of dollars of additional expenses to producers because now they 
have to go and buy hail insurance from other sources at 
considerably higher cost. 
 
And once Crop Insurance got out of the hail insurance business, 
we saw the discounts and the premiums and so on work against 
the producers. And so therefore in order to manage their total 
costs of putting a crop and of insuring a crop, they reduced 
some of their crop insurance coverage to have some additional 
dollars to put into hail insurance. And I think that is in fact a 
fairly significant reason why we have seen, you know, lower 
payouts than one might have thought under the crop insurance 
program. 
 
I would just like — I know our time is short — and I would just 
like to ask one further question, Minister, and it has to do with 
the CAIS review committee. A committee was apparently 
struck very recently, and I understand there are federal, 
provincial, and producer representatives on the committee. Do 
you have the information as to who will be representing 
Saskatchewan, both as provincial reps and producer reps? And 
also in our limited time, could you briefly comment on the 
terms of reference of the review committee and particularly 
when this committee will be meeting to review the CAIS 
program? 
 
[20:30] 
 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I want to first of all comment again on 
the issue of crop insurance and the kind of coverage that people 
are getting. It’s important to note that the numbers have 
basically held in terms of the kind of insurance that people are 
getting. Certainly in around that 70 per cent level is the 
weighted average. In terms of the coverage at 50 per cent, we 
haven’t seen any 50 per cent winterkill. We haven’t seen any 
kind of significant increase there. Basically the weighted 
average has stayed in around the 70 per cent, so that’s not a 
huge factor in the overall picture. 
 
Secondly with regard to the CAIS review, we have two people 
on from the province: Rick Burton who is a member of the 
department staff and Jim Robbins. And they will be basically in 
the review providing advice on the structure, parameters of 
CAIS, and be setting up an appeal process for CAIS as well. 
 
I think it’s important to note that as this review panel was going 
forward, we did take significant lead in making sure that there 
were farmers on the committee. It was going to be structured 
quite differently before the Prince Edward Island meeting, and 
we were able to make the case that it’s very important to have 
farmers on the committee. And we have that representation. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move that we report 
progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
reported progress. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The business before the committee are 
estimates for the Department of Health. Could the minister 
please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Good evening. It’s a pleasure to be here 
this evening. And I have with me tonight, to my immediate left, 
Mike Shaw, the associate deputy minister. Behind him is 
Bonnie Blakley, the executive director of the health human 
resource planning branch. To her right is Duncan Fisher, the 
assistant deputy minister. To Duncan’s right is Max Hendricks, 
the executive director of the finance and administration branch. 
And to my right is Lawrence Krahn, the assistant deputy 
minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Item 1, vote (HE01). I recognize the 
member from Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister here today and his officials. 

I have two different lines of questioning. I just have one 
question that came through on my . . . a constituent faxed me 
something today, and I’m looking for, I guess, background 
information on it. She had phoned, she wanted to know . . . And 
I haven’t talked to her yet. I haven’t been able to talk to her, so 
I’ll ask you. She says there is no lab technical fees charged by 
the doctor for heart pacemaker follow-up visits. But she claims 
other specialists can charge lab technical fees for follow-up 
visits. And she had asked, faxed my office with that particular 
question. So I guess I’ll pass it on to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We can’t quite understand what it is that 
you’re asking. Can you describe the words again so that we can 
see if we can figure out what the question is? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — This is just what was faxed to me. She says, no 
lab technical fees are charged by the doctor for heart pacemaker 
follow-up visits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’re still having a hard time 
understanding what the question is. I mean, the doctor wouldn’t 
charge any fees because the doctors are covered under the 
medical services plan. But if it’s related to some other kind of 
fee, perhaps you could describe it in more detail. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well I don’t have much. Like I said, I haven’t 
talked to her yet. This just came across my fax machine. So I 
was going to, like do a follow-up call with her. But she claims 
that other specialists can charge lab technical fees for follow-up 
visits. So I guess her question is that for heart pacemaker — 
like somebody that had a heart pacemaker installed — that there 
is no provision to charge the government for follow-up visits, 
from what I get. There’s only about three lines here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t understand what the question is. 
So maybe you can send me information and we’ll get back to 
you once you have a bit more information. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. I can just send you this over. You 
can take a quick read at it right now. 
 
I guess the other line of questioning I want to get into is the 
Watrous Hospital. I know that they’re looking to rebuild, or 
build a new facility there. Can you tell me where that’s sitting 
in the line? I know they’d approached the government for 
funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This project is clearly in the horizon as far 
as being decided but basically it’s at the stage in the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority where they’re evaluating their 
projects. And so if you remember the evening when I went 
through all of the various steps, it’s at step 5 out of step 18. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Okay. So they’ve got in other words five more 
steps. I know when I was first elected in ’99 dealing with the 
Outlook one, the same thing, they weren’t quite sure where they 
were. They were on the list. I’m not sure where they were on 
the step end of it. Probably about step 5 and about three or four 
years later they were finally announced that they got their 
funding. I guess same argument as with Outlook is that you 
have your funding in place but costs are always going up so 
you’ve got to keep always raising more money to cover it every 
year. They would like to be moving ahead. Can you just give 



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

me a quick synopsis of step 5 so that I could pass it on to them 
and I can do it from Hansard then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Step 5 is where the regional health 
authority is going through and ranking the projects within their 
region. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to you and your officials. Mr. Minister, the Sun 
Country Health Authority has reversed or the board there has 
reversed its decision regarding the centralization of laundry 
services to Tatagwa in Weyburn. And, Mr. Minister, as you 
would know, almost no one with the exception of the Sun 
Country board wanted the centralization of the health care, 
pardon me, of the laundry facilities in the first place. And I was 
just wondering if you could give me a reason for the change of 
heart. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This kind of a decision is a decision made 
in the region. And I think that they’ve made some decisions 
around how to implement the new laundry in Weyburn and 
continue with the laundry in Estevan. And I’m sure they’ll 
continue to monitor how the service is provided out of those 
sites and affirm the positive parts of it. And if there are 
problems, they’ll fix them. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, they have reversed their decision, 
and all the laundry is going back and being done as it was 
before. It’s being done in Estevan now. And I was just 
wondering if you could enlighten me as to why they thought 
that, the board thought that, you know, taking the laundry to 
Weyburn was the route to go, and now they’ve reversed that 
decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well it’s my understanding that the way 
the laundry was done in Estevan hasn’t changed. They’d made a 
decision about consolidating, but on further reflection they just 
let it continue in Estevan. So it hasn’t really stopped and started 
in Estevan. It’s continued the way it was before. 
 
But practically they will continue to evaluate how the services 
are provided and make sure that the various institutions are 
getting the appropriate laundry in the appropriate ways. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, as of January all laundry other 
than the personal laundry was being shipped to Weyburn to be 
laundered. And since then I’ve . . . it’s in the Mercury last 
week, the Estevan newspaper, that the laundry will now be 
staying in Estevan. So it isn’t continuing on the same way. It is 
being sent back the way it was pre-January ’05 to the way they 
had done it in previous years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the information I have is that the 
laundry decision was talked about, in having the laundry 
moved, but it never actually was all done in Weyburn and then 
sent back to Estevan. They continued with that while they were 
evaluating. They continued with the laundry working in Estevan 
while it was being evaluated. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I have a quote here where Mr. Spencer, who is 
the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Sun Country said, you 

know, give his reasons for the reversal of this decision. And this 
Mr. Spencer is the CEO and I was at meetings where the board 
would not have an open consultation with the people. People 
crammed into the boardrooms and they were treated very, very 
rudely and they were denied a public meeting regarding this. 
And in effect the laundry was moved to Weyburn and now they 
have went back on that plan and they’re going to do it in 
Estevan again. 
 
[20:45] 
 
And I know 28 people lost their job. They were . . . I know 
some were working at car dealerships, some found placement in 
other locations throughout Estevan and so it did in fact take 
effect. 
 
And I was just wondering. They had originally projected that 
this centralization of the laundry facility was going to be a 
saving of $216,000. And I know that one board member went 
on to say that he doubts that those savings were going to be 
realized. So I was just wondering, like, it was in Estevan and 
then it moved to Weyburn. Now it’s back in Estevan. And I was 
just wondering, you know, what has been spent on this fiasco to 
date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The laundry, the expanded laundry in 
Weyburn didn’t open until about five or six weeks ago so there 
wasn’t extra laundry being done there. Now what happened in 
February was that the Sun Country Regional Health Authority 
determined that it would not go ahead with the transfer of the 
institutional laundry to Weyburn from St. Joseph’s Hospital in 
Estevan. The original plan had a savings of $216,000. They 
anticipate that the plan that they have now implemented will 
save them about $59,000, so they’re still saving some money 
but they’re not saving as much as they thought they would. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me how much 
money was spent on the modified facility in Weyburn that they 
had to make modifications of it to accommodate the Estevan 
laundry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — All I would say is, this is a brand new 
facility with a brand new laundry built in it with capacity to do 
much more laundry from across the whole region, and that 
capacity remains there to do the institutional laundry. And after 
some initial start-up challenges, my understanding as of this 
week is that it’s operating quite well. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Minister, I understand that now there is 
going to be a flow analysis made of the service to see where the 
situation stands heading into the summer of 2005 and, as with 
all analysis, they come with a cost. And I was just wondering 
what the cost would be of this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that what you may be talking 
about is the regular operational reviews about how the service is 
provided to the various institutions throughout the regional 
health authority. And that would be something that’s ongoing 
within the administrative costs of the . . . how they run this 
particular part of the service for the various institutions, and so 
therefore would be just in their normal budgeting and not 
require extra money. 
 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, is it true 
that the Tatagwa centre in Weyburn, that the laundry 
department is located in the basement of that facility and the 
basement has severe water problems, been flooded, and that is 
causing some problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the answer to that is no. I’ve been 
to the laundry space while they were installing the equipment 
and it’s on ground floor and you can look out the window and 
see the trees and the grass. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials tonight. 
 
I want to start off with the letter that was sent to seniors in my 
area, and it’s from the P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland Health 
Region, and it’s dated March 23, 2005, and it’s to all wellness 
clinic foot care clients. And it states that: 
 

The . . . [P.A.] Parkland Health Region has been providing 
wellness clinics in many communities through out the 
region for an extended period of time. Many . . . residents 
have accessed the services [that are] provided by these 
clinics. 
 
One of the most utilized services that the wellness clinics 
provide is foot care. 
 
. . . In order to continue to provide this service at the 
wellness clinics, the region will be implementing a cost 
that is consistent with the cost of a billable unit of home 
care service. The cost of a unit of home care service is set 
annually by Saskatchewan Health and currently is $6.36. 
 
In comparison, the fee for podiatry services . . . has risen 
from $10.00 to $30.00 and to access services from a 
private . . . [foot care], the cost . . . [of] an individual 
would be $60.00 a visit. 
 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minster, is this something that 
Saskatchewan Health is implementing to all the regions in the 
province, or is this strictly coming from the Parkland Health 
Region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You’ve asked three questions, I think, all 
in one, so I’ll try to break them out and answer them. 
 
The $60 private fee for a podiatrist, those are set by the private 
podiatrists, and they can set any fee that they wish. We don’t 
have any control on that. The $30 podiatry fee which is part of 
the government program, that was a budget decision a year ago. 
So it was in effect from April 1, 2004, up until now. So that was 
a province-wide decision, and that’s the same charge right 
across the province. 
 
The third question around the charge for home care aid to 
provide some assistance, that is a Parkland Health Region 
decision there, and that’s made around their wellness clinic, and 

that’s a fee that they’ve set. Now they’ve tried to relate it to a 
home care fee, but it’s actually just within the region that 
they’ve set that fee, and it’s not a province-wide one. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. So in other 
words the $6.30 is something that the P.A. Parkland Health 
Region is implementing, and it is equal to a cost contributed by 
home care. Is this correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The home care fee is province-wide but 
the way . . . they have basically created a service in their 
wellness clinic and then used a comparable amount to what is 
the home care fee across the province for other services. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Then in other 
words then, the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region is 
implementing this $6.30. In regards to that, is there other 
services that can be added to this list? In other words, is there 
other services that Parkland Health can add to this list where it 
would be a cost to our seniors in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well basically the Prince Albert Parkland 
Health Region has a wellness clinic, and they’ve implemented 
this fee as set out in the information that you’ve provided. Other 
possible fees that they might charge for would be some kinds of 
supplies if they were required. But it’s . . . Each region deals 
with these kinds of things themselves and so that there is some 
variation, I think, across the province. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, to your knowledge, is there 
any other health region in the province that is going down this 
road other than the Parkland Health Region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The fees that are additional in long-term 
care are not very many. There are a few spots. Some places do 
charge for some of the supplies that are required. Others don’t. 
On a province-wide basis, as these issues arise, there is a group 
of people working together with some of the representatives of 
the regional health authorities and the department to make sure 
that there is some consistency across the province as some of 
these new ideas arise. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. To the seniors of 
this region, they’re very upset at the fact that every year they go 
for service that was there before free of charge and now they’re 
being charged. They’re also wondering what happened to our 
free medicare system that the Hon. Tommy Douglas brought in 
some years ago. They’re upset, and they recall, many of them 
recall, that when Tommy Douglas brought this in, they were in 
favour of it. At that time I believe, when first medicare came in, 
I think there was a cost on a family basis which was 
approximately $170 per family. 
 
At the rate that not only the Parkland Health District but the 
government is going, is there going to be added cost to the 
seniors regarding health care, and is the government looking at 
coming up with a cost on a family basis to cover off some of the 
medicare services that we have in this province? 
 
[21:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that we need to remind 
ourselves a little bit about what Tommy Douglas brought in. 



2810 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

Originally it was just hospitalization costs. So that was in the 
late ’40s. And then in ’62, they brought in medicare which was 
the doctor costs. But there wasn’t coverage for a number of 
other things. 
 
Under the Canada Health Act, long-term care — which is where 
the questions you’re raising now — that’s not included in there, 
but we include and in fact pay I think about 77 per cent of the 
costs of long-term care for almost 9,000 residents in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But what you have to remember is that we have continued to 
expand what we cover, but we still don’t cover everything, and 
it’s that challenge about which things we decide to expand to 
cover. 
 
You will recall that diabetic supplies, some of those things we 
increased the coverage there, just a year and a half or two years 
ago, and that was a very positive move. But there are some 
things that we don’t cover for diabetics although we continue to 
look at that. 
 
And so if your question is, are we continuing to look at how 
broad the coverage we have is and where we might expand it, 
the answer is yes. But we’re also very careful as we look 
forward in doing that because we want to make sure that it’s 
sustainable in the long run. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you’re talking about 
expansion, I think to the seniors of this area, and I guess we’re 
only dealing with the Parkland Health Region, the seniors there 
feel that they are being extra charged for this because up until 
this time it was free of charge, which begs another question, 
Mr. Minister. Is this not a form of user fees? And if it is, is your 
government going to implement anything more regarding the 
seniors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that what you have to 
recognize is that there are kinds of things that are charged for — 
sometimes it’s supplies — and these are all things that we look 
at very carefully. Practically we end up trying to balance what is 
part of the original health care plan, what’s under the Canada 
Health Act, and then we look at our further agreements about 
what other kinds of things we’re going to supply. 
 
We will continue to examine some of these things and try to 
make sure that we’re providing a base that covers most things 
that are expected. 
 
But practically there are quite a few things that we still don’t 
cover, and that’s why it’s important for people to look at what is 
covered. A good example is out-of-country travel. People need 
to make sure that they have insurance to cover those extra costs. 
Another example is that if you’re under 65 years of age and you 
require an ambulance, then you’re going to end up with a bill 
for the ambulance service. If you’re over 65, it’s a flat fee of 
$250. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, in regards to your 
answer, this was something that was free before, and now 
there’s a charge on it. I can understand where you’re coming 
from as far as diabetics because I am a diabetic, and there are 
things that the government has implemented, and I thank them 

for that. 
 
But in this case here, Mr. Minister, we’re dealing with a service 
that was there and has been there for a long time, and now, as of 
just days ago, now there’s a cost contributed to it. And the 
seniors feel that they’ve been unjustly picked out and have to 
pay for a service that was there before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the best way to describe this 
is a balancing act. Some of the regions decide to provide 
wellness clinics as something a bit extra, and not every region 
has that. It’s not something that’s part of a province-wide 
mandate. And so when they bring forward their budgets around 
how they’re going to provide some of these things that have 
been added into the system, well then they end up with 
sometimes a suggestion like what’s come from Prince Albert 
Parkland. And that’s exactly why we’ve been looking at this on 
a province-wide basis because there aren’t very many situations 
like this, and it does usually relate to something that’s a bit of 
an add-on in a particular region. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, if the senior decides to 
go to the emergency hospital for this to be done, is it covered 
under Saskatchewan Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This, I don’t think this service would be 
provided at the University Hospital. It’s not something that you 
would go to the University Hospital for. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, if the senior went to a local 
hospital in my area, I’m sure he would get that done. Would 
then he have to pay a cost then, or is it covered under 
Saskatchewan Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would not expect that foot care, getting 
your toe nails cut, would be done at the hospital. And I don’t 
encourage people to go there to get that done. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the last 
time I got in one question — there wasn’t enough time — but it 
was concerning the Biggar Hospital. And the history of the 
Biggar Hospital is that we lost the kitchen facilities. It was 
moved to the Diamond Lodge, and that created a lot of 
uncertainty in the community. 
 
Now to the regional health board, to their credit, they are 
building a brand new ambulance garage with wider doors and 
all the special showers to de-contaminate the workers and 
things like that. So that’s very much to the credit of the region. 
 
But the problem right now is we have . . . is really in Biggar we 
need three doctors. And one doctor left, I believe, last 
December. And the clinic was owned by the three doctors, I 
believe, and now it’s two doctors. And they are trying to attract 
a doctor, I believe, from South Africa, and hopefully, this 
person will be coming. 
 
But my question is, first, if you have any information about how 
that is working, if that doctor is coming to Biggar or not. But 
more on a broader question, what is the government, what is 
your department doing to attract doctors — whether they be 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2811 

foreign doctors or Canadian doctors or newly trained doctors — 
into communities like Biggar which is a rural centre which is 
only 90 kilometres from Saskatoon and has many advantages 
but still is considered a rural centre? And many doctors don’t 
want to come to a place like Biggar. And so if you could just 
answer those couple of questions for me, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that the local clinic 
and the doctors involved there along with the local community 
have started their recruiting process and that, according to the 
information we have from the regional health authority, they’re 
pretty optimistic that they’ll be recruiting somebody very soon. 
Because Biggar is a good place to live, a good place to practice, 
and that in the whole scheme of things it’s a good place to be a 
medical doctor. So there is a . . . I think they’re very optimistic 
about what is happening there. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well that’s good news. Just to reinforce a 
situation, the two doctors that are there are basically on call 
more or less 24 hours a day. And, like, I’ve talked to both of 
them, and they said it’s fine if they know that it’s going to last 
for three months or six months, and they know that they’re 
going to have a third doctor. The risk the community is running 
that if there isn’t a third doctor shows up, I mean quite frankly, 
there is going to be health concerns, stress concerns, to the two 
remaining doctors and ultimately will have no doctors if 
something isn’t done. 
 
And again I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: is your 
department playing a more active role to attracting doctors to 
Saskatchewan, not only in communities like Biggar but . . . The 
Heartland Health Region is short four doctors. And I’m sure 
every situation is the same as I described in Biggar, that the 
load is left onto the doctor or two doctors that are left in the 
community and at some point that situation will come to an end 
and they’ll lose their doctors, their clinic, and possibly their 
hospital because of a lack of a physician. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well what you’re describing is something 
that happens in communities from time to time and it really is a 
concern. Part of our overall plan, and it’s part of the action plan, 
is to try to have practices have at least three doctors so that that 
cycle of call that you were just describing doesn’t happen. And 
so we’d like to try to get at least three doctors. When there are 
challenges like what obviously is happening now, through the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association we have a locum relief 
program where they have some ability to find people to come in 
and provide some relief. So that’s a short-term kind of solution. 
 
But I think you asked more generally about what we’re doing to 
retain doctors and recruit doctors in rural areas, and there’s 
quite a number of programs. And I’ll just list them and you may 
have questions about specific ones and you can ask me about it. 
 
But we have in the medical school, family medicine residency 
bursary programs that encourage people to go into rural 
practice. We also have what’s called a rural practice 
establishment grant to help people set up practice in a rural area. 
We have a regional practice establishment grant which also 
serves that purpose. We have our bursary programs for the 
students. We have rural practice enhancement training so if 
somebody wants to practise in a rural area and then they 
discover, well maybe if they had some other skills it would 

complement the local team of doctors in that facility, there’s a 
way to get some training money. We have a continuing medical 
education program for rural emergency care, so that provides 
some assistance for people who want to beef up those skills. We 
have rural travel assistance program and rural extended leave 
program, both of which are there to assist people who provide 
services in rural areas. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. On another topic — it’s my 
personal family situation, but my mother had a stroke in ’94. 
And to my father’s credit and his good health and his good luck 
and his willingness to keep my mother at home, he’s been able 
to keep her at home. And she has serious physical problems and 
he’s able to keep her at home because of home care. And I just 
want to give your department a bouquet because home care is 
the reason she’s still at home. And I know home care does good 
work and that’s a very good thing. The two ladies that come out 
to help with my mother really have become a part of our family 
and we really appreciated that. 
 
Two points I want to make is that these home care workers, 
well everyone needs more money but I think in the home care 
system these people deserve more money. And it’s just not for 
the work they do but also for the savings that home care and 
these workers give to the health system. Because if they weren’t 
in at home, my mother would be at the local Diamond Lodge. 
And I’m assuming it would be much more expensive to keep 
my mother at the lodge than it would be at home. And I’d just 
like to just reinforce the fact how important home care is. 
 
[21:15] 
 
And I guess what I’m suggesting is to increase the cost of home 
care by giving these workers more money. But on the other 
hand, I think if the program was expanded and there was more 
people in the communities . . . because I know in other parts of 
my constituency there aren’t the people that will work in the 
home care field. There’s a shortage, and that means these 
people that have serious physical problems are in homes or on 
waiting lists or shuffled around the health region. 
 
So I guess my point is, have you considered giving more money 
to home care workers and expanding that? And again, I just 
would like to say that’s a very important program for many 
families. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I appreciate the positive comments 
about home care. And if you’ll look at the home care budget 
over the last 10 years, you can see that it’s gone up each year 
because of the kind of positive response from the public of 
getting help in their homes. 
 
The issue around compensation is presently at the bargaining 
table, and I’m sure they’ll take into account the kind words that 
you have this evening as they go forward with that. 
 
I would also say that one of the things that we are looking at 
doing which expands home care, because you asked a bit about 
that, is mental health home care. And we’re moving very 
carefully but there are oftentimes when just having that 
consistent visiting of a home care aid or nurse when you’re 
taking medications for some mental illnesses can mean that you 
can live at home and not have to be in an institution. And that 



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

accomplishes the same kind of positive thing that you were 
describing about your mother. 
 
So on behalf of all those people, thank you very much. And I 
say thank you to them, too. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ve got a number of 
questions in the time that we have, in a number of different 
areas, so I probably won’t spend a lot of time in any one area. I 
want to cover about three or four areas. 
 
But I have one general question to start with that has come to 
mind . . . well I’ve been thinking of for a number of months, 
especially since I have become the health care critic. But it was 
kind of brought to the forefront yesterday when I was watching 
the news and listening to the debate that was going on in 
Alberta right now with Klein, and what he has been saying. And 
the federal minister, Dosanjh, was out in Alberta and talking 
about the system that we have in Canada. I mean there was 
some talk of private delivery and the issue with the federal 
government saying, no it has to be all public. 
 
As I looked in Saskatchewan and look at the services that we 
offer here in Saskatchewan, there are private delivery. And we 
just talked about the podiatry, the issue about podiatry. In some 
health districts it’s covered, in other health districts it’s 
delivered privately. There are many examples where there is a 
public-private partnership in, for example I can think of 
laboratory services here in Regina with some of the lab services 
that are available. And you can start looking at many different 
sections of the health care delivery in our province, and there is 
private deliverers of health care. 
 
I guess my question to the minister is, how do you determine 
where is the cut-off line? You know, there has certainly been 
some talk of MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] and the one 
reserve, First Nation, that’s looking at putting an MRI on their 
reserve, it would be looked at as private. There is the issue in 
my constituency with the Fort Qu’Appelle, the First Nation, the 
Treaty Four healing centre, which is a kind of a hybrid 
partnership. How does the department determine — and this is a 
very, very large, broad question — what they will allow the 
private sector in, per se, and in certain areas, I mean it’s just 
forbidden, taboo. Where is the line and how do you determine 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well my initial response to your question 
is, carefully and thoughtfully. So it is a challenge to look at. But 
under the Canada Health Act there is a strong sense of public 
administration of the health care system, but recognizing that 
there are many private deliverers. And that’s the doctors or can 
be some of the ambulance services. It can be chiropractors. And 
so the goal is to try to provide a service that covers as many 
people as possible and do it in a way that recognizes that we are 
using public dollars to fund it. I think just as a point of 
information, in the Canadian system it’s about 71 or 72 cents of 
every health dollar come through public funds and 28 or 29 
cents that come from private funds or insurance and other kinds 
of things, and so we try to maintain that balance. 
 

Now in the States it’s not that much different. In fact, when 
they tally together all of the state and federal funds and county 
and local funds that go into health care, they’re probably 
somewhere around 60 per cent publicly funded versus our 71 or 
72, but it ends up being many people in the States who don’t 
have basic coverage. And that’s one of our goals, is to make 
sure everybody has good basic coverage. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I certainly agree with the whole concept of 
universality. That’s not the issue. And also as well as the 
funding and where the funding source is — and as you pointed 
out, the percentage here in Saskatchewan of, or probably 
Canada, but publicly funded as opposed to insurance. 
 
But it’s on the other side of the issue. It’s not how we fund it, 
it’s the delivery of the service. And you already have 
mentioned, you know, whether it’s ambulance service or 
chiropractors or laboratory work, how do you determine where 
you allow private deliverers into the system? How do you 
determine that we can have private delivery of ambulance 
service but we can’t have private delivery of, for example, an 
MRI, of the delivery of the service? 
 
You know we can have private delivery of laser surgery. 
There’s examples of private delivery, not that I’m saying that’s 
the way to go or we should go further. All I’m trying to kind of 
get a grasp on is, how do you determine which one, which areas 
we allow private delivery into and which areas we don’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that there aren’t black and 
white decisions made. And I’ll just give you a few examples. 
Originally with the long-term care, most of that was provided 
by private operators, but as it became subsidized some of the 
private operators were sort of grandfathered or grandmothered 
into the system. So they’re still there and providing service and 
funded that way. 
 
With ambulance service many of those, if not all of them, were 
not province-wide. For sure they weren’t provincial service. 
Some were municipalities, many of them were private ones, 
privately operated, and in certain instances it made more sense 
to bring them into the provincial system. 
 
But when you look at new technology and the kinds of things 
that are funded in our medical system, then we look at 
practically what is the most cost-effective way to provide that 
service for the population in any particular area. 
 
At this point with MRIs it’s made sense to have those placed in 
hospitals, which are publicly funded. Will that change? Well I 
think that is something that you continue to look at and see 
what makes sense. We do have some guidelines set out in the 
Canada Health Act that we have to continually watch and make 
sure that we’re not offside with those either. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So I don’t want to put words in your mouth, 
but I would almost say that what you’re telling me is that it is a 
situation-by-situation or case-by-case decision. 
 
You know, we use the example of laser surgery. You 
mentioned, and I mentioned prior to you, about MRIs. I mean 
some of the diagnostic equipment now, who administers it and 
delivers it? It’s all public, but you’re saying perhaps in the 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

future. 
 
There is nothing saying through the Canada Health Act that 
there couldn’t be a private deliverer, I guess. I guess what 
you’re saying, from what your words were, it’s a 
situation-by-situation . . . I mean you take each situation, look at 
its merits and say, this is better delivered publicly; where some 
you have obviously said, it’s better delivered privately. Would 
that be a fair statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the basic principle that you have to 
keep in mind is a publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care system and what things can be provided for all members of 
the public. And when you look at how you do that, there may be 
some ideas or suggestions about how you accomplish that. But 
ultimately if you’re using publicly administered or publicly 
funded system, then that will be a basic principle that you use 
when you look at everything. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I had better move on to all the questions 
that I have in front of me, because that wasn’t the one that I had 
in front of me, and we’ve already taken 10 or 15 minutes 
regarding that. 
 
What I did want to talk about, or ask I guess a little bit about, 
and I’m sure . . . I don’t know if you have read the article, but 
I’m sure probably some of your staff have. I guess it was in 
today’s Globe and Mail regarding the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency and some of the issues around mammograms and 
certification and the issue around that. 
 
I would be interested to know . . . First of all the article talks 
about a mobile machine in the North Battleford area that has 
had its service suspended. It said that “ . . . the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency’s mobile North Battleford machine has been 
suspended . . . [from service]. Is that correct and why? That 
was, I guess, quoted in the paper. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Let me explain what the situation is here. 
There are a couple of different things happening. One is that the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has set up a mammography 
screening program across the province, and they’ve done that 
working together with specialists in Saskatchewan who have 
been identified and certified by the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons in Saskatchewan. And they use equipment across the 
province that meets all of the standards that’s regularly 
inspected by appropriate people who inspect this equipment. 
 
What we . . . and basically they have a system for assuring the 
quality of the diagnostics and of the people who are doing the 
reading of this. So all of the screening of mammography that’s 
done through the screening program are checked and interpreted 
by radiologists in Regina or Saskatoon who are certified by the 
Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada. All 
radiologists in Saskatchewan are licensed by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons in Saskatchewan to practise in their 
specialty area. 
 
And then all of the equipment has twice-yearly preventive 
maintenance and safety checks now. So the Saskatchewan 
women can be assured that there is a quality service. 
 
[21:30] 

Now what’s the issue that’s in the paper here today? Well over 
and against the College of Physicians and Surgeons and then 
the Royal College, nationally, there’s another group which 
doesn’t include all the radiologists and is run by Mr. Laberge 
who is a lawyer — he’s not a doctor — and he, he has 
developed a method whereby they assess equipment. And what 
his comment is, is that in Saskatchewan we don’t use his 
particular assessment. 
 
Now I think you have long . . . you know, know something 
about some other areas where there are different competing 
certification processes around particular equipment that’s being 
used. In Saskatchewan because we don’t use our equipment in 
the same way as what this CAR [Canadian Association of 
Radiologists] recognizes, in fact that we take some of the 
mammographies and have them come to be interpreted centrally 
in Regina and Saskatoon, then it doesn’t fit with their 
certification process. And I think that a lot of this is about that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So a number of the provinces use the 
Canadian Association of Radiologists to certify their 
equipment. We don’t do that. We use the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons. 
 
That’s interesting because a number of provinces have 
mandatory certification through this organization. Would you 
have any idea of how many provinces use the Canadian 
Association of Radiologists, because by the looks of the article 
a number of provinces have mandatory accreditation through 
that organization but Saskatchewan doesn’t. And we use a 
different, I guess, certification agency, and it’s the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
But even through that, what is the issue around the suspension 
of service of the one mobile unit in North Battleford? Is that 
true? And are there other facilities that are close to losing their 
accreditation even with the organization that we are using to 
certify them with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The equipment in North Battleford wasn’t 
suspended or had any problem. It was just the accreditation. 
And this relates to the fact that the screening was done by the 
radiologists in Saskatoon as opposed to on-site in North 
Battleford. 
 
Now you asked how many provinces use them — Quebec, 
Alberta, and Nova Scotia. There’s only three provinces that use 
CAR as their . . . and mandate accreditation through CAR. So 
of the jurisdictions in Canada — we say there’s 13 including the 
three territories — 3 out of 13 use CAR, and British Columbia 
is looking at it. But because of some of the ways that they’ve 
set up their rules and because of our strong tradition of quality 
in how we’ve developed our program before they even did this 
service, then we’re quite satisfied with the kind of quality that 
we provide here. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So regardless of the group then, whether 
it’s CAR or the organizations that we use in Saskatchewan, the 
facility or the mobile unit in North Battleford, certification ran 
out. What does it take then to be recertified, and how many 
other facilities are in that same position of losing their 
certification? 
 



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the issue here is that this Canadian 
Association of Radiologists doesn’t understand how we provide 
these services in Saskatchewan. It doesn’t fit their model. And 
so some of the places that did have this accreditation, they’ve 
. . . it’s lapsed or they’ve changed it. But it doesn’t mean that 
the service has changed or how we’ve provided it has changed. 
 
Part of what’s happening here, frankly, is that an organization 
that earns revenue by certifying things has developed a 
marketing strategy to try to expand its certification role across 
the country. And it’s unfortunate that when they do that, they 
scare women right across the whole of the country. 
 
And so I think practically, we’ve provided good service in this 
program in Saskatchewan over many years, and we have quality 
assurance procedures put in place by the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. We work carefully with the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons to make sure that the people who are doing this work 
have the proper credentials, and we also then have another 
safeguard in that screenings that are done outside of Saskatoon 
and Regina come to Saskatoon and Regina and are reviewed 
again. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll leave that area 
because again I’ve got a couple of other areas I want to get 
through before the time is up. 
 
And one is on regarding specialists in the Regina Health Region 
as compared to the Saskatoon Health Region . . . health 
authority, I should say. And the discrepancy in numbers in 
some of the specialists like . . . and you can correct me if I’m 
wrong. These are numbers that I have been given in a letter that 
I received, and so I would be interested to know if these 
numbers are accurate and if they are accurate, some explanation 
on such a discrepancy in the numbers. 
 
For example, anaesthesiologists in Saskatoon, they show that 
there is 42, and in Regina there’s 17. Psychiatrists in Saskatoon, 
31; Regina 6. Now I don’t know, again you can correct these 
numbers if they’re wrong. I’d be interested in the department’s 
numbers and then also if there is a discrepancy. Orthopaedic 
surgeons, 16 in Saskatoon, and 9 in Regina Health Authority. 
Urologists, and I don’t have the numbers, but I know just from 
a number of people that I’ve dealt with that say that there’s, you 
know, quite a discrepancy in the number of urologists between 
the Regina Health Authority and the Saskatoon Health 
Authority. 
 
So if you could give me some of those numbers and then 
explain to me the discrepancy between one health authority as 
opposed to the other health authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank you for this question because it 
relates to a number of different things. But practically the 
simple answer relates to the fact that the main campus of the 
College of Medicine is in Saskatoon. And some of the decisions 
made in the late ’80s around funding for the College of 
Medicine actually collapsed what was the southern campus that 
was based at the Plains hospital. And at that time many 
specialists, if they wanted to continue with an academic 
medicine and a practising medicine, were almost forced to 
move to Saskatoon. And so that had a fair effect on what’s 
going on. 

So when you look at the numbers, it often is about that 
one-third of the number of specialists in Regina versus 
Saskatoon. Now there’s a couple areas where Regina has more. 
So we have more cardiac surgeons, for example, in Regina than 
in Saskatoon. But as far as most other areas, there would be 
more in Saskatoon, and it is related to the medical school. It 
ends up one of the goals of the College of Medicine over the 
last year and a half or two years . . . has been to appoint an 
assistant dean of medicine in Regina and to affirm the role of 
the Regina hospitals as teaching facilities in the College of 
Medicine, and also that’s true with nursing as well. 
 
And so what we see is an attempt to try to deal with some of the 
challenges that arose from the late ’80s as it relates to the 
distribution of specialists. But effectively, if you look between 
the numbers I have as of March of this year, that we have about 
356 specialists in Saskatoon and about 167 in Regina. And so 
there clearly is a discrepancy. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, that’s interesting. That’s a huge 
discrepancy. And I understand the issue a little bit about the 
change in the late ’80s regarding the teaching facilities. I think 
the biggest challenge that I would say that southern 
Saskatchewan faced was the challenge of when the Plains 
closed. It wasn’t whether the teaching facility was gone; it was 
that the hospital was gone. But that’s a whole other story from 
another day. That was under this government’s administration. 
 
But I still do question the fact that . . . And I understand with 
the teaching facility in Saskatoon the need for more specialists. 
But that is a huge discrepancy. That’s, you know, that’s 2:1 at 
least. Now with the 2:1 increase in specialists in the Saskatoon 
area, what is . . . can you compare then the number of 
procedures done, roughly, in the Saskatoon Health Authority 
compared to the Regina-Qu’Appelle Health Authority when 
there is a 2:1 discrepancy in specialists? And I realize some of 
them are through the college, but that is . . . I mean, to me that 
just doesn’t account for the variance in specialists. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the first thing that I will do is correct 
you about the closure of the Plains hospital. That happened 
about seven or eight years after the decision to move the 
medical school, so I think there was some connection there. 
 
But I think what I would point out is that when you look at the 
specialists in Regina, they are primarily providing service. In 
Saskatoon, many of the specialists also are doing teaching and 
research and so that when we look at the actual services 
provided — which I don’t have all that information here with 
me tonight — but you can actually see that there’s not that big a 
difference in the actual numbers of services provided. And so 
that’s one of the factors we have to look at when we are trying 
to examine how services are provided. 
 
The other factor for Saskatoon is that when there are 
sub-specialities in a particular area — so you might have some 
sub-specialty of surgery or psychiatry — primarily those have 
been located near the medical school and provide a 
province-wide service. So their patients would come from all 
over. A pretty good example I suppose is geneticists. They’re 
pretty well all located in Saskatoon near the medical school and 
the university. 
 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

But we also on a prairie-wide region are now sharing with our 
neighbours in both Manitoba and Alberta and BC [British 
Columbia] because the specialties have become more and more 
narrow. And to provide some specialties, we would provide a 
service out of Saskatoon or even Regina that might not be in 
other parts of the Prairies, but many services that we require 
would be in Edmonton or Calgary or Winnipeg or Vancouver. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In no way did I 
try and link the fact that the Plains hospital closure was with the 
teaching facility. What I was linking was the Plains hospital 
closure with your government. That’s what I was linking it to, 
not the fact that there is no longer a teaching facility. And I just 
wanted to make sure that the minister was clear on my 
connection there and my link. 
 
One last question regarding specialists, are there any 
anesthesiologists employed with other health districts? Are they 
all located in Regina and Saskatoon, or do we have any 
anesthesiologists employed under other health authorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, as of March 15 there were 22 
anesthesiologists in Regina, 49 in Saskatoon, 3 in Moose Jaw, 5 
in Prince Albert, 1 in Yorkton, 3 in Swift Current, and 1 in 
North Battleford. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, I have a couple of other 
questions regarding the health care contracts. I’m not going to 
ask anything about the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 
contract because of course it’s being negotiated right now. 
 
But how many other bargaining units are going to have the 
ability to be renewing their contracts? How many are we 
looking at in the next four or five months? 
 
[21:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In addition to SUN, where their contract 
expired on April 1 of this year, Health Sciences are negotiating; 
the Saskatchewan Government Employees Union, the Service 
Employees’ International, CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 
Employees] and also the RWDSU [Retail, Wholesale and 
Department Store Union]. All of those are presently negotiating 
right now and their contracts have expired. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Roughly then, how many employees would 
be covered under those bargaining units . . . and even if you just 
give me a ballpark percentage of the health care workers in this 
province. When you take SUN is negotiating right now, as well 
as the number of the other bargaining units, are we looking at 
80 per cent of the health care workers in this province are 
negotiating a contract right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Everybody except those who are in scope 
are . . . except those who are out of scope are bargaining right 
now. So it’s all of the people involved, and I think the numbers 
on full-time equivalents are 25,000 plus. If you talk about the 
actual people, it’s up around 35,000. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So in other words, every in-scope employee 
in this province dealing with health care is in the process of 
renegotiating their contract. And if things didn’t go quite the 
way they wanted and the process took too long and they 

eventually . . . if they voted to move towards strike, every 
health care worker in this province has . . . could have, 
hypothetically, the ability in the next month or two or three to 
be on strike in his province. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think your question can be 
answered in a technical way, but in a practical way bargaining 
has just started with SUN. The other groups have been 
bargaining and working at a number of different issues. 
They’ve clearly been trying to get a sense of what kind of 
resources are going to be at the table, at each of the tables. And 
so people are working to get resolution right across the board, 
but we’re not there yet. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes. In other words, 0, 1, and 1 is maybe a 
bit of a stumbling block right now in some of the negotiations, 
but we’ll leave that alone because that’s really not what I 
wanted to talk about. 
 
But I would ask the minister, when they are negotiating these 
contracts and settling these contracts, how wise is it that 100 per 
cent of our health care workers’ contracts expire on the same 
year? And is there not an ability to alter — not alter, to stagger 
— some of those termination dates of those contracts? 
 
I mean, it does seem a little curious that 18 months after the last 
provincial election that every contract would be coming up for 
negotiation. One may even, one may even think that perhaps the 
government of that day didn’t know whether they’d be in power 
this day and so had all the contracts come up at once and 
thought maybe somebody else will deal with it. 
 
Now this government, your government is dealing with it and 
what . . . you know, I just question the wisdom of having every 
health care worker’s contract come up right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the first point is that it’s not 
accurate to say that they’re all expiring at once. The Health 
Sciences and the various service provider unions, they all 
expired a year ago, and the SUN contract just expired this year. 
 
But they’ve been on that sort of three-year cycle for quite a 
number of contracts and so that practically the contracts are 
entered into with each group. But basically, SEIU [Service 
Employees’ International Union], SGEU [Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union], and CUPE and 
HSAS [Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan] have 
been on the same timeline. SUN has been on a different 
timeline. The doctors are on another timeline as well. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So when the . . . if and when the . . . well 
not if, but when the contracts are settled, then how will that 
work? 
 
And maybe . . . I don’t know whether you can answer this 
question or not. Will SUN always be one year staggered from 
all the other service contracts? Or will there, if everything was 
settled in the summer of 2005 with a contract agreed upon, and 
it goes on a three-year termination, are we looking at 2008, the 
summer of 2008, having 100 per cent of the health care 
workers; or does it start, SUN’s contract, of course, retroactive 
to when it was terminated? 
 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2005 

But then we’re still only working on a year stagger, SUN and 
then the other whatever percentage of health care workers that 
next year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well if the contract terms continue to be 
on three-year terms, the SUN contract will expire on March 31, 
2008. All of the other contracts would expire on March 31, 
2007. So there’d be the same sort of timeline as there is now. 
 
Now each time there’s negotiation, one of the terms that’s 
negotiated is the length of the contract. And we’ve seen some 
longer term contracts over the last couple of years have been 
negotiated and sometimes there’s some shorter term ones. But 
practically, at this stage that’s not something that has been 
fixed. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Could the minister tell me how many 
bargaining units within the health care sector are bargaining 
their first collective agreement? Are there any bargaining their 
first collective agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — None. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — In the time that we have left, I would like to 
ask the minister a couple questions on the ambulance issue that 
we had talked about last week, and certainly had a number of 
the ambulance, the EMS [emergency medical services] folks in 
the gallery. 
 
And it was interesting because you were talking last week about 
how different health districts had different rates set, some at 250 
and some . . . or 275, I forget the exact number, some at 200; 
pickup fees, that type of thing. 
 
The other issue then is not just the pickup fee but the grant that 
. . . the formula that is determining the grant that goes to 
especially the private service deliverers, whether it’s in 
Yorkton, whether it’s in Saskatoon. There’s a couple in my 
constituency. Could the minister give me kind of just an 
overview on how they determine the grant that goes to the 
ambulance operators? 
 
Because we’ve heard back from a number of the ambulance 
operators that say that if they increase the pickup charge from 
200 to 250 or 275, what that eventually does is claw back from 
the grant that is given to the health district to supply ambulance 
services. So could the minister explain to me how that whole 
system works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The question that you asked was around 
how they negotiate what kind of grant or amount goes to the 
ambulance services. Basically the regional health authority 
managers sit down with the ambulance operators and have them 
present a budget which sets out what the estimated numbers of 
accidents or number of incidents that they will be dealing with, 
the number of vehicles they require, estimated number of 
employees, and they set an overall budget. And then they 
negotiate an amount that relates to that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last quick question because we don’t 
have much time. 
 
From what I understand with the Yorkton situation though, 

they’re classed as a rural ambulance service and hence that’s the 
$200 pickup compared to the urban ambulance services. But 
they’re also required then to have 24-hour service, full-time . . . 
I think there’s three people full-time or at the service through 
the night, whereas many services can have people on call. 
 
But in Yorkton, for example, they can’t because of . . . you 
know I mean it certainly isn’t just the rural. It does an awful lot 
of urban calls, and they need people there full-time. And is that 
taken into consideration? 
 
You sent the . . . you mentioned that what is taken into 
consideration is the number of employees. But is it also taken 
into consideration the fact that they need to have employees 
there full-time, not on call, not to be called in if there is an 
accident, an MVA [motor vehicle accident] or whatever else. 
They have to have them there full-time. And is that the 
discrepancy between Yorkton and some of the other 
communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically the region would negotiate with 
the operator around what service was required, and if in fact the 
service that was required was agreed to be 24-hour coverage 
with what you are describing, well then your overall payment 
would reflect that agreement that they’ve reached. 
 
And so it’s based on what are the circumstances in any 
particular region, and so wouldn’t be exactly the same as Swift 
Current or North Battleford or anywhere else. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last question, and I think this will be 
the last one. I understand that, but you’re saying that the 
contract is negotiated of course through the ambulance service 
and the health district. But what the health district receives from 
Sask Health, so how is that determined? I mean, so Yorkton 
will say to the ambulance service, you need to have full-time 
people, 24/7. But is that reflected then in the money that is 
transferred from Sask Health to the health district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically the service in a particular region 
would have a historical base that has been there. If they were 
going to change that historical base of service which was in 
their overall budget that they submitted to Saskatchewan 
Health, then that would be something that they would have to 
ask for increased funding for or that there be some adjustment. 
But it’s based on year-over-year actual expenditures and then 
budgets, and the negotiation happens between the regional 
health authority and the ambulance service. That information 
then is in turn provided by the regional health authority to 
Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Just before I sit down, I also would like to have the Page bring 
you the retailer tool kit for tobacco sales to prevent tobacco 
sales to minors, prepared by Saskatchewan Health and Health 
Canada together with the Saskatchewan tobacco retailer 
advisory committee. These are the partners in prevention of the 
use of tobacco. This is what I had promised last week. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I’d like to thank the minister for that. I was 
thinking I hadn’t received it yet, but I didn’t realize you’d be 
presenting it publicly like this. So I do thank you for that. I did 
mention that if my political career ended, I may be needing this 
but I don’t see that ending any time soon. In fact, I see some 



May 2, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

good things blowing in the wind for the future. 
 
I would like to thank the minister and his officials for the time 
spent tonight. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to thank the members opposite for 
the great variety of questions. It’s kept all of us on our toes. I’d 
especially like to thank the staff who are here with me tonight 
representing all of the staff at Saskatchewan Health and the 
regional health authorities across the province. 
 
[22:00] 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that we rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of 
committees. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 
the committee to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Regina Dewdney that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:02.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Agriculture and Food — Vote 1 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2797 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2797 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2800 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2802 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2805 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2805 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2805 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2807 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2807 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2808 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2809 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2810 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2812 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




