

















































Hansard: April 19, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 94A  TUESDAY, APRIL 19, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2559 
 April 19, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Highway 32 from 
Swift Current to Leader is a very contentious piece of highway. 
And the prayer related to that particular issue reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s signatories are from the communities of 
Cabri, Portreeve, and Lancer. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the drug, crystal meth. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, treatment. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Weekes. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to halt the forced amalgamation of school divisions, 
and it’s signed by people who think the size of the proposed 
school divisions is far too large to retain any local input. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a number of signatures on this petition and they 
are all from the community of Eston. I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I have a petition to present from constituents of mine who 
are very concerned about the forced amalgamation of school 
divisions, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents of Midale and 
Estevan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to improve SaskTel cellular service in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by citizens from Drake, Jansen, Wynyard, and Lanigan. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith natural 
gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Asquith and Grandora and area. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition signed by Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned 
with the effects of the TransGas natural gas storage project in 
the Asquith area, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environmental assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Asquith, Grandora, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 106, 637, 666, 715, 716, 720, 729, and 730. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the Private 
Bills Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand and table the report of the . . . 
the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip . . . the 
Chair of the Committee on Private Bills. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move, 
seconded by the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, that 
the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Private Bills 
now be concurred in; and that said Bills be referred to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney and seconded by the member for Last-Mountain 
Touchwood that the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Bills be now concurred in, and that the said Bills be 
referred to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Committee of the Whole. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 99 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: for the fiscal 
year 2004-2005, what was the total number of applications 
received that year and how many applicants received 
approval? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 6 move the first reading of Bill No. 205, the 
water quality day Act. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour for me 
today to introduce to you and through you to other members of 
the legislature some individuals sitting in the west gallery who 
represent the emergency workers of our province, who do so 
much every day of the year to protect the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Specifically among the people in the west gallery are: Chief 
Terry Coleman, who is president of Saskatchewan Association 
of Chiefs of Police; Angela Desjarlais, a constable with the 
Regina Police Service; Gerry Huget, president of Saskatchewan 
Professional Fire Fighters Association and a number of 
firefighters joining him from across our province; Ross 
Reaburn, a paramedic with Regina EMS [emergency medical 
services]; Bernie Eiswirth, executive director of Saskatchewan 
Federation of Police Officers; Dave Haye, president of 
Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers, and his wife, 
Joanne. 
 
Now I believe these individuals are here to express their support 
for legislation that is receiving second reading today that’s been 
introduced by this NDP [New Democratic Party] government to 
support our emergency workers and help protect victims of 
crime and good Samaritans in our province, Mr. Speaker. And I 
hope all members of the legislature will welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to join with the 
members opposite in welcoming these individuals to our 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

legislature and to their legislature. And I’d like to as well thank 
them very much for their ongoing commitment and hard work. 
 
And we feel that all members should recognize they regularly 
and routinely put their lives at risk for our safety and security. If 
anybody has any doubts about the hard work and the risk these 
people take, I’d urge all members consider doing a ride-along 
with some of them and to get to see it through their eyes. 
They’re a fine group of people, and would ask all members to 
welcome them and recognize them for their hard work and 
commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
two constituents of mine that are joining here today. They’re on 
the floor — if they could give a little wave — Glen Hitchcock 
from the town of Wynyard and Earl Jordan from the town of 
Dafoe. They, up today on a little bit of business and also a little 
bit of pleasure, thought they would stop and visit their 
legislature and see the proceedings. I hope that they will enjoy 
what is happening today in their legislature and find it very 
informative. So through you and to members, I know that they 
will want to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted today 
to welcome through you and to you to all members of the 
legislature 21 students from Porcupine Plain Composite School. 
They’re sitting in the east gallery. Porcupine Plain is of course 
one of the best towns in Saskatchewan. With them today is their 
teacher, Lawrence Schmidt; Annette Legaré; and also a 
Japanese intern student, Satoko Ono. She has been staying in 
Porcupine this year. 
 
I’m very delighted to see them here today. I’m sure they’re 
going to want to have a lot of questions afterwards to see what 
we really do in the legislature, and I look forward to talking to 
you later on. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Pope Benedict XVI 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
“The Cardinals have elected me to work in the vineyard of the 
Lord.” These were among the first words of Pope Benedict 
XVI. Mr. Speaker, I rise to recognize the election of the new 
leader of the Catholic Church who comes from Bavaria, 
Germany, the province of my parents, and taught at the 

University of Regensburg, which is my mother’s home city. 
 
The new Pope has praised absolute fidelity to the great tradition 
of the church while saying he is open to the great challenges of 
the world. Pope Benedict XVI, previously Cardinal Joseph 
Ratzinger, has played many roles in the Catholic Church and 
has wielded spiritual influence earning worldwide respect even 
from those who don’t hold to the Catholic faith. 
 
Papal biographer for John Paul II, George Weigel, has said that 
not even those who disagree with some of the new Pope’s views 
have “ . . . ever questioned Joseph Ratzinger’s erudition, his 
encyclopedic knowledge of theology, or his elegance as a 
thinker and writer.” 
 
I would like to quote Pope Benedict XVI’s writings: 
 

The deepest poverty is the inability of joy, the tediousness 
of a life considered absurd and contradictory. This poverty 
is widespread today, in very different forms in the 
materially rich as well as the poor countries. The inability 
of joy presupposes and produces the inability of love, 
produces jealousy, avarice [and] all the defects that 
devastate the life of individuals and of the world. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we stand with Catholics the world over in 
recognition of Pope Benedict XVI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Habemus papam. 
Habemus papam. We have a pope. Today those words rang out 
across St. Peter’s Square in Rome after a puff of white smoke 
came out of the Sistine Chapel’s chimney announcing the 
election was finished. The thousands of people gathered in the 
square to await the election of a new leader for the Catholic 
Church cheered with joy when it was announced the successor 
of Pope John Paul II is the former cardinal of Germany, Joseph 
Ratzinger. Cardinal Jorge Medina Estévez of Chile announced 
the name of the 265th pope who will be known as Benedict 
XVI. The new pope was elected on the second day of the 
conclave in which 115 cardinals took part. 
 
Today’s election marks an end to the uncertainty for the 1 
billion Catholics who have been without an earthly spiritual 
leader since the death of Pope John Paul II on April 2. And also 
for many Christians, Muslims, and Jews the world over, 
welcoming the new Holy Father to the See. 
 
I would ask all members of this House to join with me 
extending warm wishes to Catholics in Saskatchewan, across 
Canada, and around the world on the election of Pope 
Benedictine XVI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

United Way of Regina Tribute Luncheon 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the past 70 
years, the United Way of Regina and its volunteers have been 
diligently working together to build community and improve 
people’s lives. By engaging individuals and mobilizing 
collective action, the United Way invests in programs and 
services that help foster healthy and supportive communities. 
 
Earlier today, I along with the members from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre and Regina Walsh Acres had the pleasure 
of attending the United Way of Regina’s 2005 Tribute 
Luncheon. As usual, this luncheon honoured a select group of 
community leaders and the thousands of volunteers and citizens 
who support the organization’s efforts every year. 
 
Dave Pettigrew of IBM [International Business Machines 
Corporation] Canada, and John Ryan, president and CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the Farm Credit Canada each received the 
President’s Award. And, Mr. Speaker, Hill group of companies, 
Harvard Developments, and SaskPower each received 
Distinguished Corporate Philanthropy Awards. The Investors 
Group Volunteer Recognition Awards went to Lee Ubell and 
Tracey Heese. And this year’s recipients of the inaugural 
Labour Community Service Award is Bob Ivanochko for the 
active and important role he has played in strengthening the 
community as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating this year’s award recipients on their 
accomplishments and thanking them for their tireless work. I 
also want to acknowledge the United Way of Regina for 
providing concerned citizens with the opportunity to work 
collectively in caring for the most vulnerable people in our 
society. Their support and efforts continue to make a difference, 
and for this we are very grateful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Annual Dinner 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when over 850 citizens of Regina are eager to hear a bright and 
inspirational vision for the province of Saskatchewan, where do 
they go and whom do they listen to? 
 
Well they go to the Sask Party leader’s dinner to hear the 
Leader of the Opposition. Last night, after an excellent 
introduction by University of Regina president, Dr. David 
Barnard, the Leader of the Opposition outlined his vision for the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan to a capacity crowd that 
included such luminaries as Mayor Pat Fiacco, former NDP 
deputy premier Dwain Lingenfelter, and a smattering of former 
NDP MLAs [Members of the Legislative Assembly] who have 
seen the light. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition gave an excellent speech that 
touched on the history of our province and the individuals who 
carved a living from the land. He talked about the early 
leadership in Saskatchewan that didn’t cast our province as 

mediocre — leadership that would match its actions to its 
words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The speech outlined how after great development and growth 
from the 1900s to the 1940s, our province’s leadership lost its 
vision. Saskatchewan was once the place to be. We were 
outstripping all other provinces in population growth. Our 
leadership for much of the last 60 years forgot that 
Saskatchewan was built not by government but by individuals 
coming together in co-operation, by communities, and by 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night over 850 Saskatchewan residents 
received a vision and a message of hope. They heard from a 
leader that is ready for the challenge of restoring this province 
to the greatness that it truly deserves. Their only hope, Mr. 
Speaker, is that day comes soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon Student Invited To Intel 
International Science and Engineering Fair 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Kim Richards is a grade 10 student 
at Walter Murray Collegiate in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Eastview. Her hobbies include writing; Highland dancing; and 
sports such as volleyball, basketball, and horseback riding; and 
she is very involved with her school and her community. 
 
Ms. Richards is also an award-winning science researcher who 
has won science prizes at the local, regional, and national 
levels. Now she is one of only eight Canadians who have been 
invited to the week-long Intel International Science and 
Engineering Fair, or ISEF, being held next month in Phoenix, 
Arizona. Mr. Speaker, the ISEF will bring together more than 
1,300 students from around the world to compete for $3 million 
worth of awards and scholarships. 
 
Ms. Richards was selected after the Youth Science Foundation 
reviewed and accepted her application to be part of Team 
Canada at ISEF. Her project concerns the use of foreign 
germplasm to control a disease of wheat and barley known as 
fusarium head blight. The disease creates micro-toxins in crops, 
making them unsuitable for human and animal use. Ms. 
Richards has put some 600 hours into her project since July, 
growing crops resistant to the disease and studying them at the 
genetic level to see how they can be merged into Canadian 
wheat and barley production. That being said, I think it’s 
particularly interesting that she thinks of herself more as an 
English student than a science student. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Kim Richards on her successes so far, and in wishing her even 
greater success next month in Phoenix. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2563 

Wynyard Artist Awarded Trip to New York 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today to talk about an accomplished artist from 
Wynyard. Wendy Struck was recently awarded $1,200 towards 
an upcoming trip to New York city as part of a research project 
on art to be produced in Wynyard. 
 
Wendy is currently the artist in residence for the Lakeview 
School Division. In 1994 she received her Bachelor of Fine Arts 
degree from the University of Regina and has worked as a 
painter, artistic judge, and art instructor across the province. 
Wendy has exhibitions of her artwork in a variety of venues 
from the Rosemont Art Gallery, Fifth Parallel Gallery in 
Regina, as well as the Gallery Vertigo in BC [British 
Columbia], and the Church Café in Manitoba. 
 
Funding was provided through the Saskatchewan Arts Board 
individual assistance program that awards funding to artists 
who are very active in the arts across Saskatchewan. This 
program supports the creation of new work in any art form, 
professional development, research, and travel for professional 
artists. 
 
I am certain that Wendy will enjoy her trip to the Big Apple and 
will be inspired by the wide variety of artistic talent in that 
historic city. I am proud to see one of the many talented . . . my 
constituents represent Saskatchewan abroad. I would that all 
members join me in congratulating Wendy Struck on her 
outstanding achievements. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Gary Tinker Awarded Centennial Medal 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
weekend I, along with my colleague the member from 
Cumberland, had the pleasure and privilege of attending the 
Gary Tinker Federation 15th anniversary celebration and 
disability conference in La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Gary Tinker Federation is a non-profit 
organization that exists today because in 1989 Gary Tinker, a 
young man with cerebral palsy, took it upon himself to make a 
650 kilometre walk from La Ronge to Regina on crutches to 
raise awareness about the needs of people with disabilities in 
northern Saskatchewan. His vision and determination were 
noted, and for the last 15 years, Mr. Speaker, the federation has 
been working to identify and address the needs of disabled 
persons in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of the conference was Breaking Barriers 
and Building Bridges, and it was a great success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to be able to say that Gary Tinker 
is a constituent of mine. He has remained very active in the 
federation over the last 15 years. At the Friday evening banquet, 
in recognition of his contributions to the people of this 
province, in particular people with disabilities in the North, I 
had the honour of awarding him the Saskatchewan Centennial 

Medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all of my colleagues to join with me today in 
congratulating Mr. Gary Tinker on receiving the centennial 
medal and in recognizing the ongoing good work of the 
organization that very appropriately bears his name. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Negotiations with Federal Government Regarding 
Equalization 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday the federal NDP leader, Jack Layton, 
announced that he intends on propping up the embattled federal 
Liberal government if the Liberal government agrees to address 
the fiscal imbalance of Ontario, Mr. Speaker. Not the province 
of Saskatchewan, no mention of it yesterday, but rather the 
province of Ontario. 
 
It’s bad enough, frankly, that our Premier seems to be unable to 
get the attention of the Prime Minister. Now it appears he’s 
unable to get the attention of his own federal leader, the leader 
of the fourth party in the House of Commons in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Premier raised this issue directly with Mr. 
Layton and, if so, why is Jack Layton fighting for fiscal fairness 
for Ontario but not for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition won’t want to confirm this fact but the fact of the 
matter is the federal Leader of the New Democratic Party, the 
New Democratic Party members of Parliament in Ottawa, have 
voiced the Saskatchewan case and have voiced it strongly. 
 
Now I understand that Mr. Harper and Mr. Layton are both 
supporting Ontario’s position — and fair enough. And fair 
enough. But the question, Mr. Speaker, that is being asked in 
the province of Saskatchewan is: where were the Conservative 
members of Parliament when they had a chance, when they had 
the opportunity to do something on behalf of the farmers and 
producers of Saskatchewan by expressing that opinion in the 
budget debate? They weren’t even there. They sat on their 
hands, Mr. Speaker. That’s the question that ought to be asked 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Let’s be clear, Mr. Speaker. Let’s be clear. We’re 
not talking about speeches in the House of Commons. We’re 



2564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

talking about the federal NDP agreeing to prop up the federal 
Liberal government. The only condition though is that that 
government address the fiscal imbalance for the province of 
Ontario. 
 
A couple of weeks ago Jack Layton was in Saskatchewan. He 
was in the Premier’s hometown. Did he hold a similar news 
conference with the Premier with respect to the province of 
Saskatchewan and equalization? No. No, he had dinner and he 
went home. Thanks for coming out, Jack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that the Leader of the New 
Democratic Party is not talking about Saskatchewan today at 
all. We want to know from this Premier, what is he doing about 
it? It’s his party. It’s his leader of the fourth party in the House 
of Commons. Where are they in terms of Saskatchewan? Where 
is he in terms of fighting for a better deal for Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, he wants to 
talk about federal leaders. Let’s talk about his federal leader. I’ll 
tell you the federal leader of the New Democratic Party has 
been in this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well now, Mr. Speaker, now they want 
to deny they have a federal leader. Well I might want to deny if 
that man was my federal leader too. But the fact of the matter is, 
they cannot deny it. The Conservative Saskatchewan Party and 
the Conservative Party of Canada or better described as the 
Reform Conservative Party of Canada — it’s the same political 
group, Mr. Speaker. We know that. 
 
And the question is where were their members of the House of 
Commons when it came to voting on behalf of the farming 
people of Saskatchewan? They sat on their hands, they didn’t 
do what they could do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
And just by the way, Mr. Speaker, I have seen the federal leader 
of the New Democratic Party in the province of Saskatchewan 
on many occasions and rare is the occasion Mr. Harper has been 
here to actually talk to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of months ago when 
the Premier had his meeting, which turned out apparently to be 
a photo op with different political people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, he promised to take the advice of the opposition 
to ramp-up the case for better equalization deal for our 
province. And since then, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has been 
strangely quiet. He wouldn’t have even commented last week 
about making this a federal election issue if the opposition 
hadn’t raised it in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Yesterday, yesterday his federal leader said that he will prop up 

the federal Liberal government and the condition is a better deal 
for Ontario. What is the position of the federal NDP with 
respect to a better deal for Saskatchewan? And where is the 
Premier with respect to his position on the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
He and the Minister of Finance have a lot of time to write me 
letters complaining about the opposition being mean to them. 
When is he going to start making the case to Ottawa for a better 
deal for our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, about a year and a half ago 
we began to make the case for a better deal for Saskatchewan. 
And as a result of this government’s efforts a year ago, we were 
able to achieve a significant, significant progress on injustice 
that has been done to this province in the course of the years 
under the current equalization formula. 
 
As a result of that, of course we have the Finance critic of the 
opposition describing the $360 million achieved for the people 
of Saskatchewan as table scraps, Mr. Speaker. That’s their view 
of $360 million. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. I just find that 
the . . . Order, please. I would ask members on both sides of the 
House . . . I would ask members on both sides of the House to 
just wait their turn for when they get recognized. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, over the course of 
this year I have been raising this issue at first ministers’ level. I 
have raised it on a number of times in the person of the Prime 
Minister. We have travelled to the nation’s capital and the 
nation’s media centres and the nation’s financial capitals to 
raise this case. And I can inform the House that significant 
discussions have been happening between senior officials of 
both of our governments to seek a fair deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Funding for New Contract with the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has displayed a remarkable consistency of saying 
one thing and doing the other. After it said it was going to 
impose a 0, 1, and 1 mandate on teachers, it came to its senses 
and finally realized they had to negotiate a contract. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those very same teachers, school board 
officials, and taxpayers are wondering the very next major 
question. That is, where is this money to settle this contract 
going to come from? To the Minister of Learning, Mr. Speaker: 
can he tell us unequivocally that this money is going to be 
provided for our school boards and school trustees and teachers 
and not come out of property taxes? 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2565 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the same time that those 
members opposite were complaining — complaining about the 
mandate that we were working with — at the same time then 
after we settled the agreement, saying, oh they’re complaining 
that we got an agreement. Those members need to understand 
that what we have done is looked at an agreement that meets the 
needs of teachers, meets the needs of taxpayers, and will in fact 
be ratified by the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] and 
be implemented by the government. This is a good news story. 
The members should stop looking, stop looking for the 
negativity here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to stop 
looking for the negativity when there is never a forthright 
answer that comes available from this government. Mr. 
Speaker, the question is very simple. To the Minister of 
Learning: will the provincial government cover the cost of the 
three-year contract that’s been negotiated, in its entirety, to 
local school boards so that this does not go onto local property 
taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, we have 
good news for teachers. We have good news for students. We 
have good news for parents. And we have bad news for the 
Sask Party. And I am sorry that they need to keep looking for 
negativity. 
 
In past agreements we have funded that. I said to the STF when 
we went forward that we would go forward with the new 
resources. What we are working through is what the mechanism 
is to do that, and the member opposite should know that and 
stop this scaremongering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that frightens 
people in this province is this government’s happiness to go and 
do one thing when it’s promising something else. What 
frightens people in this province is this minister standing up and 
blaming teachers’ salaries for the high cost of property tax. 
What frightens people in this province, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that this minister refuses to stand in his place and commit 
unequivocally that the funds will be made available to school 
boards so that it will not go on to the property taxpayers. Will 
he do that instead of playing cute with his answers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I have already answered this 
question. The member can review Hansard and see that. 
 
What this opposition needs to understand is what the people of 
Saskatchewan are afraid of — is afraid to see the kind of 
partisanship that that opposition brings to this House, the kind 
of negativity. When we have an agreement that we negotiated 
by fair and free collective bargaining, when we have a 
negotiation that results in a deal that’s good for teachers, good 
for taxpayers, good for parents, and good for students, we don’t 
need an opposition that comes in here and trash-talks it on the 
floor of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Property Tax Increase in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
this government says one thing and does another. It promises 
not to raise taxes, then it increased the PST [provincial sales 
tax]. It promises not to raise taxes, Mr. Speaker, then it freezes 
municipal revenue sharing. Everyone knew that that would lead 
directly to higher property taxes. But would this government 
listen, Mr. Speaker? No. Its actions don’t match its words. 
 
Last night Saskatoon residents found out their property taxes 
were going up by 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The reason? This 
government said one thing and does another. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
members towards that side, pay a little more attention to the 
questions and the responses that are being given and stand when 
they are recognized. The floor belongs to the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, why is this government 
forcing the city of Saskatoon to raise property taxes by 4 per 
cent? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
had the opportunity to review the work that’s being done in the 
city of Saskatoon, as I had the opportunity to review the work 
that’s being done in other cities across Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that members who were watching 
yesterday afternoon in Committee of Finance when I was 
appearing and talking about revenue sharing, that members will 
recognize and realize that this government has had a very good 
working relationship with municipalities, and in fact are 
understanding and recognize that municipalities have a lot of 
choices to make when they set their, when they set their tax 
rates, Mr. Speaker. They had an opportunity to know where the 
province of Saskatchewan was sitting on revenue sharing. And I 
think it should be, should be noted, considerable amount of the 



2566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

additional costs in the city of Saskatoon had to do with 
additional expenses that were being taken there. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
biggest tax increase the city of Saskatoon has seen in the last 
four years. And it can be traced right back to this NDP 
government, this NDP government that failed to provide any 
increase in revenue sharing for urban or rural municipalities. 
 
People came and they begged for a new revenue-sharing 
formula. But this NDP government didn’t listen. They don’t 
care. They say lower taxes and then they do something else. 
They talk the talk but they don’t walk the walk. They say one 
thing and they do something else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government begin negotiations on a 
new revenue-sharing formula for municipalities so they can 
forget about this dismal budget just presented by this 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
once again we have a opposition that hasn’t listened to a thing 
that this government has said. Over a month and a half ago we 
entered into negotiations with the municipalities to discuss 
revenue sharing for the coming year. Municipalities are 
bringing to the table information, just as Government Relations 
and Finance is bringing to the table information. And we are 
committed to working on a revenue-sharing formula that works 
in the interests of municipalities across this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, once again we recognize municipalities have 
choices, just as this government has choices. We made a choice 
to provide $11 million to municipalities for infrastructure 
funding this year. And every one of those municipalities, 
including the city of Saskatoon, will be using those dollars to 
the benefit of their communities and their citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People across 
the province are wondering why they aren’t getting any support 
from this NDP government. They say one thing and they do 
another. 
 
Nowhere is this more evident than the city of Saskatoon. Here’s 
what councillor Myles Heidt had to say last night, and I quote, 
and I hope the Minister of Government Relations was listening 
when Mr. Heidt said this last night: 
 

When you don’t have senior levels of government 
supporting you, what are you going to do, turn the streets 
over to the gangs? 

 
The city of Saskatoon today has seven fewer police officers. No 
means to implement the Stonechild recommendations. Mr. 
Speaker, this government left municipalities out in the cold, the 
highest tax increase in Saskatoon in four years. When is this 
minister going to start supporting municipalities with adequate 
revenue-sharing formula so they are not forced to raise taxes? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 
not forget that over the last three years it’s been this 
government that’s increased revenue sharing to the 
municipalities by more than 54 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s very easy for the members opposite to 
throw out one little piece of information and forget all the other 
information that exists out there, Mr. Speaker. The distortions 
in facts on that side of the House are unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Municipalities know that this government is committed to 
working with them on developing revenue-sharing 
opportunities, options for the future, Mr. Speaker. We are 
prepared to sit down with them, they are prepared to sit down 
with us, and we are going forward, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 
the communities are well funded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
to check the accuracy of the information released by the 
Minister of Labour, and it’s unfortunate that I have to clarify 
that matter with this minister. Since many NDP ministers are 
known to say one thing but actually do another, it is imperative 
that I clarify the position of the Minister of Labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a Government of Saskatchewan news release 
dated February 18, 2005, I quote: 
 

Higgins also announced the government’s decision to 
withdraw the draft regulations and repeal the 
unproclaimed Additional Hours section of The Labour 
Standards Act. 

 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Labour: when 
will you be keeping your promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to see the 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2567 

members opposite finally begin to take a concern and an 
interest in labour legislation in this province. They’ve got a 
history of consistently being opposed to The Trade Union Act, 
to unions, to working people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would say to the member: stay tuned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, in the government 
news release the minister said this would happen. Today she 
says, we’ll stay tuned. Before the election, the NDP said there 
would be no major changes to labour laws. Then immediately 
after the election, the minister dropped a bombshell. Her actions 
don’t match her words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister took about a month to draft 
regulations on the ill-conceived, unworkable, 
government-directed hours idea. Mr. Speaker, it’s been exactly 
two months since she promised to repeal the unproclaimed 
hours section. When is she going to do that, or is this just 
another example of saying one thing and doing another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite should maybe pay attention to his comments, 
when he talks about saying one thing and doing another. 
 
Now maybe this is his, maybe this is his softer Liberal side 
coming out, when the member used to be a Liberal way back 
when, before he joined the Conservatives. Mr. Speaker, this 
party, this party, has a reputation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying these . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Chair once again 
recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well the Leader of the Opposition 
Conservative party has been on record a number of times 
talking about the red tape and regulation being foisted on 
businesses. And what red tape and regulation is he talking about 
— workers’ compensation and occupational health and safety. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they better watch out what they say because 
they’re not plausible; they’re not believable. They’re a mile 
wide and an inch deep. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
[14:15] 

Kyoto Accord 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week 
the federal Minister of the Environment, Stéphane Dion, 
released his government’s implementation plan under the Kyoto 
accord. It was called the Project Green. 
 
Under their plan, Mr. Speaker, there are four major 
components, and one of them being the Partnership Fund. And 
I’d like to quote from the news release. And I quote: 
 

. . . the Government of Canada will work with [the] 
provinces and territories to: 
 
strike new agreements and improve existing ones with 
provinces and territories . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: is Saskatchewan 
negotiating any new agreements under the Kyoto 
implementation program? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have — along with our 
partners at the Petroleum Technology Research Centre and 
other partners in government at the officials level — been 
talking to the federal government for quite some time. 
 
And we’ve been quite prominent in the media — I’m surprised 
the member does not know this, Mr. Speaker — in saying to the 
federal government that there’s a great opportunity here, Mr. 
Speaker. And the opportunity is for the federal government to 
join with us in injecting carbon dioxide into the soil to sequester 
the carbon dioxide, Mr. Speaker, and to increase oil production 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier and I announced a plan to do just that. We can 
meet one third of Canada’s Kyoto accord by working with the 
oil sector. And we’ve had the Prime Minister in Regina at the 
PTRC [Petroleum Technology Research Centre] to talk to him 
about just that. And we’re pursuing it. We’re way ahead of the 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, this government talks about a green 
and prosperous economy. They talk about how they are the 
protectors of the environment while other governments of other 
provinces are in various phases of negotiating implementation 
plans with the federal government for their own provinces. The 
Kyoto accord could have some real negative impact on 
Saskatchewan, but it also could have some real benefits. And 
more proactive governments like the governments of Quebec 
and Alberta and Manitoba are in various phases of negotiations 
to negotiate agreements that are specific to their provinces, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question again is to the Premier: is his government entering 



2568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

into any type of negotiations under the Kyoto implementation 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, other provinces may be 
negotiating — we’re taking action. Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
may be talking and proposing — what we’re doing is acting, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several weeks ago the Premier and I announced 
that the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, that we were 
giving the oil patch a break to take measures, Mr. Speaker, that 
would not only increase oil production, Mr. Speaker, but would 
help Canada achieve its Kyoto objectives. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has a plan — the best plan in this country, I 
would argue — to work with the federal government in order to 
sequester carbon dioxide and to meet one-third of Canada’s 
Kyoto targets. 
 
We’ve talked to the Prime Minister through the PTRC. They’re 
talking and complaining. We’re taking action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I’d like to give an example of the action that this 
government is taking. In their 2003 election platform, they 
talked about the environment and the Kyoto accord. And they 
talked about carbon sinks. And I’d like to quote from their 
election platform. And I quote: 
 

We’ll press Ottawa to provide payments to Saskatchewan 
producers in recognition of significant greenhouse gas 
credits that Canada will receive for these sinks [Mr. 
Speaker]. 

 
Yet yesterday, when the Minister of Agriculture was asked 
what is his department doing and what is he doing to help the 
Saskatchewan producers receive those benefits, he stands in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, and he says, well it’s a little too early to 
get involved, Mr. Speaker — a little too early, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Producers, soil scientists, and farm organizations are saying that 
this NDP government is two years too late on getting moving 
on this file. And once again we see, Mr. Speaker, that we have a 
government that says one thing and does nothing and sits on its 
hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is that Minister of Agriculture going to 
stand up and release a plan whereby Saskatchewan producers 
can receive credit for storing carbon in agricultural soils? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as is so often the case, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately what the member of the Conservative opposition 
says is not accurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member from Last Mountain-Touch . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Chair recognizes the Minister 
of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood had been paying attention, he would 
know that a few years ago, I appeared in front of the Senate 
Standing Committee on Agriculture when it came to Regina. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we took the position and continue to take the 
position that the agricultural producers of Saskatchewan should 
be rewarded for the minimal till that they’ve been doing and the 
zero-till. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have raised that repeatedly and will 
continue to do so. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s just another case 
of the Government of Saskatchewan taking action and the 
opposition really not noticing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005/ 
Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 114, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and 
read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 114, The Education Amendment Act, 
2005 be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall the Bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2569 

Bill No. 115, The Education Property Tax Credit Act, be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 115, The Education Property Tax Credit 
Act be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I wish to 
lay on the table a report to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the financial statements of Crown agencies 
for years ending in the 2004 calendar year. It’s dated April, 
2005. It’s from the Office of the Provincial Auditor. And the 
report to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 
2004 financial statements of CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] Crown Corporations, and related 
entities dated April 2005. It’s also submitted by the Office of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 

RULING ON A POINT OF ORDER 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I also wish to bring 
down a ruling from a point of order. Yesterday the Government 
House Leader raised a point of order concerning an apology 
made to this Assembly by the member for Thunder Creek for 
remarks made off the record during oral question period on 
April 14, 2005. The Government House Leader asked for a 
ruling as to whether members’ statements during routine 
proceedings, is an appropriate place to deal with a point of 
order; whether an apology must be the result of a point of order; 
and thirdly, whether the apology offered by the member for 
Thunder Creek was made unequivocally. 
 
I have reviewed the record and it is clear that an apology was 
made directly to the affected member, the Deputy Premier, and 
also to the Assembly. The member withdrew the 
unparliamentary language with the following words, which I 
quote from Hansard page 2531: 
 

During question period on Thursday, Mr. Speaker, I 
directed comments toward the member from Yorkton, and 
in . . . [doing so] I used unparliamentary language. Mr. 
Speaker, I wish to apologize to the member and to this 
Hon. Assembly for, and to retract that particular language. 
 

I find, as Speaker, there was no equivocation in the member’s 
apology. 
 
With respect to when and how the apology was offered, there is 

nothing within the rules or practices of this Assembly that 
prohibit a member from making an apology in the absence of a 
point of order nor during members’ statements. Rule 12(3) 
states that: 
 

Members may make statements about any subject of 
interest or concern. 
 

The point of order raised by the Government House Leader is 
not well taken. 
 
With respect to language usage in the Assembly, I do want to 
emphasize the necessity for members of this Assembly to be 
able to exercise freedom of speech and, at the same time, 
respect the integrity of the Assembly and the personal integrity 
of all members. 
 
I wish to read a citation from Beauchesne’s, citation 494 on 
page 151 which reads: 
 

It is not unparliamentary temperately to criticize 
statements made by . . . [a member] as being contrary to 
the facts; but no imputation of intentional falsehood is . . . 
[permitted]. 

 
I also wish to quote into the record a citation from Marleau and 
Montpetit on page 525: 
 

The proceedings of the House are based on a 
long-standing tradition of respect for the integrity of all 
Members. Thus, the use of offensive, provocative or 
threatening language in the House is strictly forbidden. 
Personal attacks, insults and obscene language or words 
are not in order. 

 
I bring this to members’ attention because the lack of respect 
members occasionally show to one another in the House reflects 
upon the entire body of MLAs and thus the institution itself. I 
therefore remind all members to be respectful of our 
parliamentary rules and processes which have withstood the test 
of time. 
 
As members exercise the responsibility given to them by the 
electorate, they should respect the privilege of free speech 
through vigorous debate of issues while making conscious 
effort to refrain from intemperate or personal attacks. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Return No. 356 
 
The Speaker: — No. 1 has been ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 102 — The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure 
(Bodily Substances) Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 



2570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure 
(Bodily Substances) Act. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
introduce a Bill that seeks to help to protect those emergency 
health workers and good Samaritans in our community who risk 
so much protecting us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — This Bill, which is based on a Uniform 
Law Conference of Canada Act, seeks to address the fear and 
uncertainty that good Samaritans, emergency workers, and 
victims of crime experience following accidental or intentional 
exposure to bodily fluids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to provide for a 
procedure for the compulsory taking of bodily samples, the 
analysis of those samples, and the limited disclosure of personal 
health information derived from the analysis, in order to 
facilitate the treatment of the exposed individual. 
 
The procedure under this Bill will apply only if the exposed 
individual came into contact with a potentially infectious bodily 
substance from a source individual as a crime victim or while 
providing emergency services to the source individual. It will 
apply to a broad range of emergency service workers, such as 
police officers, firefighters, and emergency medical technicians 
and paramedics in the course of their duties, where they are 
providing emergency medical services or where they are the 
victims of a crime, such as an assault, in the conduct of those 
duties. The Bill will also apply to good Samaritans in our 
community who voluntarily provide emergency services as well 
as victims of crime in general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been written to provide that an order 
for an individual to be tested would only be available where the 
donor refuses to provides a sample voluntarily and where a 
doctor’s report expresses the view that there is a significant risk 
of transmission of a communicable disease, and further, that the 
test will provide medically beneficial information to the 
applicant. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The results of such a test will be held confidential for the 
purposes of this Bill only and it will be an offence under the 
Bill to disclose the results of the testing order or to otherwise 
identify the source individual except in accordance with the 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as noted this Bill is based largely on the uniform 
mandatory testing of bodily substances Act as recommended by 
the Uniform Law Conference of Canada and it is careful to 
balance the rights of the source individual with the rights of the 
applicant in a process that’s based on medical need and that is 
governed by the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all members of this Assembly will join 
me in expressing our ongoing gratitude to the men and women 
who protect us and provide us emergency services. These 
individuals, as well as the victims of crime and those good 
Samaritans who voluntarily provide emergency health services, 
deserve our protection. This new legislation will help protect 

the men and women who protect us by addressing the stress and 
uncertainty of not knowing whether they have contacted a fatal 
or debilitating disease. 
 
While testing in and of itself does not eliminate the risk or 
provide perfect information, the Bill provides that where a 
doctor is of the view that it would be beneficial to the treatment 
of the applicant to have such information, that information may 
be gathered in a confidential manner that neither puts the source 
individual at significant physical or medical risk nor unduly 
infringes on their personal rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is not intended to replace occupational 
health and safety protocols or the responsibility of employees in 
all sectors to engage in best safety practices in exposure 
situations. The Bill is, however, intended to provide some 
important support for those in our society who have, as a victim 
of crime, as a good Samaritan, or in provision of emergency 
services, been potentially exposed to a communicable disease 
and whose medical treatment would benefit from this testing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Mandatory Testing of Bodily Substances for Communicable 
Diseases and the Disclosure of the Analyses of Test Samples. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 102, The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily 
Substances) Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise to speak briefly on Bill No. 102, An Act respecting 
the Mandatory Testing of Bodily Substances for Communicable 
Diseases and the Disclosure of the Analyses of Test Samples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in beginning I would like to echo the words of the 
minister in expressing our gratitude and the gratitude of the 
entire province for those people who provide us routinely and 
with a great deal of enthusiasm and commitment for the 
emergency services and the special protections that we all come 
to take for granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every day these people go to work in the 
knowledge that they may come in contact with substances that 
may endanger their ongoing health status. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill is indeed a step in the right direction in order to provide 
some measure of protection, so that individuals who come in 
contact with bodily fluids are able to receive in a timely way the 
appropriate test to see if there is any underlying concerns about 
their health as a result of this exposure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard of instances in the past where this 
indeed has been the case, where police officers and emergency 
workers have come in contact with bodily fluids and have 
worried for months and days and years about what the risk of 
further infection might result from this exposure. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, we are very pleased to see the government bring 
forward legislation of this nature to protect our public servants 
in a very special way. 
 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2571 

Mr. Speaker, I think as well, although I have to confess to not 
being a lawyer, that it strikes me as there’s an appropriate 
balance between making sure that this information is indeed 
disclosed and also protection of individuals in an appropriate 
balance. And I think the Department of Justice should be 
commended on striking an appropriate balance in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that our Justice critic has had some 
opportunity to consult with some of the individuals involved in 
the EMS and the police services in regard to this Bill. However, 
he has confirmed to me that there are others who want to take 
the opportunity to speak to him to discuss this Bill and to make 
sure that everything possible that can be done in this legislation 
is indeed embedded in the legislation as being presented. And in 
order for that discussion to occur, Mr. Speaker, and to give the 
opportunity for these individuals to speak directly with our 
Justice critic, I would like to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill 102 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 59 — The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 59, The 
Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 
the opportunity to speak to Bill No. 59, The Ambulance 
Amendment Act. 
 
The implications of this proposed Bill are of importance to 
everyone in the province as this legislation deals with the 
people who are very often the initial providers of health care. It 
also applies to every resident of the province regardless of 
where they happen to live. 
 
Not only are the implications of this proposed legislation 
important, Bill 59 is unequivocally damaging to the health care 
interests of Saskatchewan people. This legislation deals with 
emergency medical services, the organizations that provide 
those services to the health regions, and the people who provide 
those services. 
 
We are talking about the 112 ambulance services in 
Saskatchewan and the 3,000 valuable employees around the 

province who provide those emergency services. These 
employees include dispatchers, responders, technicians, and 
paramedics. The organizations for which they provide their 
expertise are, quite frankly, under attack through the NDP 
government’s Bill No. 59. 
 
The emergency services sector in Saskatchewan has stated very 
clearly on many occasions to the Minister of Health and his 
department officials that, above all else, what is required is an 
atmosphere of fairness. This is critical to the ability of these 
organizations to deliver emergency services through the 
valuable expertise of their dispatchers, responders, technicians, 
and paramedics. 
 
Specifically the ambulance service providers, through the 
Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association, have 
stated that the following are vital components of a working 
agreement with the health regions — fairness, by being treated 
as a valuable partner in health care; recognition for providing of 
distinct valuable service; accountability through consistent 
performance standards that are clearly communicated and 
enforced; recognition of the professionalism, specialized skills, 
and training of ambulance service providers; and an operating 
framework that recognizes the special relationship between 
ambulance operators and the health regions. 
 
Creating an environment where fairness and accountability 
permeates that relationship, as enunciated by the Emergency 
Medical Services Association, is a worthwhile and very 
reasonable goal. Interestingly enough, the following is what the 
Health minister said according to Hansard of May 31, ’04. He 
stated that it is vital that any changes to The Ambulance Act 
accomplish several goals, including the following: creating “ 
. . . more consistent accountability and reporting requirements 
for ambulance providers across the province”; aligning “ . . . 
new reporting requirements under The Regional Health 
Services Act”; supporting quality service; and, Mr. Speaker, 
being accountable. 
 
Again fairness and accountability would appear to be the 
minister’s overriding objectives. At least those are the stated 
ones, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately any resemblance between the 
principles outlined by the minister and the legislation 
introduced is illusionary. The actual content of Bill No. 59 does 
not match up with the minister’s stated goals at all. In fact there 
is some glaring disparities between these laudable goals and the 
proposed legislation. 
 
Bill 59, as it sits before the legislature, would do the following. 
It would remove sections of The Ambulance Act that provide 
for ongoing, long-term service agreements between ambulance 
service providers and health regions. Section 10 of the proposed 
Act dismantles fairness within contracts as an essential element 
of contract negotiations. Section 18, Mr. Speaker, removes the 
right of ambulance operators to be heard during a contract 
dispute. Further to this, the proposed Act removes the deemed 
renewal of contractual obligations and contractual conditions. 
Also removed are sections of The Ambulance Act that provide 
for an impartial dispute resolution mechanism. 
 
None of the minister’s stated goals are achieved in this 
proposed legislation. What would be accomplished is nothing 
short of disastrous for the long-term provision of high-quality 



2572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

emergency medical services in all parts of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Bill No. 59, if passed by this Assembly, will have the following 
effects. It will seriously destabilize the emergency medical 
services industry by undermining the contractual certainty that 
is absolutely vital to enabling ambulance providers to invest in 
equipment, technology, and, Mr. Speaker, most of all, people. 
 
In the absence of any long-term contractual certainty, 
dismantled as it is under Bill 59, ambulance service providers 
will have greatly reduced capacity to finance their capital 
requirements. Investment in new equipment will be severely 
hampered. Investment in new technologies essential to the 
health care interests in Saskatchewan, essential to 
Saskatchewan residents, will be severely hampered. Bill 59 will 
destabilize the emergency services profession. These 
professionals count on the continuity of their employers so they 
can consistently improve and enhance their own skills, so they 
can make long-term plans for themselves and for their families 
in their own communities. 
 
Bill 59, Mr. Speaker, destabilizes patient care. By creating an 
environment of uncertainty for ambulance service providers and 
their employees, this Bill is clearly detrimental to the interests 
of the very people the health care system is supposed to serve 
— their patients. 
 
Bill 59, Mr. Speaker, destabilizes the agreement framework 
between ambulance service providers and health regions 
because it removes legal recourse from emergency service 
providers in the event of contract termination. Uncertainty of 
contract combined with a lack of resolution mechanisms is a 
recipe for failure, I submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bill 59 destabilizes the contractual arrangement between 
ambulance service providers and health care regions, as it 
removes the mediation and arbitration in the case of legal 
disputes. Instead the proposed legislation states that the 
Minister of Health may — and I underscore may, Mr. Speaker 
— assign an arbitrator. This simply worsens an atmosphere of 
uncertainty. 
 
This Bill accomplishes none of the goals of the ambulance 
service providers or their employees. The Bill accomplishes 
none of the goals stated by the very Minister of Health. It 
replaces certainty and continuity with uncertainty and 
instability. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it raises some very serious 
questions. Is the minister in proposing this legislation not duly 
concerned about the detrimental effects on the ambulance 
service providers’ ability to continuously improve their valuable 
services? 
 
Is the Minister of Health not concerned about the detrimental 
effects on employees in the industry who, in assessing the 
potential outcomes, may choose not to invest in additional 
training or may choose not to upgrade their skills or — worse 
yet, Mr. Speaker — leave for jurisdictions where the 
government has not created this landscape of uncertainty? Is the 
minister insensitive to the effects on our ability as a province to 
retain employees? 

Does the minister not believe the health regions have the ability 
to deal with the improved reporting process that had been 
recommended by both the ambulance service providers and the 
health regions? Is this merely a badly disguised attempt to cut 
corners in health care, Mr. Speaker? 
 
[14:45] 
 
By virtue of the office of the Minister of Health becoming part 
of the dispute resolution mechanism with increased powers, 
does this represent one more significant step towards 
centralization of health care services with all the power sitting 
in the minister’s office in Regina? Does the minister believe 
that only he and his office have the wherewithal to be 
accountable in this area and that of the health regions, and their 
service providers are somehow incapable? These are very 
troubling questions, Mr. Speaker, and they need not even arise. 
 
Undoubtedly, there are issues to be resolved in the delivery of 
emergency health services in Saskatchewan. This proposed 
legislation with its inherent top-down, unilateral approach is 
most certainly not the answer. There are solutions. Through a 
process that involves all the stakeholders, not just the minister 
and his staff, the answers can be developed. 
 
The more reasonable, rational approach would include the 
introduction of accountability measurements and procedures 
that would augment existing legislation. This would create a 
framework, Mr. Speaker, for open, accountable, and transparent 
reporting between the health regions, the authorities, and the 
ambulance service providers. 
 
The result would be improved emergency medical services, Mr. 
Speaker, not the destabilization or deterioration that will follow 
if the government barges ahead with this draconian Bill 59. This 
is injurious legislation, Mr. Speaker, replete with inevitable, 
detrimental outcomes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I move to adjourn debate on Bill 59. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Silver 
Springs that debate on second reading of Bill 59 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 86 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this was a Bill that’s a number of a group of Bills that 
this government presented during the earlier session last fall and 
that deals with the way labour and employees, or employers as 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2573 

well are dealt with in this province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an 
area that concerns a good many people on both sides of the 
labour equation, Mr. Speaker — the employees and the 
employers. 
 
Along with the hours-of-work proposals that the government 
was bringing forward that were opposed very dramatically by 
employers in this province, this Bill along with Bill No. 87 are 
part of that group, Mr. Speaker, and employers in this province 
have a great deal of concern about it. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that employees as well should have a great deal of concern 
about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the parts that this Bill deals with is whistle-blower, parts 
of the whistle-blower legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I recall a 
few years ago, five or six years ago perhaps, a situation 
involving SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] 
and an employee of this government, Mr. Speaker. The 
employee in that particular case believed that there was some 
wrongdoing happening and reported that wrongdoing to the 
police. Mr. Speaker, what was the net result of that, Mr. 
Speaker? The net result of that was that employee being fired 
by this government, Mr. Speaker, because they reported 
wrongdoing to the police. 
 
The arbitrary line that this government took, Mr. Speaker, was 
that they didn’t follow the chain of command within their 
organization in reporting it. They didn’t report it to the 
immediate supervisor, Mr. Speaker, which in the particular case 
involved was one of the concerns that the employee was 
reporting. 
 
So what has this government done to correct that situation? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve changed the rules in this legislation 
slightly. You can now report to the police. Someone who, if I 
read this correctly, Mr. Speaker, is entitled to, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Where is this . . . yes: 
 

“ . . . any police or law enforcement agency with respect of 
an offence within [the powers] its power to investigate 
[Mr. Speaker] . . . or any person [it goes on, any person] 
directly or indirectly responsible for supervising the 
employee”. 

 
Which means, Mr. Speaker, that person directly above 
whomever that employee may be that believes they have a 
concern that they want to raise with someone, Mr. Speaker, 
about possible wrongdoing within their place of employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation that the government is 
bringing forward does not indicate that they can perhaps go in 
the case of government to the deputy minister to report this, to 
someone higher up the chain of command four or five levels, so 
that they are not dealing directly with those that they deal with 
on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clearly when this piece of legislation, if this piece of legislation 
is enacted, there is still going to be huge questions when it 
comes to dealing with whistle-blower legislation that this 
government should recognize, Mr. Speaker, because it was 
certainly talked about in the case of SLGA, and yet they have 
done very little to correct the situation. 
 

The only correction is allowing that employer — employee, 
excuse me — to go to the police, to someone who has the 
authority to enforce the statutes. Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t allow 
them to go throughout their organizational chain of command, 
higher up than their . . . what they termed as person directly or 
indirectly responsible for supervising the employee. 
 
You should be able to, Mr. Speaker, go to anyone in the 
corporation with authority. That would allow them to go to 
whomever they wish to that they believe would be unbiased in 
the situation and be able to influence then the outcome and 
protect them, Mr. Speaker. And that’s clearly not part of what 
this government is doing. They’re making them deal rather with 
their immediate supervisors, which in some cases, Mr. Speaker, 
could be the area of concern. That is a flaw I believe that this 
government continues to perpetuate within its legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other areas as well within 
this particular piece of legislation that is of concern. There’s 
talk of making regulations, allowing the chairman of the labour 
standards board to make a regulation rather than rules by which 
the corporation operates — to make regulation. 
 
And I guess the question then for me comes, once the labour 
standards board is making regulation, do those regulations get 
reported back to the legislature? Do the standing committees of 
this legislature then have the opportunity to review those 
regulations? 
 
Because clearly, Mr. Speaker, regulations, government 
regulations, the standing committee, policy field committees of 
this legislature have the ability to review those regulations and, 
Mr. Speaker, should be reviewing those regulations prior to 
their implementation — not only to determine whether they’re 
ultra vires but to determine whether they provide for the public 
policy as outlined by government in their statements such as the 
Speech from the Throne, or even, Mr. Speaker, in the 
statements by ministers in their explanation as to what this 
piece of legislation is supposed to do. 
 
That is a role that the legislature has given to the standing 
policy committees, Mr. Speaker, to be able to review 
regulations. If those committees have the ability to review 
regulations, and The Labour Standards Act is making 
regulations, Mr. Speaker, this legislature has the right and 
indeed the duty to review those regulations to determine that 
they’re carrying out the proper functions, Mr. Speaker. And yet 
I don’t see anything in here in which the government is 
referring those regulations to any of the legislative standing 
committees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And fact is what they’re doing is they’re allowing the chairman 
to make regulations without consultation, Mr. Speaker, with the 
legislature. I would be hopeful that they’re making those 
regulations . . . the chairman’s making those regulations in 
consultation with the minister, but it certainly doesn’t seem to 
indicate that that would be happening, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 
indicate that it wouldn’t be happening, but it doesn’t indicate 
that it is happening, Mr. Speaker. So that becomes an area of 
concern. 
 
One of the areas of concern . . . And the minister even 
addressed this, Mr. Speaker. And she states, “By making 



2574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

regulation rather than rules, there is a formality and a 
transparency brought to the process.” That’s a quote from her 
statements in Hansard, Mr. Speaker. Well if there is going to be 
transparency in the process, then those regulations need to be 
dealt with by the standing committees dealing with labour 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, of this Assembly. 
 
One of the other areas, Mr. Speaker, of concern is the time 
frames when bargaining should commence after a certification. 
This labour legislation will force bargaining to commence 
within 20 days after certification, Mr. Speaker. Whether that’s 
actually certification because employees in a location have 
signed their union cards and voted on that certification, whether 
the Labour Standards Board has judged that 50 per cent of the 
employees signing cards have agreed to certification, or 
whether the Labour Standards Board has imposed certification 
on that workplace, this legislation, Mr. Speaker, says that that 
bargaining will take place within 20 days of that certification, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, The Labour Standards Act, Mr. Speaker, also deals with a 
number of other issues as well, Mr. Speaker. There is a need 
though to allow people, I believe, to have a better understanding 
of this particular piece of legislation and to take a further look 
at it, including the government so that they can get this right. 
Because employers across this province are not happy with this 
particular piece of legislation, believing that it will further 
decrease the investment in this province because of an 
unfriendly atmosphere and an unfriendly attitude towards a 
business coming into this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Cannington that debate on second reading of Bill 86 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 87 — The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2004 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
comments regarding Bill No. 87 before the Assembly this 
morning — or this afternoon, pardon me — and what impacts it 
may have on the people of Saskatchewan and certainly the 
business community and individuals who may or may not be a 
part of unions across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking to some groups who have 
already raised some major concerns with this piece of 
legislation. And one has to wonder exactly why this piece of 
legislation is before this Assembly at this time. What is its 

purpose, and who exactly brought this piece of legislation 
forward, and who actually made the recommendations that this 
piece of legislation is addressing? 
 
Some of the concerns I think, Mr. Speaker, may go back to the 
most recent court case of Wal-Mart and the united and 
commercial food workers disagreement as the UFCW [United 
Food & Commercial Workers] tried to unionize Wal-Mart 
employees in a couple of the communities in this province. 
 
And of course we are quite familiar, Mr. Speaker, with the 
motion going to the Court of Queen’s Bench and a ruling that 
came out at that time. And I want to just to quote a couple 
comments from the ruling, and basically a ruling that was 
handed down by Mr. Justice Baynton in the Saskatchewan 
court, and the decision handed down yesterday by the 
Saskatchewan court. It says: 
 

. . . Mr. Justice Baynton ruled that Wal-Mart Canada is not 
required to produce company material demanded by 
UFCW, and that the union’s demands for such information 
“clearly” amounts to a “fishing expedition” on the part of 
the union. 

 
[15:00] 
 
Further, Justice Baynton states in his decision that Wal-Mart 
Canada had no option considering the direction in which the 
labour board hearing was progressing but to bring its 
application before the court. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I think raises some questions about the 
current Bill before us. We even have a further comment, and I 
quote regarding the decision Justice Baynton: 
 

In his decision Justice Baynton wrote, “In the case before 
me, a passionate observer could well conclude that the 
impartiality of the Board has been compromised by the 
manner in which it has permitted UFCW to conduct and 
direct the hearing process. It appears that the role of the 
Board was often restricted to enforcing the demands made 
up by the UFCW and that it, rather than the Board, was 
controlling the course the hearing took. Seldom, as in the 
case before me, is a dispute or issue so one-sided that one 
party is successful in all of its applications while the other 
is successful in none.” 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we speak of the Labour Relations 
Board . . . and I know that just speaking with a couple ministers 
in committees recently, we continue to hear reference to the 
Labour Relations Board or the Human Rights Commission. And 
this government seems to be really quite intent on always 
having issues referred to either of these boards, and then 
waiting for decisions before they move on issues that may be of 
major concern to individuals and taxpayers in the province of 
Saskatchewan — whether they be labourers or whether they be 
the business community of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. A recent poll was indicating that 
when it comes to unionization of workplaces, in whether it’s 
Saskatchewan or across Canada, many, many workers would 
like to have more information. Many workers would like to feel 
that the process they’re entering into is very democratic, or is as 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2575 

democratic as you could, that process could become. 
 
And when I just . . . we hear of the decision that Justice 
Baynton wrote, his comments would basically indicate that 
there’s very little democracy in the way the Labour Relations 
Board has been acting recently. And as I look through the piece 
of legislation before us, Bill No. 87, and some of the 
requirements of the Bill, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this 
Bill is actually giving more power to the Labour Relations 
Board. 
 
And the Bill may be overlooking the fact that Canadians in 
general, including Saskatchewan residents, are voting very 
substantially in favour of more . . . a greater democratic process 
in how unions proceed in requiring or in how they implement a 
union or the information that is made available. And when I talk 
about unionization, Mr. Speaker . . . we talk about in this 
Assembly, and it was noted today that this Assembly, in this 
floor of this Legislative Building, is a place where members 
have the ability to represent their constituents and to speak, 
raise issues of major concern and speak quite freely without fear 
of harassment. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, some . . . What I’ve been hearing when I’ve 
been observing, many people have been coming to me who 
have been in situations where union organizers have come to 
them and suggested, if you work with us and we form a union 
in your workplace, these are the benefits that we could create 
for you. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the way our province 
and the way unionization proceeds in this province right now, I 
would suggest we do not really have a democratic forum. 
 
A democratic forum would indicate that if a union would enter 
a workplace and talk to the workers on the floor of, or in the 
workplace and say, offer their services — if we unionize, this is 
what we can do; these are the services we can provide — that 
those workers should have at the same time the same ability to 
speak to their employer and ask their employer what about 
some of the concerns they may have. Or talk to their employer, 
get their employer’s views and ask their employer to kind of let 
them know where they might fit in the whole, in how that 
business operates and functions. 
 
But I know I’ve run into situations where people signed on to 
get some more information about a union only to find out that 
the cards they signed, which they didn’t realize at the time, 
indicated because more than 50 had turned out, more than 50 
per cent of the people had signed on, all of a sudden the union 
was in, forced upon them. 
 
And it would seem to me that the Labour Relations Board, Mr. 
Speaker, is a board that should be very non-biased and working 
on behalf of both, representing and actually being a listening 
post for a person who may have been an unionized member 
who has some concerns with their employer and they go the 
Labour Relations Board, or if the employer has some concerns 
they at least have a way to address some of the issues that 
continue to fall on their plate as they’re raised by any specific 
union. 
 
And what we have been hearing is there are some major 
concerns with this piece of legislation that’s before the 
Assembly today. And we’re quite concerned about the fact that 

the government is moving ahead with this piece of legislation in 
view of the fact that the hours of work legislation, the debate we 
had last fall, the government’s finally recognized that maybe 
what wasn’t the right direction to go and they backed off on that 
issue. And one has to ask, well are they coming forward with 
something else to try and appease the unions across this 
province who happen to be strong supporters of this New 
Democratic government? 
 
So we ask you . . . And when I say, Mr. Speaker, we basically 
are asking the question, exactly what is the purpose of this, The 
Trade Union Act, Bill No. 87, before us? Exactly what will this 
Act achieve for the working people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, the business community? And Mr. Speaker, 
when this Bill, when this Bill, if it eventually is moved through 
the Assembly, through second reading and through committee, 
and reported back to the Assembly and receives approval, 
exactly what will it mean to the working relationships between 
working people, management, and the business community of 
this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing about this Bill that I think is of 
major concern. And it allows the Chair of the Saskatchewan 
Labour Relations Board to designate himself or a 
Vice-Chairperson to hear matters alone regarding fair practices. 
Now I would . . . Not to say that maybe the Chair or the 
Vice-Chair may not have the ability, and maybe there are times 
when it’s difficult and to actually implement further progress, 
or looking at a matter in a more . . . expedite a concern that’s 
been raised, that maybe the only way to expedite the process is 
to allow the Chair to hear a matter of concern. That certainly 
isn’t an issue. But there are some concerns with the fact that the 
Bill just allows the Chair to designate himself. 
 
And what seemed to me . . . It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Chair would be removing him or herself from that 
position and inviting someone else to sit down and hear matters 
of concern, and then reporting to the Chair and the Chair can 
make a decision. I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
might be a better way of really ensuring that there’s impartiality 
and that individuals who would come before the Labour 
Relations Board would sense that they really have a fair and 
honest hearing. 
 
This Bill also grants that members of the Saskatchewan Labour 
Relations Board . . . the same privileges and immunities as a 
judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. And the question we have 
to ask is, exactly why is that there? What is the purpose of that 
piece in this piece of legislation? Exactly what is its purpose? 
What is its goal? And why is this Bill now granting those 
immunities and privileges the same as you would have to a 
Court of Queen’s Bench, a judge on the court? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there certainly are some major concerns with the 
Bill before us. One may ask, does this Act, will this Act . . . 
This Act may then present a violation of the Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms in violating the freedom of speech. Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill proposes changes that would prevent the 
Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board from being taken to 
court by employers. And I think that’s one of the major issues. 
And I think going back to what I began my comments with this 
afternoon, the decision by Justice Baynton when Wal-Mart 
went to court because it just seemed that they weren’t getting 



2576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

any way with the Labour Relations Board . . . And then we now 
have a Bill before this Assembly that prevents the 
Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board from being taken to 
court. 
 
So if the Labour Relations Board makes a decision that 
significantly impacts a business or an employer, one has to ask, 
if this Bill moves forward, Mr. Speaker, exactly what 
alternative does that business community or that business or 
that employer have? And there are some significant questions 
that we certainly have to ask and we must certainly bring to the 
attention of the floor of this Assembly as we move forward in 
the debate on Bill No. 87, The Trade Union Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another issue that has been brought to our 
attention is that the amendments in the Bill would also allow 
officials from the board to enter the premises of any employer 
or trade union to inspect work and to view any records and 
documents or interview any person it sees fit. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, when the Act allows officials to enter the premises of 
an employer, does that mean, Mr. Speaker, that they can call 
ahead and say, we’ve had a complaint, we’ve listened to the 
complaint, we have a number of questions; and some of the 
concerns we feel in order to address those concerns, we would 
like access to your business to view, if you will, some of the 
information, whether it’s the books or what have you. 
 
Whether or not that Labour Relations Board is obligated to 
communicate this to an employer or whether they just have the 
ability, just on a whim, to go out to a business, and just to walk 
into the business and demand that the business submit to their 
demands, Mr. Speaker, without realizing that maybe some of 
the demands they’re making may really inhibit that business to 
continue to function and operate. 
 
And those are concerns, Mr. Speaker, that are raised not only by 
the business community, but even by individuals themselves, 
workers in the province, workers in the workplace. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, if a business closes its doors, 
let’s say it’s a business with 45 men and women working there, 
all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, there’s 45 men and women who 
are unemployed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, there are a number of 
questions, a number of concerns, a number of issues that are 
being brought to our attention on a daily basis regarding Bill 
No. 87, The Trade Union Act, and it would seem to me that 
now is not the time to proceed. 
 
We would ask the government to give more serious thought to 
why they brought forward this Bill and hold off on the 
implementation of this Bill and moving forward with this Bill, 
so that these questions can be addressed in a more forthright 
manner, rather than forcing them through and then after the fact 
admitting, oh maybe we made a mistake here; maybe we should 
have re-thought this. Maybe we should have worded it 
differently so that we’re actually really protecting the rights of 
workers and the rights of employers so everyone is treated 
fairly, and that the Labour Relations Board is indeed acting as a 
very impartial body to listen to the cases that are brought to its 
attention. And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moosomin that the debate on second reading of Bill 87 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 80 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 80 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2004/Loi de 2004 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
hoping and waiting for some time now to speak on Bill 80 and 
The Education Act amendment and how it relates to people in 
my constituency of Carrot River Valley and also, I think, people 
right across the province. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, if you buy into the idea that there 
ought to be amalgamations of school divisions in 
Saskatchewan, and then if you further buy into the idea that 
they ought to be forced amalgamations by the government or 
Department of Education, then obviously one would buy into 
the idea that Bill 80 would be a Bill well worth supporting, 
because what Bill 80 does is allows for the election of school 
boards under the boundaries of these new amalgamated school 
divisions. 
 
Of course which does make obvious democratic sense, 
regardless of where the division are, regardless of how big they 
are, regardless of how many schools or old school divisions are 
in the new division, there needs to be, of course, some level of 
government, of governance in those divisions. And without the 
Act to allow for elections of those particular boards, then of 
course the democratic process falls apart and the will of those 
ratepayers in those new school divisions is no longer heard at a 
public level. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So if you just look at the Bill as it sits — it’s a small Bill, it’s a 
short Bill — one would say that if you agree to those other 
ideas, then of course you must agree to allowing Bill 80 to pass, 
which would be . . . allow for elections of new school boards. 
 
Well I wanted to speak, Mr. Speaker, about some of the 
concerns that I know people right across the province have 
when it comes to the amalgamated school divisions in general. 
And I think that’s where the real debate or the real argument or 
the real, even perhaps the misunderstanding from people across 
the province — that’s where it really comes into play and that’s 
where the concern is. 
 
There are so many questions that people have about school 
board amalgamations that are still yet unanswered. Obviously 
some of those questions cannot be answered until they have 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2577 

local boards in place, but I think where . . . where I think the 
falling down of this whole issue started was the fact that I don’t 
think people were really consulted enough before the forced 
amalgamation took place. 
 
When the former minister of Education, Mr. Melenchuk, was 
here, he did call for a reduction of school districts by some 25 
per cent. And it is interesting to see that that guideline, that 
goal, was almost met through amalgamation happening by its 
own accord, and through the good work and the good efforts 
and the good co-operation of people in school boards, school 
divisions right across the province. That was obviously, that 
was a good thing to see and no one would, no one could be 
critical of the fact that those amalgamations took place on their 
own. 
 
From my experience in talking to school boards and people who 
had been involved in those voluntary amalgamations, Mr. 
Speaker, there was obviously a tremendous amount of work — 
tremendous amount of work — involved in making sure and 
ensuring that everything was put in pace prior to the 
amalgamation of that school board. There were contracts to be 
negotiated, obviously, with teachers, with custodians, with bus 
drivers, with people that provide services, services or contract 
to those small divisions within that larger amalgamated school 
division. 
 
So it wasn’t something that obviously could happen overnight. 
It needed to be thought about. It needed to be discussed. And 
there needed to be a high level of co-operation in order for those 
amalgamations to take place. That’s one of the things that I 
have seen and I think my colleagues have made mention of over 
the past number of months, is that they were disappointed in the 
fact that the government didn’t allow them the time or the input 
to talk about some of the things that they were very concerned 
about, they were very concerned about prior to the map coming 
out last July that really kind of set the ball in motion as far as 
amalgamation of the school districts took place. 
 
An issue of local interest from the division that — our children 
go to school in Davidson School Division — that’s come up 
over the last couple of months raises another issue, raises a new 
issue that people have to think about and maybe hadn’t thought 
about prior to it taking place. 
 
But what happened in this Davidson School Division, Mr. 
Speaker, was that there was some excess surplus money left in 
the budget, which is a good thing, Mr. Speaker. That shows that 
somebody did a very good job in the Davidson School Division 
as far as the administration goes. 
 
But what the question . . . The question that arose is what 
they’re going to do with the surplus funds. What happens? 
What becomes of that surplus taxpayer money that was saved 
— virtually it’s a savings account that was put aside for rainy 
days — what happens to those funds and to those bank accounts 
after amalgamation? Who becomes the owners of those types of 
surplus funds? That’s the question, and that’s a question of 
great concern to people right across the province because after 
all and in fact it is taxpayer money. 
 
What happened there, Mr. Speaker, and I know many, many 
members, and I know the minister is aware of that situation 

where they actually took 120-some-thousand dollars and paid a 
gratuity to the school board administrator, the Davidson 
division school board administrator. That was an issue that was 
brought forward through the media. I know the taxpayers 
federation brought it forward. I know the minister of Education 
himself said that, you know, that probably the board of 
Davidson School Division was premature in allowing that to 
happen. 
 
There was a great hue and cry, Mr. Speaker, from the taxpayers 
in the division. They through a petition forced the division to 
have a public meeting. I was at that meeting that night, Mr. 
Speaker. I know the member for Watrous, Arm River was there, 
and I know others were there. And we wanted to listen to what 
people had to say. People were very frustrated because they 
were concerned that their money — the money that they had 
paid in their taxes — was being spent as a gratuity. 
 
But that’s only the one issue in the Davidson School Division, 
Mr. Speaker. If you look at the bigger picture, there will be, and 
we know that . . . I don’t know. I can’t give you the number 
because I don’t know the number, but I know that there will be 
many other school divisions throughout the province who will 
have excess funds, and there’s got to be some formula, some 
mechanism, in order to dispense with those. 
 
Will those funds go back to the taxpayers, to the RMs [rural 
municipality] where they originated? Will they go back to those 
school districts, to those local school boards, where they 
originated? I don’t know the answer, Mr. Speaker. And many 
people don’t know these answers, and I don’t think that even 
the department of Education could give you those answers. And 
maybe they haven’t thought that far. 
 
And probably that’s sort of an understandable, an 
understandable thing that’s happened because, as I said at the 
outset, if you buy into the idea that forced amalgamation was a 
good idea, then you have to buy into this Bill because it allows 
for local governance and the election of the school boards. 
 
After these elections are held, will those larger boards then 
make that decision as to surplus funding, as to layoffs of 
teachers, cutbacks of buses or bus drivers — all those issues 
that have not yet been dealt with? And perhaps that is the 
intention of the board of education and the minister of 
Education is that those new boards would in fact address all 
those issues and take some leadership on those types of things, 
which in itself is not all a bad thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we know and if we are all believers — and we are and I am 
and I’m sure you are and every member in this House is — a 
firm believer in democracy, then one needs to put your faith and 
your trust in those people that are elected locally as members of 
that board. They’re going to have a fairly long term of office, 
Mr. Speaker, according to this Bill. It’s suggested that those 
elections would take place this June, and those people would 
hold office until 2009, which is about a four-year, a good 
four-year term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That in itself makes sense because what you’re going to have is 
you’re going to have a new school division, a larger school 
division that’s going to have to make up the rules. It’s going to 
have to make the rules, and it’s going to have to make some 



2578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

decisions upon how we spend this money, how we draw up 
those agreements with all those people that provide services to 
provide for the education of our children. And so if you do then 
place your trust and your faith in those elected board members, 
then obviously this is a good system and one that we would 
want to see go forward. 
 
As I alluded to, the member, the critic for Learning, prior to the 
critic shuffle for our party made some interesting comments 
about this Bill when he spoke on it in the legislature last time. 
And he talked about some of the same things that I talked about 
just here today, and he also talked about, he also talked about 
the fact that we want to see this whole issue become as efficient 
and work as well as possible under what we consider to be 
difficult circumstances for the people that are having to deal 
with this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion then I want to thank the 
legislature for the opportunity to speak on this Bill because it is 
of huge concern right across the province. Certainly rural 
Saskatchewan has lots of concerns and questions. And that’s 
why at this point in time I’d like to move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill 80. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley that debate on second reading of Bill 80 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 91 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 91 — The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and talk about this particular Bill; it’s just a one-page Bill. 
It’s to do some adjustments to land titles which we all know has 
had huge, huge problems with that, and they’re still fixing them, 
Mr. Speaker, at that end of it. 
 
I think this particular Bill goes towards actually fixing some of 
the problems. With that, I know we’ve had some speakers on it 
and we particularly don’t have too big of a problem with this 
one-piece legislation because we want, just like everybody, land 
titles to run smooth. They actually made some mistakes on it; I 
still want to get that on record. They were rammy with it. They 
could’ve went to another system. They could’ve done things 
different. But now we have this system. Let’s work to trying to 
improve it, at that end, Mr. Speaker, with that. 
 
And we’re hoping this Bill does. We’ve looked at it. And right 
now we’re going to let it move on to committee, and there will 
be asked a few more questions at it. But we haven’t had 
basically anybody that has a huge problem with this particular 
one-piece of legislation, right now with that. 

They still have trouble with the land titles itself, maybe the way 
it’s run, the cost, especially the cost overrun to taxpayers. That 
was a huge, huge, huge overrun, Mr. Speaker, as everybody 
knows that. That was very huge. When you budget for roughly 
20 million, you go over 100 million, I mean, that’s, that’s huge 
and a huge cost to taxpayers at the end of it. And that was 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that this government realizes 
that was wrong when they look at different things. When you 
budget for something, you’re that way off, I hope that you’ve 
looked at the mistakes that you made in the past and I hope you 
can correct them in future endeavours down the road because 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan can’t afford things like that. So 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I will . . . Well it’s up to the 
government, but with our side we will move it to committee if 
they so please. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Industry and Resources that 
Bill No. 91, The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill 91, The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that Bill No. 91 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This Bill stands 
referred to the Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 88 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 88 — The Health 
Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it is indeed a 
pleasure to enter the debate on Bill No. 88 today. 
 
It is just another prime example, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, of 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2579 

how this NDP government will say one thing and do another, 
and especially when it is concerning with the working class. 
They say that they are the advocates of the working class, and 
yet what they do is an altogether different thing. If these are the 
members that are supposed to be looking at and being 
concerned about the working people of the province, they 
wouldn’t have a 0, 1, and 1 mandate. They would support a 
collective bargaining process. They keep saying that they 
support a collective bargaining process, but in fact Mr. Speaker, 
that is not what they do. 
 
I think it’s quite unreasonable and misguided to have that 
mandate, quite frankly, and now it turns out, Mr. Speaker, that 
they are telling the public, they say they have a 0, 1, and 1 
mandate, but we’re not even too sure if that’s true any longer 
because they say it’s 0, 1, and 1 with flexibility or 0, 1, and 1 
with a light at the end of the tunnel or 0, 1, and 1 with pay 
equity increases. And now it looks like 0, 1, and 1 has turned 
into be 2, 2, and 2. So who the . . . You know, who has a clue 
what the heck they mean when they say something? 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just bring to the 
member’s attention that we are on Bill 88, The Health Labour 
Relations Reorganization Act. I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Not a problem at all, Mr. Speaker, because 
this just leads to where I was going. And they say that they 
support The Trade Union Act, but in fact this Act, Bill No. 88, 
will circumvent it. So do they have any idea what they’re 
doing? They say they care about the working class, but this Bill 
takes away their right to apply to the Labour Relations Board to 
choose their own union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most people in the House know that many years 
ago — and too many, far too many that I care to mention — I 
was a laboratory technologist at the Royal University Hospital. 
And I still have a good relationship with a number of the 
laboratory technologists. And I know that for nine years now 
they have been asking this government for the right to join one 
union. 
 
Presently they’re in four different unions. And what that means 
to the lab techs of this province, and the lab technicians, is that 
it’s four different collective agreements which leads to different 
wages. It leads to different benefit packages. It leads to different 
workers’ specific work conditions. And for nine years they have 
been ignored and pushed around by this government who says 
that it cares about the working . . . the health care workers in 
this province, but in fact, they do the opposite again and again 
and again. 
 
They don’t listen. They haven’t listened for nine years now. 
And now they’re introducing a Bill that will circumvent their 
own Trade Union Act. And so what they say and what they will 
do are two entirely different things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s best said quite frankly by the president 
of the Saskatchewan Association of Medical Technicians and 
Technologists. And he wrote a letter to the editor, and I want to 
read that entire letter into the record. To the editor, and I quote: 

As the president and representative of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Medical Technicians and Technologists . . . 
I am writing in response to concerns raised by [SAMTT] 
members to statements made by the Saskatchewan Labour 
minister, Deb Higgins. 
 
In the provincial legislature on March 31, [2005, the Hon. 
Ms.] Higgins defended a proposed Bill [which] . . . ensures 
further segregation, discrimination, and oppression of 
health-care workers in Saskatchewan. 
 
On three occasions, [Ms.] Higgins stated [that] “The Trade 
Union Act does not allow for decisions to be made in 
multi-employer bargaining units by the Labour Relations 
Board.” 
 
However, contrary to her statement, the recommendation 
of the Dorsey Commission, which states, “two 
province-wide, multi-employer standard bargaining units 
for specific occupations will be the only exceptions to the 
30 primary all-employee units”, was put into effect by The 
Health Labour Reorganization . . . in 1996. 
 

I’m going to skip a bit of the letter and continue to: 
 

Under the trade union . . . [Act] in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now you said you were going to read it 
all. Now don’t be changing your mind . . . 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Well the minister wants to hear it all on the 
record so, “There are . . . ” I would be more than happy to 
oblige the minister. The part that I was going to omit continues, 
and I quote: 
 

There are currently five unions in Saskatchewan for 
health-care workers: [and perhaps I should have read it 
right away because the minister maybe doesn’t know this, 
and they are] CUPE, SEIU and SGEU, which cover 
multi-employer standard bargaining units for 
health-service providers; HSAS (which covers 
multi-employer bargaining units for licensed providers) 
and SUN (which covers multi-employer bargaining units 
for nurses). 

 
So now it has been read into the record, because the minister 
wanted to hear that. I will continue: 
 

Under the trade . . . [unions Act] in all provinces and 
territories, “employees have the right to organize in, and to 
form, join or assist trade unions and to bargain collectively 
through a trade union of their own choosing.” However, 
under the Health Labour Relations Reorganization Act, 
Saskatchewan health-care workers are not presently 
allowed these rights enjoyed by other Canadian workers. 
 
Health-care workers in Saskatchewan deserve the right not 
to be segregated, oppressed or discriminated against in the 
name of health-care reorganization. If the Trade Union Act 
does not allow for decisions to be made in multi-employer 
bargaining units by the Labour Relations . . . [boards] as 
stated by [the Hon. Ms.] Higgins, then amendments should 
be made to the [Labour] act. 



2580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

Any solution to health-care labour issues must start with 
. . . [the] mutual respect towards all parties involved, 
which includes the rights and freedoms allowed workers 
under the law. The NDP should keep this in mind when 
. . . [they are] representing the public. 
 
[Sincerely] Lyle Theriault . . . president of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Medical Technicians and 
Technologists . . . 
 

And quite frankly I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that more 
could be said about the lack of respect as the minister sat in her 
seat and laughed at this letter. And I think that is totally 
unacceptable. And with that, I adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Humboldt that debate on second reading of Bill 88 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 94 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 94 — The 
Apiaries Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
speak on this Bill called The Apiaries Act. And I’m not sure if 
I’m pronouncing that right, but I do understand beekeeping 
because at one time I did have six hives of bees. So I do 
understand it even though I can’t handle the word. 
 
In the early years, along with other producers, we would import 
from the States new hives every year. And each year when the 
honey collection was done you would kill off the bees and bring 
in new bees because it was too expensive to winter the bees. So 
then in the late ’70s, early ’80s, this big word of foul brood 
came in. And the first scare was then and it started closing the 
border and people began to learn the art of wintering bees. And 
up until then that hadn’t been done much in Saskatchewan, but 
we’ve learned the art and now producers are . . . I’m hearing 
there are some producers are up to 3,000 hives which is a pretty 
significant number — especially when you started with only six 
like I did. 
 
So it has a growing industry we should say, with a lot of sweet 
potential. Saskatchewan bees produce the highest number of 
pounds of honey anywhere in the world. It’s due to our climate, 
due to the conditions. But beekeepers in Saskatchewan can be 
some of the top producers in the world — by quite a margin, 
too. So you can see that beekeeping, an industry that has grown 
and has potential for a lot more growth, especially with 
everyone looking for food that is more natural. Now we’re 
finding that there is a foul brood bacteria that is resistant to 
antibiotics. And this could be very harmful to the Saskatchewan 
producers. Therefore, any effort to help protect them and 

protect the bee industry I’m sure would be greatly appreciated 
by producers. And therefore at this time I support this Bill and 
would ask this Bill to proceed to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 94, 
The Apiaries Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I move that Bill No. 94, The Apiaries 
Act, 2005 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 94 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 95 — The 
Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I was last 
given an opportunity to speak on this particular piece of 
legislation, there were a number of issues that I wanted to 
address prior to running out of time. And I’d like to take a few 
minutes now to just cover some of the ground that I had talked 
about briefly in the last session when this particular piece of 
legislation came before the House. 
 
There are, as everybody is well aware, several competing 
interests as it relates to the Great Sand Hills and the potential in 
that area. It is without dispute one of the finest examples of a 
unique ecological area and I think that environmentalists and 
local people have acknowledged that fact. 
 
In fact, when it comes right down to it, Mr. Speaker, nobody 
has offered more protection to the delicate nature of the Sand 
Hills than the very individuals who are operating leases in that 
area, who are running cattle in that area, and who are very 
protective, personally, of the fragile ecological balance that 
exists in that particular area of southwest Saskatchewan. So to 
have the larger ecological movement show a great deal of 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2581 

interest in that particular region doesn’t surprise anybody. In 
fact, we’d be surprised if they weren’t interested in protecting 
that particular area of the province. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, there is the other competing 
interest that come into play there. The fact that the Great Sand 
Hills is estimated to be the home to about 20 per cent of the 
natural gas reserves in the province of Saskatchewan puts that 
area under a great deal of developmental pressure. And there 
are existing oil and gas leases that remain to be exercised in that 
area, leases that were sold to the industry by this government 
and to which there has not been allowed full development 
potential because of the impending commission studies and 
reviews that have gone on over the last little while and because 
of some very restrictive requirements that existed previously. 
 
So one of the things I want to be sure to address and I would 
ask the government to give us some assurance on is the 
willingness of this government to respect the rights of the oil 
companies that have paid money — good money — to have 
access to those reserves in that particular region of southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, there’s nothing more damaging to a government’s 
credibility than to offer, by one department, for sale leases for 
development by oil and gas industries and then have another 
department slap a freeze on or protective legislation on that 
particular area that has been granted for development purposes 
to the industry. 
 
So if the government can give us an assurance today, that they 
will take that conflict into consideration and offer the industry 
either alternative parcels or a refund on their investment, I think 
that would make us feel a lot better. 
 
The other issue I think, Mr. Speaker, that needs to be attended 
to here is the probability that the protected area could grow 
even to much greater bounds than this particular piece of 
legislation addresses. And I have as reason for concern the fact 
that this particular Bill triples the size of the area that is now 
protected. 
 
What we have as a protected area under the existing legislation 
is about thirty-six and a half sections of land and it is very 
restrictive protection in place. But as we see with this particular 
piece of legislation, the expanded boundaries of this protected 
area are significantly larger — some three and a half times. 
 
Now I don’t have the exact size of the proposed boundaries in 
sections, but according to the press release put out by the 
Department of Environment, they’re looking at 365 square 
kilometres of additionally protected land in the Great Sand 
Hills. So there is a significant increase in the area that is 
addressed by this particular piece of legislation. But that’s not 
as far as it goes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While this legislation has this immediate boundary in mind, we 
have also heard from the minister about the review of a much 
larger area that’s going to be undertaken by an expert, an 
individual who has come to Canada, from the State of Florida I 
understand, who has a particular expertise in ecosystems and 
closed ecological environments. And he and his colleagues are 
going to be looking at a significantly larger area again. So, Mr. 

Speaker, while we have 365 square kilometres set aside by this 
particular piece of legislation, who knows how much larger the 
recommendations could be once this new study is undertaken 
and completed. There is some concern, some estimation, that 
we could have maybe a doubling of the size again and even 
more. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if that argument is to be made that that 
much enlarged boundary needs additional protection, that is 
going to encumber the government considerably because there’s 
a lot of privately held land in that area, it’s not just Crown land. 
And so what is the government’s intention going to be as it 
relates to that privately held land and existing farms and 
existing oil and gas operations in the much larger area. 
 
So none of this might be a problem and it still may not be. But 
I’m a little concerned about how this is all going to unfold, Mr. 
Speaker, because this particular piece of legislation takes an 
interesting tack. There have rarely been Bills brought before 
this House where changes to the legislation, in terms of 
regulatory application, are required to come back to the House. 
The most recent example of that happening of course was the 
government’s legislation as it related to Crown corporations. 
And that particular piece of legislation said nothing could 
happen unless it came back to the House for debate. 
 
And that’s exactly what’s happened in this small piece of 
legislation. No changes, no regulatory changes, can be made to 
the way environmental activity is . . . or, I’m sorry, 
environmental concerns are addressed or how management and 
development opportunities are undertaken, unless those changes 
are brought back to this particular House for consideration. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in principle I think that’s the right approach. 
But it’s a rarity for this government to take that approach. It 
suggests something to me, Mr. Speaker. It suggests that this 
government isn’t entirely confident that it’s going to win the 
next election. So it wants to be sure that any subsequent 
government will have no opportunity to make regulatory 
changes to any development within that particular area unless 
it’s approved by this legislature. 
 
Now I think that if we looked at other pieces of legislation, 
ordinarily regulatory changes are the purview of the minister. 
Most Acts say that all regulatory opportunities or requirements 
are vested in the minister or in officials that the minister might 
appoint or in Executive Council or in the Crown. They rarely 
come to the point where they insist that all regulatory changes 
be approved by the House. And so, Mr. Speaker, that suggests 
to me that there is some serious concern on the side of the 
government that subsequent governments might make changes 
that they don’t approve of, and that they do not trust the 
integrity or the capacity of a subsequent government to make 
decisions that are appropriate to this particular environmental 
area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a bit of history that we need 
to review as it relates to this particular area because this has 
been a very hotly contested matter in terms of the larger 
provincial population, but certainly as it relates to the local 
population. The effect of this discourse and disagreement 



2582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

resulted in, back in the early 1990s, a commission being 
established in the local area made up of the four most heavily 
involved rural municipalities and some additional players. And 
it took a long time, but those RMs and those people who were 
party to that planning commission that was established in the 
early ’90s finally came to a point where they had established 
broadly accepted developmental bylaws. 
 
It was a tough process, but they were able to achieve a 
commonality for development purposes, for zoning purposes, 
and so forth. 
 
But after a few years of this particular commission being in 
existence, the RM of Piapot — knowing from their own 
personal experience with some of the lands that had been 
designated too environmentally sensitive for development; 
knowing from on-the-ground experience, first-hand experience 
with some of that land; and also recognizing that absolute need 
for some economic development in the area — the RM of 
Piapot said: we need to get some changes to the zoning that’s in 
effect here. 
 
There was quite a brouhaha that developed as a result of that 
particular position by the RM, and there were a number of 
public meetings held, and there were a lot of contentious points 
of view expressed. But as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we had 
this most recent commission look at the Sand Hills; and 
ultimately, after a number of public hearings and a lot of serious 
debate and effort, they came up with a summary of 
recommendations on which this particular piece of legislation I 
believe is established. 
 
But the summary, which is only four or five lines long, I would 
like to read into the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In the end, the implementation recommendation [that this 
particular most recent commission came up with] will 
recognize the partnership between the provincial and the 
municipal (local) authorities for management of the area. 
A combination of the following features: 

one environmental impact assessment for the whole 
area, 
the formation of either an advisory or formalized 
administrative board, and 
a comprehensive implementation plan for the area. 

[These] will give direction for land use and resource 
management in the Great Sand Hills area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the commission that this 
government struck to look at that particular delicate issue, one 
of the things especially acknowledged as a necessity was that 
there would be a partnership between provincial and municipal 
authorities for management of the area. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
particular piece of legislation denies that working relationship. 
This legislation doesn’t talk about local participation in the 
decision making as it impacts an area whatsoever. 
 
This particular piece of legislation says that no changes can be 
made, no developmental changes, no impact in that area can be 
accepted unless it is approved by this legislature. And while I 
appreciate the fact that each of us in this legislature represents 
the province as a whole, and maybe the specific area that’s 
addressed in this particular piece of legislation, it’s not the same 

as having the full participation of local people in the 
management decisions that are to be made as it relates to that 
piece of area . . . of territory. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m disappointed that we’re going to remove 
any local participation ultimately from any decisions that are 
going to happen in that area. And as we know, this is just an 
intermediary step. We could see a much larger area designated 
as a fully protected area and the implications for local people 
and local RMs and local communities could be pretty 
devastating if developmental opportunities are going to be as 
restrictive as this particular piece of legislation envisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the, one of the other, one of the 
other things that we need to accomplish as a result of this piece 
of legislation being brought forward is an opportunity by the 
communities and the RMs affected by this legislation to 
comment on how this legislation might ultimately burden them. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I as the MLA representing that area, have 
taken the liberty to send this particular Bill and the 
accompanying notes out to the individual RMs and towns in 
that immediate area, and have asked them for that comment. 
And as of yet, we have heard no response. We anticipate 
hearing sometime in the next week or so. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are the comments I have in summary, on 
this particular piece of legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I just quickly want to add a 
couple of points on this particular Bill that my colleague from 
Cypress Hills had quite alluded to on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things he had mentioned was that 
they’re changing 300 . . . how big it is. And I think it’s bigger 
than most of the constituencies over there, Mr. Speaker, at that 
end. So when you’re doing something that big, it has to be 
studied and sent out to the areas. 
 
And my point . . . or my colleague made some very, very good 
points, Mr. Speaker, at that end of it. And I know that I’ve just 
looked at this Bill, and I know that I think I have some people 
out home that would be interested in looking at this too. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate on this 
particular Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 95 be 
now adjourned. Is it pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 101 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 101 — The 
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution 
des jugements étrangers be now read a second time.] 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2583 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have had the opportunity of 
looking at and reviewing this piece of legislation. We note that 
it serves some very laudable purposes as far as making our laws 
enforceable elsewhere and reciprocating that with other 
jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, we have no objection to this Bill 
going forward at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 101, The 
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act, be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that 101, Bill 101, The 
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act, be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that Bill 101 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill 101 stands 
referred to the Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 103 — The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill as well can go forward. 
We have had the opportunity to review, and had discussions 
with various realtors and members of the Real Estate 
Commission. 
 
We note that part of this Bill is to increase the size of the 
commission to allow them to have representatives from various 
regions throughout the province, and appreciate the issues that 
they have to deal with, with the physical size of the province. 
 

We note as well that the jurisdiction of the commission will be 
enlarged to allow the disciplinary procedures to deal with 
people who have ceased being realtors, so that a person cannot 
avoid disciplinary proceedings or other processes of the 
commission by merely resigning from their licence. 
 
It deals as well, Mr. Speaker, with associate brokers, and has 
made some amendments to deal with and tighten up matters 
dealing with depositing of money into trust, as well as 
providing some interim protection for temporary suspension of 
licences. 
 
We’re pleased that these recommendations came forth from the 
commission and were acted on, and are supportive of the 
commission’s work. Mr. Speaker, this Bill as well could go 
forward to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the Bill 
moved by the Minister of Justice that . . . is the motion moved 
by the Minister of Justice that Bill 103, The Real Estate 
Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill 103, The Real Estate 
Amendment Act, 2005, be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that Bill 103 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the policy committee on Human Services. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 
[16:00] 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — Order. I call the Committee of Finance to order. 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

The first item before the committee is the consideration of 
estimates for the Department of Learning, vote 5, found on page 
105 of the Estimates book. And I recognize the Minister of 
Learning to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m pleased today to be joined by a number of officials. Seated 
directly next to me is deputy minister, Bonnie Durnford. Next 
to her, Brady Salloum, who is the executive director, student 
financial assistance. Behind Brady is Kevin Veitenheimer, the 
director of university services. And behind Deputy Minister 
Durnford is Wayne McElree, who is the assistant deputy 
minister. Seated directly behind me is Nelson Wagner, who is 
the executive director of facilities. Behind him is Glenda Eden, 
the manager of financial planning. Next to her is Trina Fallows, 
the director of finance for corporate services. And just over to 
my right is Rick Pawliw, who is executive director of programs. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would just say by way of introduction that I am 
particularly pleased that we have the opportunity to discuss the 
post-secondary estimates today. Post-secondary education was a 
focus of this budget. And our continuing efforts to make sure 
Saskatchewan is a great place for students to learn and to live 
continues to be emphasized within the initiatives contained in 
this budget. 
 
This budget focuses on making sure that university is 
affordable, is accessible, and that we are working to make sure 
that there is a closer relationship between our post-secondary 
institutions and the economic environment that this province 
finds itself in, an economic environment which sees a 
tremendous growth as Saskatchewan becomes a have province 
and enters its second century. 
 
The Chair: — Central management and services (LR01). Is the 
committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — There has been so many modifications to 
committees and how things work, I’m never sure whether to 
stand, or sit, or be here, or there, or whatever. But thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. And to the minister, we appreciate your time and 
attention this afternoon, and thank you for bringing your 
officials with you to the committee this afternoon. 
 
You mentioned in your opening comments, Mr. Minister, that 
your government made post-secondary education a focus of this 
year’s budget. And while there has been considerable attention 
given to that particular issue, I would like to go to the matter as 
it relates to tuitions and student loans and student assistance and 
so forth — generally, student aid — because of the priority that 
students have put on that as part of their conversation with the 
government and with the official opposition. As part of their 
lobbying leading up to the last budget, they wanted to focus in 
on general student aid availability. And I think that that should 
form sort of the focus of our discussions here, at least in the 
early part of this particular session of estimates. 
 
I know the minister said publicly — and there’s enough print to 
verify it — that he didn’t believe in student tuition freezes and 

that he felt that was an unworkable and possibly an untenable 
situation going forward, that they hadn’t proved very successful 
in other jurisdictions or in other times when student tuition 
freezes were implemented by various governments and/or 
schools. And yet in effect, this year’s budget, with the financing 
provided, has done just that, at least for the one-year term. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you tell us how you can differentiate 
between what the government did in this year’s budget and your 
views on tuition freezes that were published in several media 
outlets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it is true that in other 
jurisdictions where we have seen governments act to put in a 
regulation to minimize the degree that tuition can rise or to 
effectively freeze it, as provinces like British Columbia have 
done, that what those measures essentially did was simply 
postponed tuition increases. The approach that we took in this 
budget was not to move forward with a regulated or a legislated 
freeze but rather to provide the universities with sufficient funds 
that they could hold the tuition increase to zero this year. 
 
This is a decision that the universities have agreed with; they 
have supported our funding regime this year and have said that 
they will hold the tuition to what it was this past year. We think 
this is a good approach to take. It was a co-operative approach. 
It was one that met the needs of the university and recognizes 
that the universities indeed are the ones who set the tuition fees. 
It at the same time provides them with sufficient funds to carry 
on their activities in a way that prevents the environment from 
developing as we saw in British Columbia. 
 
So that’s how we undertook this. In terms of simplicity, yes, it 
provides for an effective freeze of tuition this year, but it is a 
freeze that has been established by the universities. They have 
made the decision to hold their tuition fee at the same level it 
was last year. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In making that particular decision by the 
universities, was there a suggestion by your government, by 
your department, that this money would be contingent on them 
making that decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes. The money that we provided 
through the centennial student line, which is in the budget, is 
contingent on making sure that tuition fees are mitigated this 
year. That is a specific, targeted fund for this year. 
 
What we are working through is next year, how that will be 
reflected within the budget. And it will need, I would argue, to 
roll into the general university budget. But we will need to be 
careful to make sure that that money does not simply become 
absorbed and then we see a double jump in tuition. That will 
need to essentially have reset the base for the tuition for this 
year, and that is part of the discussion that is ongoing with the 
universities. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So, Mr. Minister, if this is to become an 
ongoing feature of the government’s level of funding, how are 
you going to safeguard the impact on tuitions? How are you 
going to safeguard the level of tuitions without basically 
dictating to the universities, which you have agreed and as most 
of us understand, are an autonomous, free-standing institution? 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

The government’s involvement and investment in funding these 
levels to protect tuition must in effect become conditional and 
that would impede on that autonomy that we’ve talked about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, every year as we go 
through the budgeting process with universities and we take a 
look at what their requests are, obviously we have a great deal 
of detail. We have had many years of discussion about how the 
university funding formula should work, and that is a 
well-established mechanism in the province. 
 
Certainly the universities are autonomous institutions and make 
their own budget decisions, but the government funding is 
provided to pay for a level of support that we both understand at 
the point that it’s provided. I don’t think that we need to be 
overly coy about it. We obviously understand what the level of 
funding will mean in terms of likely tuition outcomes. We know 
what we expect it to be used for. The line-to-line issues are 
determined by the university boards and they make those 
decisions appropriately. 
 
But the 160-some million that we’re providing to the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] this year and the 50- or 60-some 
million that we’re providing — 60-some million we’re 
providing to the U of R [University of Regina], we have certain 
understandings as to what that money will be used for. 
 
This year we’ve inserted a specific line in the budget to deal 
with tuition mitigation, in part in recognition to the fact that 
students and youth are a priority of this government and that we 
have wanted to reflect that clearly in this our centennial year, in 
this our centennial budget, and to have that very clearly outlined 
so that students saw that their efforts were appreciated and were 
noted in a document as important as the provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think, Mr. Minister, that I would concede that 
students found the money set aside for offsetting tuition 
increases was well received, and that they want some 
assurances going forward that that kind of attention will be paid 
to their concerns as it relates to tuition in the future. 
 
I guess the problem becomes, however, how the government 
will manage to do that going forward because there’s going to 
be a certain dependency by these institutions on that funding as 
the years unfold, as the years progress. They’re not likely to 
want to go to lesser funding for the sake of protecting tuitions. 
So how does the government anticipate dealing with those 
ongoing or unfolding scenarios? The universities’ budgets 
aren’t going to get less. They’re not going to find things 
cheaper to accomplish. And I think they’re obviously going to 
be under great pressure to increase tuitions as the years unfold. 
That puts the onus on the provincial government to either keep 
funding on an ongoing basis this very type of tuition support or 
dictating to the universities that monies in an increasing 
proportion be dedicated to tuition support. Has the government 
thought this particular conundrum through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well tuition on an annual basis every 
year, as we take a look at the universities’ budgets, we’re aware 
that there is some upward pressure on tuition, just as there is 
upward pressure on government funding. And what we are 
trying to do is establish what the appropriate balance is. The 
approach that we’ve opted for this year is a special line in the 

budget to deal with tuition mitigation. It is our expectation that 
next year this will roll into the base budget for the university. 
We still need to have a discussion with them about how that 
will be reflected in next year’s budget so that it continues to be 
used for tuition mitigation — and that is really what the 
discussion is. But the member’s right. There continue to be 
upward pressures on research, on infrastructure, and on general 
program and operating costs within the universities. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If this particular level 
of funding will be rolled into the sort of the foundational 
funding for universities for next year, can we assume then that 
as a minimum, next year’s amount designated for 
post-secondary education — particularly universities — will be 
this amount plus X number of dollars? 
 
[16:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That’s a reasonable assumption to 
make, yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, the issue of Saskatchewan 
student aid has been a hotly debated one, I think, in this 
province. And there are other jurisdictions that have meted out 
student aid in a different variety of ways and through different 
programs. But we in Saskatchewan, if I recall from previous 
conversations with the minister and previous post-secondary 
ministers, have taken view that student aid is by and large more 
generous in Saskatchewan than it is elsewhere. 
 
And yet I’m looking at figures from this year’s budget that 
would suggest a decrease in Saskatchewan student aid funds 
from $37.1 million in 2003-2004 down to 35.6 million, 
2004-2005; and projected for 2005-2006, $33.7 million. That’s 
roughly a $2 million drop per year over the last two years. This 
would seem to fly in the face of the government’s commitment 
to generous student funding. Would the minister explain this 
particular drop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This reflects largely a change in 
utilization within the fund and we’ve simply rebudgeted to 
respect that. I think what’s important to identify is we have 
dealt with the Student Aid Fund during this administration’s 
time, have been . . . Perhaps the most significant change we 
have introduced has been the return to bursaries and forgivable 
loan portions. And this has been a significant change that we 
have implemented. We believe strongly in that as a debt 
management tool. And it’s an approach that was missing during 
the . . . in large part, during the years of the Devine 
administration. This Student Loan Fund, the number that we 
have in the budget reflects what we expect usage to be, and in 
part is reflective of the current situation with interest rates. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Are you suggesting, Mr. Minister, that the $2 
million discrepancy from last year to this year is primarily a 
result of decreased interest rates or reallocation of those 
resources? You alluded to that early in your answer. And if 
there is a reallocation, can you tell us where that is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — If I said it was a reallocation, Mr. 
Chairman, that would not have been accurate. It is a reduction 
in usage. It’s a change in utilization rather than allocation, and 
so we’re simply restating the numbers to show what we 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

anticipate utilization to be this year. If I said allocation, that 
would be my mistake. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, can you give us an indication 
why the government expects, why your department expects a 
drop in utilization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I am advised that this is largely due to 
the fact we have fewer students applying for student financial 
assistance through the student loan funds. I am also advised that 
this is not a phenomenon unique to Saskatchewan but indeed 
something that we see in other provinces as well. 
 
The member can speculate probably as easily as I could as to 
what’s driving that, whether it’s improved financial planning on 
the part of parents who are taking advantage of other tools to 
prepare for funding their children’s education, whether it’s the 
fact that the economy is stronger and students are able to make 
more in the summer months to offset that and thus don’t need to 
borrow as much. There are a number of different possibilities 
but we don’t have any empirical data other than to say that there 
are fewer students applying for access to the funds. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, that scenario, while I can’t 
disagree with some of the possible explanations, that scenario 
does seem difficult to accept in view of the fact that attendance 
at post-secondary institutions is supposed to be rising 
dramatically, and so this wouldn’t be a small change in terms of 
demand or requirement. It would really probably indicate a 
fairly substantial change in demand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think it’s important to identify that 
this is a needs-based system and so the vast majority of students 
who go to the university or the post-secondary institutions don’t 
even apply for student loans. This is really the place that they’ll 
come for last resort to borrow. I suspect in a large part that what 
we’re seeing is a stronger economy that’s generating more 
individual income for students. As a result, we see fewer 
applying. There may be more parental contributions coming 
into this for younger students. 
 
But the simple fact is, there are fewer applying. And on some 
cases, students, we know, are taking longer to complete their 
degrees, and maybe they’re undertaking more work. Whatever 
the anecdotal evidence that we see that we may wish to ascribe 
to this in terms of why there’s a reduction, the simple fact 
remains that there are fewer students applying for assistance 
this year than last. And that’s part of what we’ve been able to 
reflect in this budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — If I recall from earlier discussions, at one time 
about 40 per cent of students — maybe as many as 50 per cent 
— had some kind of student loan application or indebtedness. Is 
that percentage expected to drop? And it sounds like real 
numbers are dropping, but is the percentage likely to drop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised the number fluctuates 
somewhat between 35 and 40 per cent, and it does in fact 
fluctuate. So it could be dependent on any number of things, 
including what the farm sector economy is looking like. It’s 
hard for us to say specifically. This year’s budget reflects what 
we think utilization will be this year. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — You mentioned in some of your earlier 
comments, Minister, that there is an anticipated uptake in terms 
of bursaries and loan forgiveness and that type of thing. 
 
One of the areas that post-secondary institutions have asked 
repeatedly of the provincial government is a program that 
would allow them to establish a matching grant, a fund for 
scholarships. And I know the University of Saskatchewan has 
been pretty aggressive in seeking that. I believe the University 
of Regina would match that appeal probably as equally 
aggressive. But nevertheless, I’m wondering if the provincial 
government has a plan in place to address the need for 
additional scholarship money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I am pleased that this 
budget did provide us with the opportunity to double the 
amount of money that we are funding for the centennial merit 
scholarship program — up to $1 million this year. And that will 
provide over 665 scholarships for this coming year. This is 
again I think a reflection of this government’s commitment to 
students and youth, and in particular in our centennial year as 
we look forward to the role that they’re gong to play in our 
academic community as well as in our community at large. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that any 
increase in scholarship funding would be money well spent. 
 
Representing an area from the extreme west part of the 
province, I know for a fact that the majority of students 
graduating from high school in the Southwest and probably the 
West of the province would virtually always be enticed to an 
out-of-province university — most frequently Alberta but 
Toronto and British Columbia are not unheard of — because of 
the impact of scholarships. Those scholarships have tremendous 
appeal and I, you know, I’m frustrated as the political 
representative for that area to see our young people almost 
automatically leave. In so many instances they don’t even give 
Saskatchewan universities a fair chance to compete simply 
because the scholarship opportunities aren’t available here as 
extensively as they are in other universities in other parts of the 
country. 
 
So I would say to the minister that I’m sure the universities and 
colleges appreciate the money you’ve put in there. I think that 
they would be much more competitive in terms of attracting 
students, especially from the west side of the province, if the 
scholarships could be at virtually a competitive level with the 
University of Lethbridge, Calgary, Edmonton, and certainly 
Victoria and BC. 
 
So having made that statement, I appreciate the fact that you put 
more money into the scholarship fund. I guess I would like to 
encourage you, for the sake of the future of our young people 
especially on the west side of the province, that you continue 
that down that path because the competitive recruiting element 
that is happening among high school students these days is such 
that when we lose those students to other jurisdictions, to other 
universities, our chances of getting them back to contribute 
positively to our economy are greatly reduced. And that’s not a 
loss that we can sustain for too many more years or generations. 
 
Would the minister give us an indication of how that 
scholarship money that he alluded to a few minutes ago, how 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

that is divided between the two universities and SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]? 
Are there other players in the post-secondary education level 
that also participate in scholarships? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t have the specific breakdown 
between the two universities, but I can say with the centennial 
merit scholarship program, which is one of many scholarship 
programs which are in effect at the universities, for the 
centennial merit scholarship program, approximately 280 
scholarships will be awarded to university students; 150 to 
SIAST students, 35 to regional colleges, and 200 will be made 
available to students participating in apprenticeship. 
 
And I just want to say to the member opposite that I think it’s 
important that when we think about post-secondary education, 
that we not narrowly focus on the universities. The strength and 
growth in Saskatchewan’s economy today is largely based on us 
being able to attract more apprentices, more people into the 
technical vocational areas, and to build on the strength 
particularly of the regional colleges and SIAST. This is a key 
for us if we are going to grow in the regional economies of this 
province and especially to stimulate the sectors where we’ve 
identified particular areas of growth — forestry, oil and gas, the 
mining sector — for us to take more advantage of that. 
 
Yes, we continue to need to focus on the academic growth at 
the universities, but we should not be forgetting that a lot of this 
province’s growth are in the traditional, blue-collar industries 
and are going to require us to have highly skilled workers 
coming out of SIAST and the technical vocational colleges. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I’m glad you reminded us of that. 
It’s not a reminder that I’m particularly in need of. As a matter 
of fact, I think SIAST has one of the highest reputations in 
terms of graduates and their willingness to stay in the province 
of any institution of a similar nature elsewhere in the country. 
 
But that’s why I asked you about the allocation of scholarships 
because if the vast majority of the scholarship money is going 
to universities, that tends to discourage participation in the 
post-secondary opportunities at regional colleges and at 
technical schools like SIAST. 
 
But here’s an anecdote that I’d like to pass on. I heard the other 
day . . . and this is subject to verification. I heard the other day 
that the oil sands expansion project at Fort McMurray, being 
undertaken by one of the big players in the oil industry — I 
believe it’s Suncor that has their major project ongoing right 
now — is going to require 300 power engineers for the 
operation of that one plant. Mr. Minister, how many power 
engineers do we graduate in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m sorry. Is the member asking me 
how we can educate more people to export to Alberta? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’m asking the minister if there is going to be 
that demand in Alberta at one plant, why are we restricting our 
education to 16 students for our own needs in this province? 
Because as it stands right now, an individual could pack up 
their bags and probably move to the Suncor project and double 
their income instantly. 
 

And it’s going to be hard to hold our instructors, even at a 
school like SIAST, if their wages could jump dramatically if 
they were to go to a project like that. The demand for qualified, 
well-trained technical people in Saskatchewan we expect is 
going to go up. But, you know, when you have that kind of 
inequity in terms of economic clout, when you have one plant 
in Alberta that’s going to require 300 power engineers, certainly 
16 being graduated in Saskatchewan isn’t going to meet our 
needs in the long run. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the approach that we take is that 
we should be using Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars to educate 
Saskatchewan students for jobs in Saskatchewan. That’s not to 
say that there is not mobility across the country, and inevitably 
some students do decide to pursue their careers otherwise. But 
as we take a look at the spaces which are allocated, they are 
primarily lined up with what our economy needs so that we are 
making sure we are getting maximum benefit to Saskatchewan 
students and Saskatchewan’s taxpayers and Saskatchewan’s 
economy. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well I guess that would ordinarily make sense, 
Mr. Minister, except for the fact that if you have a big vacuum 
sucking our capability right out of the province, then we’re not 
only meeting our needs; we’re going backwards. As we 
graduate 16 students a year and the demand is exponentially 
larger than that in other jurisdictions and one quite close by, 
then those 16 if they stay here are not even going to fill the 
demands that are going to created in this province. So I guess 
the question becomes, how readily, how able is SIAST going to 
be able to respond to those new realities as we move forward? 
 
You know, we’re not living in isolation here. We can sit here 
and pretend that we got a big wall up around our borders and 
that we’re going to meet our exact needs. But that’s not the way 
it works anymore. And unfortunately with the huge economic 
impact that some of these mega projects are likely to have . . . 
And this is one project that’s happening there, who knows how 
many more are slated. And we might have our own substantial 
projects that will be requiring those kinds of capabilities right 
here in the province. I mean, an expansion at Husky could make 
the 16 graduates that we put out any given year, they could eat 
that entire quotient up. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you know the idea of just meeting today’s 
demands by today’s graduates isn’t very proactive, doesn’t give 
us much of a glimpse to the realities facing us in the future. And 
I’m concerned about that. And I think that this all came about as 
a result of our discussion about monies that might be available 
through student loans or through scholarship programs. But if 
the government is going to be serious about meeting our 
manpower needs in this province, we need to be much more 
aggressive in those particular areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I believe very strongly that we 
shouldn’t train just for training’s sake that, where we have 
expensive technical vocational training, we should be targeting 
that to meet our economic needs. And to that regard, SIAST has 
a very sophisticated program in place to try and match up their 
program capacity with what they believe are going to be the 
future labour demands and the needs of the province. This is a 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

mechanism that’s been in place for many years. It works very, 
very well I would argue and is something that we should 
continue to support. 
 
I am not of the belief that we should actively ramp-up in 
anticipation that Alberta or British Columbia or Ontario are 
going to need our graduates. And what we need to do is make 
sure that we are putting the appropriate resources in place so 
we’ve got capacity here for Saskatchewan students to be able to 
access Saskatchewan jobs. That’s the approach SIAST has been 
working on. I think it’s a very successful one, and it’s one that 
we’re happy to continue to support. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I would take great exception with the historical 
retention rates of some of the positions trained out of some of 
our institutions such as SIAST, for example nurses. And I 
would say that the minister’s comments, unfortunately in a 
global economy, fall short and to the detriment of us all. 
 
What I would like to ask the minister though, is if he could 
explain the funding formula for the two universities, the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan. What 
is the . . . could he explain please the ratio of how much money 
the provincial government allocates to each institution relative 
to their student body and possibly even broken down, if the 
capacity exists, for graduate versus postgraduate work. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The allocation model that we use was 
devised primarily by Harold McKay in his work some years 
ago, and it is not a simple one to explain. It’s not a simple ratio 
of 3:1 or something of that nature. Indeed what it takes a look at 
is the cost of operating the programs at the two universities 
here. 
 
In particular it takes a look at how we fund the high cost 
professional colleges that we see at the U of S and still make 
sure that we’re able to deal with the strategic needs that are 
identified within the liberal arts colleges, within the 
administration colleges or commerce colleges that deal with the 
education faculties, that we can still deal with that envelope as 
well. So it is a complicated formula. It takes a look at student 
population numbers. It takes a look at cost models and then 
provides for an allocation based on that. I don’t think that 
Harold’s report is secret. I suspect I can make it available to the 
member if he has an interest in it. But it is a fairly detailed 
formula that’s been worked out and that both universities have 
come to accept. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would just have 
follow-up to that. Perhaps the minister would be able to 
elaborate just on the faculties of Arts and Science at the two 
institutions broken down. Is there a basic ratio relative to tuition 
paid for an Arts and Science student? Would there be a peer 
ratio of how much the provincial government would then fund 
so that there is a total cost that the university . . . to the 
university for that . . . per student, on Arts and Science. And 
some of that would be offset by tuition and the other will be 
offset by operating grant. Perhaps the minister could answer 

that question for me. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The funding formulas do not take into 
account tuition at a certain percentage of the overall operating 
budget of an individual program or of the overall university 
budget. So we don’t have a case where we say, tuition will meet 
20 or 24 per cent or 30 per cent of the overall funding of the 
institution. That’s the decision the boards make. 
 
What we take a look at is, within the provincial money that’s 
available, how the allocation is divided up. The deputy reminds 
me that in fact it was not Harold MacKay’s work, but the 
DesRosiers report that actually sets the formula in place, and 
that’s what it takes to look at. The universities then decide 
within their own institutions what the tuition support should be. 
 
This is actually one of the debates that we get into around 
tuition policy. What should you tie tuition to? Should it be 
reflective of teaching costs? Should it be reflective of overall 
university budget cost? How do you put in a differential for 
professional colleges or high-cost colleges? And that’s very 
much a debate that I can assure the member is very much alive 
and well within the halls of the academy both in Saskatoon and 
here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I thank the minister for that explanation. 
The question that I would have to follow that, unfortunately 
with the lack of peer ratios, because the formula is somewhat 
complex, would the minister be able to explain how it works for 
students studying from overseas and their tuition costs relative 
to the costs for an individual Saskatchewan, Canadian, or 
landed immigrant student? And is there any subsidization 
coming then directly from that operating grant going to one of 
the two institutions for foreign students in this province today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The government funding formula 
doesn’t differentiate for foreign nationals studying here versus 
landed immigrants or Canadian citizens. We simply take a look 
at the overall student population count. However the 
universities themselves as they set their tuition fees, in many 
cases, will take a look at a differential fee for foreign students. 
 
It is not clear at this time as to how that debate will work itself 
out — whether they will move to a full cost recovery model or 
whether they will look at some other different option. Part of 
what they rely on foreign students to deal with are a lot of the 
research capacity. We see a large number of foreign students at 
the post-graduate levels and that, of course, helps drive the 
universities’ research agendas. So there is a trade off that the 
university administrations will make as they take a look at 
tuition cost and how they attract students in. 
 
I do know that both the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina have made it a priority to try and attract 
more international students into the institution and to do so 
from a broader spectrum of countries. 
 
There are a number of reasons for this, not the least of which is 
that it is good for our trade environment. As the member has 
pointed out, we do live in a global economy and part of what 
helps our province thrive is the fact the we have a good strong 
connection in with future leaders — academic, political or 
cultural leaders — within many different countries that we like 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

to then sell goods to. This has been one of the traditional 
strengths of, certainly, the University of Regina that’s had a 
25-year relationship I guess now, yes, 25-year relationship with 
the People’s Republic of China in terms of academic 
partnership. 
 
And so there are a number of different reasons why we would 
look, why the universities look to attract international students, 
and indeed as such, their tuition policies reflect a number of 
competing demands. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As the minister 
will recall from my first question, I asked if there was a 
difference in breakdown between graduate and post-graduate or 
undergraduate and graduate and post-graduate work. I do have 
some concerns that from the answers I’m hearing today, that 
there isn’t a breakdown directed by this provincial government 
for foreign students coming in as undergraduates. And it would 
be my understanding that possibly they’re not having to pay the 
entirety of their tuitions as those tuitions are set by the 
universities. So hence we have foreign students coming in 
essentially with a subsidy from the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
And I’d like the minister to elaborate on why such a situation 
should in fact be favourable and/or acceptable especially when, 
as students have pointed out — and I would take it not to 
differentiate between home grown or other — but that the 
demands for the youth in this province, Aboriginal youth, and 
access to facilities for financial reasons may be somewhat 
trying. And yet at the same time we may have foreign students 
coming in, essentially being educated on the backs of the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer, and you know without any known 
ability that they’re going to be retained here or not. 
 
Could the minister please comment on that? And I hope I’ve 
made my question sufficiently clear to him. And if I haven’t I’d 
be happy to repeat parts of it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I think I understand what the 
question is. I’m not completely sure what to derive from that as 
the Sask Party’s policy. Is the Sask Party then saying that our 
universities that have had many years worth of tradition in 
terms of providing not only high quality education to citizens in 
the developing world — which we believe is important — but 
also recognizing the benefit of having those connections with 
other countries in the developed world be they Korea, be they 
Japan or otherwise, that there’s not a benefit to Saskatchewan 
for that. 
 
Is the Sask Party suggesting that we shut out foreign students? 
Or are they suggesting that we only allow in the programs 
where there’s excess capacities? Or are they suggesting that we 
allow them but that they have to pay full cost? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I thank the minister. Unfortunately that 
wasn’t at all an answer to my question. But I will raise this — 
with other jurisdictions in the United States and Canada foreign 
students often do pay the entirety of the costs of tuition. And I 
think that the Saskatchewan taxpayer would be very interested 
to understand why their tax dollars may be going to subsidize 
foreign students at either the University of Regina or the 
University of Saskatchewan, which by your explanation today 
from the minister, is indeed happening. 

And I should suspect that if there were residents and 
constituents from the member’s riding in Regina South that 
were having a burden being able to do this, and there was a 
finite amount of resources available to our universities, that 
they would definitely raise some questions as to why the 
government would be entering into such policies. 
 
And I don’t think that the . . . You know, asking for the 
opposition’s policy is fine and what not, but as we are in 
estimates today asking for an answer from the minister on this 
of why the government has chosen this approach, and with that 
on a more technical basis, if the minister would be able to 
provide — and possibly not today — but table in this House, 
what that cost subsidy would be to foreign students studying in 
the two universities in this province. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I must admit I’m a bit perplexed by the 
member’s question. Earlier on in these estimates, he suggested 
we were living in a global economy, that we needed to be 
mindful we were living in a global economy, that we needed to 
make sure Saskatchewan’s place in that global economy was 
protected. 
 
Now it appears that he and his party have a list of countries that 
we are saying should not apply to come to our universities. I’d 
be interested in knowing what that list is and I’d be interested in 
knowing why we should not be supporting those international 
students coming to our institutions. 
 
For 25 years we have had a partnership with the People’s 
Republic of China to bring students here to assist in research, to 
assist them in development, and there’s been a very rich 
relationship develop between our two institutions and our two 
countries, I would argue, as a result of that academic 
relationship. 
 
That has, of course, helped us sell potash into China. It has 
helped us sell wheat into China. It has helped us deal with 
information technology exchange. It has helped us build 
scientific partnerships. I’d be interested in knowing what is the 
list of countries that the members opposite and the Sask Party 
would be saying should not apply to come to our universities. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you. Again the minister’s failed to 
answer this question. I would suggest, having gone to the 
University of Toronto which is, along with the University of 
Sydney in Australia, the two most multicultural universities in 
the world, this is an excellent thing for academics. It’s a great 
thing for academia. That is not the question here today. It would 
be wonderful if both of our universities were able to have 
students from every country in this . . . on the globe and in great 
numbers. 
 
The question is, should those students be coming here and being 
paid for and subsidized by the Government of Saskatchewan 
outside of possibly designated programs? I know at the 
University of Toronto there are development funds. There are 
development scholarships. These exist all across the country. 
Some of them are sponsored by our federal government. These 
are positive aspects. 
 



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2005 

The question that is being put forth to the minister today, which 
he has yet to answer . . . And very clearly let me state this, I 
wish that we had more foreign student enrolment. But with that 
being said, I would want to know the amount that they were 
paying up front for the totality of their education. And I think 
that it is the right of my constituents and yours, and the people 
of this province to know how much of their tax dollars are 
going through this ministry to fund foreign education for 
students when at the same time those resources are possibly not 
being used for homegrown Saskatchewan students that have 
lived here, paid into this . . . paid taxes in this country their 
entire life. 
 
So if the minister would be able to answer how much money is 
being paid to subsidize foreign students — and I was very 
specific before at the undergraduate level. I believe at the 
graduate level there may be some merit. Absolutely. But at the 
undergraduate level — I’m not saying that there’s no merit — 
but I would like the government to explain how much money is 
being put there for foreign students coming in, coming straight 
from the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ pocket. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to be very clear. We do not 
provide any specific support for foreign students to come into 
the universities, nor do we discriminate against them within our 
funding formula. We simply count them in as we would any 
other student. The previous member from the Sask Party who 
was asking me questions was asking, and made a very clear 
point, about institutional autonomy. If we respect institutional 
autonomy then we need to leave that question as to what the 
tuition policy is at the universities to the boards of governors. 
That’s what we’ve done in this case. The question as to what 
the tuition rate is, is largely set by the board of governors. 
 
I don’t know that I agree with the member who is suggesting 
that, well, maybe we can take foreign students but only at the 
postgraduate level. I would be very careful about how we are 
constructing this as we are looking at the fact that Canada and 
particularly Saskatchewan are trade dependent and need to 
make sure we continue to have access. I’m encouraged by the 
work that I see done at our universities, both the U of S and the 
University of Regina, that are encouraging more foreign 
students to come to support our research agenda here in this 
country. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Minister, but once again the 
question stands as this: I asked initially how the funding 
formulas were set, if there was any ratio relative to total student 
body numbers. And I was given the answer from the minister 
that there was a fairly complex formula for this. Universities are 
complex institutions — fair enough. I think the same question is 
still out there, is essentially this: is money going in from the 
provincial government’s coffers, is directly subsidizing foreign 
students to attain their education in Saskatchewan when they 
have not participated in the tax base? 
 
And if that is the case, how much money is that and what is the 
reason for it and will you be having discussions with the 
university around that policy? Because I think that is something 
that constituents of mine and the people of Saskatchewan would 
be interested in understanding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well this is a very dangerous, a 

dangerous assertion that the member opposite makes, that 
somehow that the people who participate in our education 
system should be directly taxpayers. I’d be very interested in 
knowing how that fits in with the Sask Party’s view about how 
we deal with First Nations education, and how we deal with 
those responsibilities that we have as a society. How is it that 
the Sask Party then constructs this argument that we should 
hang at our border a do not apply unless you bring a big cheque 
with you? How does that work with countries where we have a 
social responsibility? 
 
What would have happened if 100 years ago people had said 
that about the waves of immigration that came in that our 
families moved into this country with, and said they were not 
allowed to participate? The member opposite’s question, I 
think, doesn’t take a look at the reality of today’s economy, the 
importance of us having those connections. I worry that at best 
it’s xenophobic. And I would very much be interested in 
knowing exactly where the Sask Party stands on the question of 
foreign students. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, once 
again, I’d just remind him, this is the estimates. I’m asking for a 
financial number. I don’t think that that is something that 
should be denied to the people of Saskatchewan. It is simply a 
question. This has nothing to do with fearmongering and 
xenophobia. 
 
As I’ve stated before in this Chamber, I think it would be 
wonderful if we were able to have an economy that could 
support everyone — global — every university in the world 
sending scholars to Saskatchewan. What a great benefit that 
would be for us. However, the question before us is one of a 
financial matter which his ministry is directly responsible for. 
And it gets to the heart of just simply one question. How much 
money is being used directly to subsidize foreign students’ 
tuition fees at the University of Regina and the University of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well the universities have set in place 
a program where I am told that foreign students pay about two 
to two and a half times the tuition rate that Saskatchewan-based 
students would pay. The question as to how whether or not we 
should have a discriminatory policy built into our funding, we 
don’t. And so as a result of that I’m not in a position to be able 
to say today what the dollar value is. We simply take a look at 
the student numbers, irrespective of whether they’re from 
Ontario or they’re from Osaka, and take a look at that as an 
overall student number in terms of what we fund the university 
with. 
 
If the member opposite is continuing to suggest that I should 
discriminate against foreign students — be they out of province 
or out of country — then I’d be interested in knowing what that 
basis is that we should be using. Should it be a zero per cent 
recognition within the formula, 10 per cent recognition in the 
formula? Is a foreign student worth only as half as much as a 
Saskatchewan student? What is the Sask Party suggesting? 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I thank the minister, finally, for that partial 
answer. And it’s amazing that suddenly other students in 
Canada, by the minister’s words equated to me, would now be 
foreign. And as the minister is quite aware, there are agreements 



April 19, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

between provinces. And I would question the minister’s use of 
that particular word in this case. 
 
For students overseas, I think that it is a question that 
Saskatchewan taxpayers would like to have answered. And I 
don’t . . . it really raises the question of, is the minister ashamed 
of this policy, or of explaining this to the constituents of his 
riding or the people of Saskatchewan? Is this something that 
needs to be hidden? I mean certainly it seems that the minister 
has made arguments with the global economy, that this is 
something that has a net benefit. And if that’s the case, I 
shouldn’t see that such a line of questioning would provoke 
such anger. 
 
I would ask the minister now, having had this set of questions 
go forth, will this, will the amounts that foreign students pay, 
will that at all be put under review by this ministry? And will 
this be raised with the universities with regards to upcoming 
discussions with them, and about the way the grants are made to 
the universities in the future? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well let me be very clear about this. 
The NDP government is not about to start discriminating based 
on that. Now the Sask Party is suggesting very clearly, as they 
have here, that we should discriminate against those students 
that are coming in from out of the country. This is what they are 
suggesting, is that students that come in from China, students 
that come in from Korea, that provide clear benefit, should be 
discriminated against. 
 
The members opposite are asking if we’d like to come back 
tonight to debate this. I am clearly prepared to defend these 
estimates and to continue on with this debate because I am very 
interested in knowing where the opposition stands on this. 
 
Now the member opposite is asking, will we be changing our 
policy? The answer is we will not be changing our policy. We 
will not build into this, a discrimination factor into our funding 
formula. We’ll continue to stick with DesRosiers and with 
MacKay. And that’s an approach that the university supports. 
And I think that that is where we’re at. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would like thank my 
officials and thank the members opposite for a lively debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s very 
interesting to listen to the debate that’s been going on and the 
interpretation and the spin put on this by the minister. He 
clearly was refusing to answer a very simple question and yet 
he tries to describe that question as a matter of discrimination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, the only discrimination in this case 
is in the mind of that minister — that he could not and would 
not answer a question related to his department and how it 
provides its financing to the universities. He believes that to 
even question the financing that this government provides is to 
be discriminating against someone — anyone — that deals with 
his particular department, Mr. Speaker. And that is totally 
abhorrent. 
 

That is non-democratic, even though, even though his party 
claims to be the democratic party, Mr. Speaker — the New 
Democratic Party. Just to stand in your place in this Assembly 
as a member of this legislature elected by your constituents and 
to ask a question related to the estimates of the education 
department, to him is discrimination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that minister does not understand the role of 
estimates. He does not understand the role of a member of this 
legislature. His role, Mr. Chairman, as a minister is to justify 
the expenditures of his department before that money is 
supplied. Grievance before demand, Mr. Chairman, and that 
minister does not understand that. 
 
To ask a question in this Assembly, a question provided . . . 
according to the role of the official opposition, deserves a 
respectful answer. And in the time I sat here and listened to that 
minister respond, there was no respect in any of his answers. 
None whatsoever, Mr. Chairman. That minister has been 
arrogant, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, and totally disrespectful 
of the questions being asked. He can disagree with the question, 
but he needs to answer in a respectful manner and that minister 
was not doing so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before there can be supply, before the demand for 
monies can be met, there is grievance. And that grievance 
means the opposition and the people of Saskatchewan have a 
right to ask questions and get answers from that minister and his 
department, Mr. Speaker. And those answers were not being 
provided by that minister. 
 
[17:00] 
 
I think there is a need, Mr. Chairman, for a lot more questions 
and at least some answers from that minister before supply is 
provided to that minister. And I don’t believe that minister has 
any intention of supplying that, so I suspect that these questions 
will go on for a considerable period of time. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, that it’s after the hour of 
normal recess at this particular time. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Now that it’s past 5 o’clock and the 
chairman . . . I’m sorry. It now being past 5 o’clock the 
committee will stand recessed until 7 o’clock. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2559 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2559 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2559 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2559 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2559 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2559 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2560 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2560 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Private Bills 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2560 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2560 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2560 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2560 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2560 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2561 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2561 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Pope Benedict XVI 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2561 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2561 
 United Way of Regina Tribute Luncheon 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2562 
 Saskatchewan Party Leader’s Annual Dinner 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2562 
 Saskatoon Student Invited To Intel International Science and Engineering Fair 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2562 
 Wynyard Artist Awarded Trip to New York 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2563 
 Gary Tinker Awarded Centennial Medal 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2563 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Negotiations with Federal Government Regarding Equalization 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2563 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2563 
 Funding for New Contract with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2564 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
 Property Tax Increase in Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2565 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2565 
 Labour Legislation 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2566 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2566 
 Kyoto Accord 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2567 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2567 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 114 — The Education Amendment Act, 2005 
 Loi de 2005 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2568 
 Bill No. 115 — The Education Property Tax Credit Act 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2568 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2569 
RULING ON A POINT OF ORDER 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2569 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 Return No. 356............................................................................................................................................................................2569 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 102 — The Mandatory Testing and Disclosure (Bodily Substances) Act 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2570 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2570 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 59 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2004 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2571 
 Bill No. 86 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2004 (No. 2) 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2572 
 Bill No. 87 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2004 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2574 
 Bill No. 80 — The Education Amendment Act, 2004 
 Loi de 2004 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2576 
 Bill No. 91 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2005 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2578 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................2578 
 Bill No. 88 — The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act, 2004 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2578 
 Bill No. 94 — The Apiaries Act, 2005 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2580 
  Wartman (referral to committee) ..........................................................................................................................................2580 
 Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2580 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2582 
 Bill No. 101 — The Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act 
 Loi sur l’exécution des jugements étrangers 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2583 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................2583 
 Bill No. 103 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2583 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) ...........................................................................................................................................2583 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Learning — Vote 5 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2584 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2584 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2588 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2591 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


