
















































Hansard: November 09, 2005


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 3A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 43 
 November 9, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated 
yesterday, highways are a continuing problem in southwest 
Saskatchewan. I present a petition on behalf of constituents who 
drive the road 321 from the community of Liebenthal through 
Burstall to the Alberta border. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
321 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Burstall, Medicine Hat, Calgary, Didsbury, Fox 
Valley, Saskatoon, Mendham, and Leader. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have constituents 
who are also concerned about a highway in my constituency, 
Highway No. 310. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 310 in order to address safety concerns 
and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Foam 
Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Lintlaw, 
Dalmeny, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with citizens concerned about the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Fulda, Bruno, and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that residents on 
Highway 19 and the Outlook area in Saskatchewan are 
protected for reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Strongfield and Loreburn. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read a 
petition of people opposed to reduction of health care services 
in Wilkie. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read and 
received as sessional paper nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: for the year 
2005 and ’06, who are the members of the investment 
attraction council; how many times has the investment 
attraction council met; what groups, organizations, and/or 
companies has the investment attraction council met with; 
what is the budget for the investment attraction council; 
how much is being spent by the investment attraction 
council; and what are the results of the council’s works? 
 

And I have the same questions, Mr. Speaker, for the years 2004 
and ’05, 2003 and ’04, and 2002-03. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

Management: how many proposals did SPM receive by the 
May 31, 2005 deadline for the disposal of the Echo Valley 
Conference Centre, and who were the parties that 
submitted proposals? 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have a second question also to that same 
minister and the question reads as follows: 
 

Was the May 31, 2005 deadline for the receipt of 
proposals for the disposal of the Echo Valley Conference 
Centre extended to a later date? If so, what was the new 
deadline and how many proposals were received and from 
whom? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Assembly some individuals seated in the Speaker’s gallery 
— seated up there, looking good. 
 
These individuals have something to do with the north central 
employment enhancement program. I’ll say a few words about 
the program, Mr. Speaker, and then introduce the guests. It’s an 
outreach of the inner city community partnership which is, of 
course, a partnership between the federal, provincial, and 
municipal governments working to take on the challenges in our 
inner city. 
 
This particular program itself is a real partnership between the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment, Human 
Resources and Skills Development Canada, the city of Regina, 
the city police, North Central Community Association that is 
the sponsor for the program, and the North Central Family 
Centre. There’s a great number of groups that are involved in 
this endeavour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But part of their work has been to go out to different places of 
employment, see what they think, get a chance to size up the 
jobs. And so it happens today that we had opportunity to have 
lunch with the Premier, with the Minister for Northern Affairs, 
with the Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation, and of 
course with myself. And without any further ado, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce them, and if they could stand and give us a 
wave when I do so. 
 
Needing little introduction is Forest Pelletier. Anyway Forest is 
quite the rapper, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got Carol Burns. We’ve 
got Evan Kinequon, Janice Kinequon, Richard Lafromboise, 
Tony Longman. I’ll introduce him again, Forest Pelletier. One 
more time. There’s his encore. Okay. Stacy Sparvier, Cory 
Williams — oh he’s left the building — anyway, Richard 
Kahnapace. 
 
And of course we’ve got people that . . . this being the 
partnership that it is, we’ve got different people here. We’ve got 
Corporal Ray Van Dusen from the Regina city police. We’ve 
got — let me see here — we’ve got Clayton Episkenew who is 
one of the coordinators for the program. We’ve got Cecilia — 
still around here? No, she’s out. Thanks very much. I’m just 

going to flip over here. We’ve got Christina Phipps from the 
Department of Community Resources and Employment. And 
from the fine constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, the 
untiring, hard-working Colleen Smith who works in the office 
of the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
These young people are making a big difference in north 
central, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a real pleasure to see them here in 
their Assembly. And I just want to say congratulations for the 
work you’re doing. Keep up that good work and keep building 
that confidence and success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to welcome to our Assembly today on behalf of all 
members, His Excellency, William Fisher, the High 
Commissioner of Australia to Canada who has just joined us in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The High Commissioner is visiting our province over these 
period of days. He has spent some time in Saskatoon — I 
understand has toured the University of Saskatchewan, met with 
officials there, has met with folks from Cameco, and I 
understand had a tour of the Canadian Light Source 
synchrotron. 
 
While in Regina he will be meeting with the president of the 
university here. He will be meeting with yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
or has met with yourself, will be touring the building, and later 
this afternoon meeting with myself, the Leader of the 
Opposition, and I think the Minister of Health. 
 
I want to, on behalf of all members and the people of 
Saskatchewan, welcome the High Commissioner of Australia to 
our province, to the nation, and wish him very well during his 
time in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, it’s a pleasure to join with the Premier in welcoming 
His Excellency to the Legislative Assembly today. We also 
want to join with the Premier in wishing His Excellency an 
excellent visit to our province. I too have noted his itinerary and 
I think it’s a good one. The relationship between the countries, 
our two countries, but also this province and Australia are key, 
especially in particular with respect to agriculture. So on behalf 
of the official opposition we want to welcome him here to the 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, the member for Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to welcome the 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

young people that are visiting us here today. And my colleague 
here forgot to mention Jeremy LaRose — so if he could wave to 
us — and thank you for coming to visit us. You’re role models 
like I told you earlier. You’re taking a leadership role. And, Mr. 
Speaker, hopefully that as part of this journey that they’re 
taking, that they’re going to end up in the House as well, in 
these chairs. So I want to welcome them as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It always gives me 
great pleasure to introduce individuals from the constituency of 
Cypress Hills who make the journey to Regina. It’s a fairly long 
distance as you know, having travelled that way yourself a few 
times. 
 
But in this case we have individuals representing several 
different RMs [rural municipality] as reeves and councillors and 
an administrator as well. So, Mr. Speaker, to you and through 
you to the rest of the House, I’d like to introduce the following 
individuals: Mr. Ken Dietz from the RM of Clinworth; Dwight 
Holstein and Doug Smith from the RM of Deer Forks; Larry 
Bischoff and Tim Geiger from the RM of Happyland. And I 
have to comment. I don’t know where the name came from but 
given the nature of these guys, it might have had something to 
do with them or their predecessors. And Tim Lozinsky who’s 
more recently the administrator of both Happyland and Deer 
Forks. And welcome, gentlemen, to your House today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Centennial Medal Recipient 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday night in 
Swift Current I had the privilege of presenting a Centennial 
Medal on behalf of the Lieutenant Governor. The recipient was 
not someone who enjoys fame in her province. She is not the 
president of a local service club. She is not involved with some 
very worthy community-based organization, the many that do 
amazing things in Saskatchewan. She is a recovering drug 
addict. She is Kelly Merriman. She is the daughter of my friend 
and my colleague, the hon. member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
And while she must deal daily with her drug addiction, Mr. 
Speaker — most recently to crystal meth — she has the 
unspeakable courage to speak out to students, teachers, parents, 
and anyone who will listen about the dangers of drugs, to fight 
for the lives of others even as she continues to fight for her 
own. She will have travelled with her dad to 14 schools across 
the province to take this message, by the end of the month. 
 
Last night in Swift Current her and her dad spoke to parents. 
Yesterday afternoon and earlier this morning they spoke with 
students from my constituency, and by yesterday evening 

already two students — children of my constituents — had 
come to Kelly to ask for her help with addictions. Would they 
have the courage to come forward had she not had the courage 
herself to go out and speak in Swift Current? I don’t know. I 
don’t know that they would have. 
 
But that is the reason that she should be honoured and has been 
honoured by a grateful province. That Centennial Medal was 
made for Kelly Merriman. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Sunday I attended a special awards ceremony 
sponsored by the Saskatchewan provincial council of the 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress to help celebrate Saskatchewan’s 
centennial. This year, Mr. Speaker, in addition to their annual 
Nation Builders Awards, the council added the Community 
Recognition Award to honour individuals from the Ukrainian 
community who exemplify the Saskatchewan spirit we’ve been 
celebrating this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jennie Ortynsky, Stefan Franko, and Ehor 
William Gauk received the Nation Builders Awards while Mike 
Boychuk and Anastasia Zuck were recognized nation builders 
posthumously. 
 
Patrice Detz received a Community Recognition Award for 
leadership and cultural preservation and development, Shawna 
Lee Kozun for cultural preservation and development, while 
Yaroslaw Sywanyk was recognized for his volunteer activities. 
And for youth achievement, Mr. Speaker, the recipients were 
Stacey Nahachewsky and Theresa Sokyrka. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these award recipients and in thanking the members of 
Saskatchewan’s Ukrainian community for their ongoing 
contributions to our province. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Health Care Services 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Monday in the Throne Speech there is a 
reference to Saskatchewan being the model jurisdiction for 
health care that delivers modern services. I couldn’t disagree 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

more with the characterization that Saskatchewan is the model 
jurisdiction across Canada. I think, Mr. Speaker, most of 
Saskatchewan residents would agree with me. 
 
We receive countless letter, emails, faxes, and phone calls, 
hearing from people that cannot access the services they need in 
this province. And I know the members opposite receive many 
of those letters as well because they’re cc’d to us. Those letters 
talk about people who have had to uproot their families to get 
health care in other provinces, families with children with 
special needs such as autism that have had to go out of province 
to receive care. 
 
A number of months ago an elderly gentleman came to this 
building to do a news conference to inform people that he had 
to go to Toronto to receive a hip surgery replacement that 
would have taken over two years here in Saskatchewan. It took 
less than two weeks when he went to Ontario. 
 
People are waiting months in some cases for much needed 
cancer care. Does that sound like a model jurisdiction of health 
care in Canada? I don’t believe it is. Perhaps 50 years ago 
Saskatchewan could hold its head high and say it was the model 
of health care in this nation. But we’re a long ways from that 
under this NDP [New Democratic Party] government. It’s time 
for this government to quit giving itself platitudes and pats on 
the back and start dealing with the reality of the longest health 
care wait lists in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Art and Annie Haase Celebrate 70th Wedding Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a 
typical November day when Art and Annie Haase arrived at the 
post office in Cold Lake, Alberta to purchase their wedding 
licence. However at the counter the postmaster informed them 
that he had sold his last licence the previous day. 
 
Unable to be married in Pierceland, Art and Annie had to travel 
30 kilometres across the provincial border to Cold Lake — by 
horse, I should say — to Cold Lake to be married. But having 
travelled as far as they had and being as determined as they 
were, they made arrangements to have a licence shipped from 
Edmonton to Cold Lake for the following day. Of course this 
meant trying to make arrangements to spend the night at Cold 
Lake, which has apparently made a number of interesting 
family stories. 
 
Art and Annie Haase were married November 7, 1935 in Cold 
Lake, Alberta and on Monday of this past week this amazing 
couple celebrated their 70th wedding anniversary. 
 
Art with his wife Annie at his side managed the Beacon Hill 
community pasture from 1960 until 1979. There are still many 
who talk about what a great job they did. 
 
They farmed together in Pierceland for close to 70 years and 
raised three boys. 
 

Art and Annie now have numerous grandchildren, many 
great-grandchildren, and now have a great-great-grandchild. 
This past year they moved off the farm and now reside in 
Goodsoil. And Art is still going strong. At 92 years of age he 
bought a brand new van last week. He says he plans on using it 
for at least 10 years before trading it in. 
 
I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating Art and Annie 
Haase and to extend our warmest and best wishes to them on 
the occasion of their 70th wedding anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Addictions Strategy 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
urged this government for more than a year to tackle the 
growing problem of crystal meth and addictions in our 
province. This spring the NDP finally admitted there was an 
addictions crisis in our province. Unfortunately the Premier’s 
Project Hope appears to be more about winning elections than 
solving the problems facing families today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Project Hope does nothing for families in need of 
help for addictions today. Not a single additional youth 
treatment bed will be created until 2007. Instead this NDP 
government has decided that hiring additional political staff and 
promoting NDP backbenchers was a higher priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has the worst crime rate in 
Canada. Police officers will tell you that addictions are the 
major cause of crime, and yet instead of using their new-found 
money to fulfill their promise to hire more police officers and 
create more addictions beds, this government chooses to create 
more political jobs for themselves. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are looking for leadership from 
their government. Instead this NDP government chooses to 
benefit themselves. On behalf of the families in crisis and the 
victims of crime, the Saskatchewan Party and I call on this 
government to do the right thing and deal with addictions in our 
province immediately. The NDP have the money. They should 
care enough to act now before more young people die. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Community Planning Day 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year throughout 
Canada and in 30 countries across the world, November 8 is set 
aside to promote the awareness and involvement of elected 
officials and the public in community and regional land use 
planning, and to highlight the valuable contributions that sound 
community and regional planning make to our quality of life 
and to our environment. 
 
This year for the first time the day was designated as 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

Community Planning Day in Saskatchewan and coincided with 
the annual conference of the Association of Professional 
Community Planners of Saskatchewan, an organization that has 
represented professional planners in the province for 40 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, setting aside a day to highlight community 
planning provides support to the valuable work that 
professional community planners do in building our 
communities. Highlighting the profession of community 
planners also reinforces the contribution that they make to land 
use planning and multi-jurisdictional planning projects in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the Association of Professional Community 
Planners of Saskatchewan on their 40th anniversary and in 
recognizing the values highlighted on Community Planning 
Day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Saskatchewan Aviation Hall of Fame Awards 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past weekend the Saskatchewan Aviation 
Council convention was held in Moose Jaw. At this event 
individuals who have contributed to the aviation industry in 
Saskatchewan were honoured. Dick Ryan, John Howe and Bob 
McCombie were the recipients of the Saskatchewan Aviation 
Hall of Fame Award which honours pioneers who built the 
aviation industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Steve Burchi received the David Eckmire Industry Service 
Award. This award is presented in recognition of an individual 
within the aviation support industry who exemplifies the pursuit 
of excellence in service to others. 
 
In 2005, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan centennial year, the 
Saskatchewan Aviation Council initiated a new award titled the 
Distinguished Airman Award. This award recognizes those past 
and present heroes who form the backbone of the aviation 
industry in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to 
announce that Doug Ingram along with our friend and 
colleague, the member from Wood River, were the recipients of 
this prestigious award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating the member from Wood River and the other 
individuals who have been singled out by their peers for their 
exemplary service to the aviation industry within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Equalization 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, by now 
most people in the province of Saskatchewan know that the 
Premier is hopping mad about equalization. The Premier has 
admitted that his policy of quiet diplomacy has failed, has failed 
the people of Saskatchewan on the important issue of 
equalization. 
 
Being angry is fine. But what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is what 
is done with that anger and with that resolve. Mr. Speaker, will 
the Premier share with members of this Assembly and the 
people of the province what he has in mind? What are his plans 
to make Saskatchewan’s case to a federal Liberal government 
that clearly does not care about the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what this government and I 
will do over the next coming days and weeks is to engage the 
people of Saskatchewan, to report to the people of 
Saskatchewan and engage the people of Saskatchewan so that’s 
it’s not a government that’s voicing this opinion — it is a 
province and a people. And we welcome and have appreciated 
the support that we have received from the opposition. 
 
Over the next several days, Mr. Speaker, we will use tools 
available to us to acquaint the province of Saskatchewan with 
the current circumstance and engage their support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past February the 
Premier and well a number of political leaders in the province 
of Saskatchewan gathered together in this building. Members of 
parliament, the Premier, there was ministers there. The 
opposition was there. There were senators there. The Premier 
wanted a united front on this issue, and the Premier got his 
united front. There was a commitment there made by all of the 
people involved to do what was necessary. 
 
And you know, since that date, Mr. Speaker, the first call, the 
first call that we received on this particular issue on 
equalization didn’t happen until yesterday, until yesterday, 
moments before the Premier’s press conference when the thing 
had flown apart. 
 
Additionally today, the Member for Parliament for 
Regina-Lumsden-Lake Centre said that no one in the 
Conservative caucus, the opposition members of the House of 
Commons, has been contacted. He says we all showed up for 
the photo op, and then the united front was forgotten, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This Premier asked for a united front. He got a united front, and 
then he did nothing with that united front. Short of a temper 
tantrum, what’s he going to do now, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I take it from the Leader of 
the Opposition’s comments right now that the only time his 
federal members will do anything is when I phone them and ask 
them to do something. What have they been doing in Ottawa, 
Mr. Speaker, representing the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Yesterday, yesterday the Leader of the Opposition suggested 
the thing that we should ought to do, what we should ought to 
do is send him, him and myself and some others, I guess, to 
Ottawa immediately, as if going to Ottawa was going to solve 
this problem. Mr. Speaker, then he raises Danny Williams as a 
role model on how to get things done in the country. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the Leader of the 
Opposition that Premier Williams and Premier Hamm of Nova 
Scotia left Ottawa and got it done in Newfoundland and Nova 
Scotia, and that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, people 
in this Assembly knew about the case that Newfoundland was 
making. They heard here loud and clear from the Premier of 
Newfoundland. 
 
I wonder if the people of Newfoundland know even who the 
name of the Premier of Saskatchewan is, Mr. Speaker. They do 
not know because this Premier has left it to officials and to 
quiet diplomacy, and he has failed. He asked for a united front 
from political people in this province. He got that united front, 
and he did nothing with it. He left it to officials. Well now we 
know the result. The result is that this Premier has failed to get 
a deal for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We would like to know what tactics he has in mind, what plans 
he has to make the case, Mr. Speaker, so that the people of 
Newfoundland know our case as we did of theirs only a few 
short months ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asked by the people of 
Saskatchewan, what has the Leader of the Opposition been 
doing on this file? What have we heard from the Leader of the 
Opposition? Does he require my leadership? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if he weren’t so busy trying to forward his 
own political agenda as opposed to the agenda of the people of 
Saskatchewan, if the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party — the 
Saskatchewan Conservative Party — was more interested in the 
future of the province as opposed to his own political future, he 
would be working with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to engage the people of 

Saskatchewan. We are going to engage them in this discussion 
and this debate. And it will be the voice of Saskatchewan 
people, not the voice of a Leader of the Opposition or not solely 
the voice of a Premier. It will be the voice of Saskatchewan 
people that will influence the national government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier wants to know 
what the official opposition is going to do about the need for 
strong leadership in the province of Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you 
what we’re going to do about that, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
win the next election, and then we won’t have that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the Opposition has already 
done, has already done — notwithstanding the fact that the 
government didn’t inform us of this until yesterday — we’ve 
already contacted the opposition parties. We’ve asked them 
what issue they’re going to make of this in the House of 
Commons. We’ve already started to work. What has this 
Premier done? That’s the question that the people of the 
province have. What has this Premier done already in the three 
days since he found out? And what has he got planned in the 
future to fight for Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, since we engaged in this 
goal of reaching for the people of Saskatchewan an energy 
accord that will be equitable and fair with those energy accords 
that have been signed with Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, 
since we began, we have attended to the Senate. We have 
attended to the House of Commons. I’ve spent days in Ottawa, 
Mr. Speaker. I have visited every national media outlet. I have 
spoken to the Empire Club of Toronto. Yesterday I was on 
national television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to engage the people of 
Saskatchewan, as they have not been previously engaged, in 
fighting this battle with us, Mr. Speaker, because it is for the 
benefit of the future of the children of Saskatchewan that we 
lobby and fight this fight. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say in reference to the Leader 
of the Opposition’s opening comment. I tell you, if the people 
of Saskatchewan have to wait for him or his party to be in 
government, it’s way too long to wait for an energy deal for the 
people . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Relief for the Education Portion of Property Tax 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

have a quote. 
 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that a tax 
revolt is brewing in this province? People are being taxed 
to death and they’re saying, we can’t take [it] any more. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take credit for that statement but I can’t. 
It came from the Premier, the current Premier. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, nothing has changed. There is a tax revolt in the 
province right now. Nineteen rural municipalities are not going 
to submit their portion of taxes. And what does this government 
expect when the ratepayers pay the highest education portion of 
property tax in the country? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about being mad at Ottawa. Well 
the people of this province are mad at him and they’re here 
today. To the Premier of high property taxes: why does he force 
people to revolt? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had 
the good fortune to attend the meeting of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities this morning. The reception 
I got from the members of the association as well as the 
executive was a very positive one — one that was directing 
government to take some action with regards to education 
property tax relief. 
 
I had the opportunity to speak for 45 minutes, in addition to 
questions, in which I laid out the plan of the government with 
regards to education property tax, Mr. Speaker, and that 
commitment was to continue the work that we’re doing as laid 
out in the Throne Speech and to provide long-term, sustainable 
education property tax relief to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the new premier for the answer. And I understand his 
answering of questions wasn’t all that long this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier also said a portion of any new 
equalization money would go to property tax relief. Based on 
his announcement yesterday, the grand total people in 
Saskatchewan will see is zero. No equalization deal, no relief 
— nothing but failure from this Premier and this government. 
 
To the Premier: why has he failed the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
hon. member opposite does have a very short memory. The 
government committed at a time, in consultation with 
representatives from the urban and rural municipalities, to 

commit any new monies received from equalization to 
education property tax relief. Thirty per cent of the money that 
the Premier received after his very first launch of the fight on 
this issue, 30 per cent of that money has gone, Mr. Speaker, to 
education property tax relief, $110 million, two years — 8 per 
cent per year for two years, $55 million per year. This is an 
interim step towards long-term, sustainable property tax relief. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest my memory is better than the 
Premier’s if you refer back to the quote I just gave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are revolting. RMs are going broke 
because this government won’t fund them. What we see this 
NDP government giving is a band-aid solution to the education 
portion of property tax. It’s like putting a Band-Aid on a gaping 
wound. Since this government cut the education grant, property 
tax went up in some cases as high as 84 per cent. How can this 
be, Mr. Speaker? And are the people expected to live with these 
massive increases? Again to the Premier of high property taxes, 
will he commit to real property tax relief today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
assuming that the member opposite joins me and the executive 
of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
in not condoning acts that are in contravention of the laws of 
Saskatchewan. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I hope the 
member opposite understood the speech that I made this 
morning in which I did commit to long-term, sustainable 
property tax relief in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Responsibilities and Pay for Government 
Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sixty years 
and counting seems pretty long term to me, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to quote from an opposition member from a few years ago, 
and I quote: 
 

Now by my count . . . there is only one member of the 
government benches . . . who doesn’t receive extra pay for 
some cabinet or Legislative Secretary responsibility . . . 
[You] Know what that means, Mr. Speaker . . . not only [is 
it] a question of extra salaries . . . it’s extra offices in this 
building, it’s extra staff, it’s extra cars, [it’s] extra airplane 
trips. 

 
And you know who said that, Mr. Speaker? It was the Premier, 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale in April 1990. 
 
Now when I look down the list of NDP MLAs, Mr. Speaker, 
guess what. There’s only one member not receiving extra pay, 
Mr. Speaker. Why is the Premier doing exactly the same thing 
the previous government was doing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I appreciate the fact . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Everybody will have their turn. 
The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I appreciate the fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition members are spending so much time reading my 
very good speeches. And I recommend many of my speeches to 
them, and I think they’ll find lots of good and useful 
information there. 
 
It’s interesting that the member from Cannington wants to talk 
about the 1980s when his party was in government here. We do 
have memories of the 1980s when we had a cabinet over here 
that I think was 25 or 26 members at that time, when of course 
everyone else had certain privileges, and when we recognize 
some of those privileges were abused, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the same time when that group of men and women were in 
these government benches, they nearly bankrupt the province, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re still today paying hundreds of millions of 
dollars, one hundreds of millions of dollars in payments on the 
debt that these people rang up when they were in government. 
The people of Saskatchewan at the end of that decade say we 
want through with those people, and they don’t want them back 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed we 
have been looking at the minister . . . the Premier’s old speeches 
and wondering why he hasn’t kept his word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was obviously a big issue for him because he 
spoke on it again in April 1991, and I quote: 
 

Perhaps he’d admit it’s a mistake that every member of the 
government benches, with the exception of one, is either a 
cabinet minister . . . an associate minister, a chair of 
committees, or a Legislative Secretary, earning extra 
money. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was in 1991 that the Premier said it was a 
mistake. And yet he’s doing exactly the same thing. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, every NDP MLA, with the exception of one, is earning 
extra salary. Will the Premier admit today that’s a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the test, the test of a 
government is in the progress of its people and its province. The 
test of a government is setting forth vision as we have in this 
Throne Speech, setting forth goals and setting forth key 
commitments and initiatives to achieve those goals and visions. 
And, Mr. Speaker, every member, every member of this caucus 
is engaged in building toward the vision of a Saskatchewan 
where there’s opportunity for all, where we’re building diverse 
communities, and where we are doing it in a green . . . and 
growing in a prosperous economy. That’s the work of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do not apologize for the work of this government. We will 
continue to do that work, Mr. Speaker. And we would 
encourage members of the opposition to come out of the ’80s 
because all the time that they’re talking about the ’80s, they’re 
only reminding the people of Saskatchewan who they are, 
where they come from, and where we do not want ever to go 
again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately 
there’s even less people in Saskatchewan today than there was 
in 1991, but the Premier’s Throne Speech is saying, no one left 
behind. Well, Mr. Speaker, it should have said, no NDP MLA 
left behind. Mr. Speaker, this really speaks to the culture of 
entitlement that is incipient in the NDP. 
 
When the NDP was in opposition they were against government 
advertising, government travel, against political patronage, 
against extra pay for government MLAs. But now they’re in 
government; it’s okay as long as it’s NDP advertising, NDP 
travel, NDP patronage, and NDP MLAs getting extra pay. Mr. 
Speaker, this Premier has become exactly that which he 
criticized, Mr. Speaker. Why is the Premier betraying his own 
words? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, all the provisions and extra 
responsibilities that exist in this House, and many of them are 
held by members of the opposition, and there are appropriate, 
appropriate rewards for those positions, Mr. Speaker. As that 
member should know from Cannington, these are established by 
the Board of Internal Economy of which he and other members 
have been a significant part. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I say the test of a government, the test of a 
government is how you manage the affairs of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And when that test is applied to this government 
and our government of the ’90s as opposed to their government 
— which the Leader of the Opposition of today was much a 
part of — when the test is put by the people of Saskatchewan in 
how have we managed the affairs, they failed that party, they 
failed that group of men and women. And they have rewarded 
this party and this government with successive election 
victories, and we expect to see that continue well into the 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Treatment Beds for People with Addictions 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the Throne Speech 
talked about no one being left behind. And one thing is very 
clear, this government is doing its very best to make sure that 
no NDP MLAs are left behind all right, but we’re all aware of 
the ever-expanding NDP cabinet. And one of those positions is 
going to the member from Sutherland to create an addictions 
ministry. Meanwhile people with addictions are being left 
behind. 
 
This government today has new money for a minister. They 
have new money for salaries for new political staff. They have 
money for the printing of new stationary, but we don’t have any 
money for a new treatment bed until 2007. Will this Premier, 
the very man who locked the doors of White Spruce, explain 
why he’s chosen to spend at least half a million dollars a year 
on a new ministry instead of ensuring people with addictions 
have quicker access to treatment beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been my great privilege to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan in the past nine months as Legislative Secretary 
on addictions. I’ve been able to tour the province and meet with 
parents, meet with those that are struggling with addictions, 
meet with teachers, meet with police — all of those individuals. 
And we learned that we have a very good base of addictions 
services, a lot of great people doing very good work. 
 
However we did learn that there is areas of improvement, and 
that’s why the Premier released his plan in August with the 60 
per cent increase on a $25 million base providing $15 million 
more money per year over the next three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition yesterday criticized this 
government for winning an award from the Canadian Centre on 
Substance Abuse. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just about winning 
awards. It’s about helping people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier, the man that we are 
talking about, is the same man that closed White Spruce and is 
the same man that abolished SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol 
and Drug Abuse Commission]. And it’s the same man that said 
on March 27, 1990: 

. . . if the government was sincere and wanting to assist 
Saskatchewan households, the Premier of this province 
would tomorrow fire four or five . . . cabinet ministers, 
[and] take that money and put it into a school lunch 
program [or perhaps treatment beds for young people] . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan families and the people don’t 
want is another cabinet minister while all this Premier can offer 
is hope, and what we really need is action. We don’t need 
another minister. We don’t need more staff. What we need is 
some treatment beds. 
 
Why should the people of Saskatchewan believe this Premier 
that he has any commitment to addictions when he’s more 
interested in expanding his cabinet than helping people with 
addictions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has on many 
occasions, as have I over this past nine months, commended 
some of the members of the opposition for their very good work 
on highlighting the issue of crystal meth. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
this is an issue where the good opposition has raised an issue, 
and as good government we have responded. I think . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is an 
issue that is showing that this democratic process can work. Mr. 
Speaker, there is a long list of initiatives that we’ve announced 
on August 4. We’ve actually implemented many of them 
already. I can go over the list if the member wants to and we’re 
well ahead of schedule on all of the other issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an additional $15 million each and every 
year over the next three years. That’s a 60 per cent increase in 
the budget. Mr. Speaker. The Throne Speech said that every 
child will have the best possible chance of growing up free from 
addiction. I’m proud to be part of a government that’s going to 
fulfill that promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, yes the opposition has raised the 
issue, but you know what? We have to wait for the government 
to actually deal with the issue. And they haven’t dealt with the 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said in 1987, he may ask this 
question: 
 

Have they done anything to cut funding to their own 
political staff? Have they cut anything from their 
self-serving advertising budgets? Have they cut from their 
lavish personal expenditures? And have they cut from trips 
on government aircraft? 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

And what have we seen today in Saskatchewan? Larger cabinet, 
more political staff, a 30 per cent increase in advertising, a 30 
per cent increase in cabinet minister travel expenses, and a 
brand new airport. But you know what? We still have no new 
treatment beds. Can the Premier explain why any of these lavish 
expenditures ranks higher than treatment beds for people with 
addictions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s Project Hope 
that was announced on August 4 covers a number of initiatives 
and areas. One of them is prevention and treatment. We’ve 
already hired and established a prevention and education 
directorate and those individuals will be supporting not only the 
addiction workers in all of the regional health authorities but 
also will be a resource to parents. 
 
Which reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of the first thing that this 
government did on this issue around project hope was 
enhancing HealthLine. In my consultations with parents what I 
heard was a gut-wrenching fear that they don’t know where to 
go to turn for help. And HealthLine has already helped over 300 
individuals since it’s been established. And that is, Mr. Speaker, 
we know that for every one individual that is having a problem 
with addictions there’s nine or ten individuals that are suffering 
from that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on prevention and education, supply, 
reduction, and treatment, we’ve already established a number of 
initiatives and we’re moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t need a cabinet portfolio. 
You don’t need political staff or a cabinet car to get some things 
done. The Member for Kelvington has proved that. The 
Member for Weyburn-Big Muddy’s proved that. And last night 
in Swift Current, my colleague, the Member for Saskatoon 
Northwest and his daughter Kelly proved that. 
 
In Swift Current, they were making presentations to students 
and parents about the deadliness of meth and addiction. And 
after their presentation, two students came up to them and told 
them that they had an addictions problem and that they needed 
some help. They asked for some help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what it’s all about. You don’t need a 
cabinet portfolio or political staff or a cabinet car to get things 
done. You need leadership that has a will to get things done. 
 
And at the top of the list, Mr. Speaker, you need beds because 
what if those two young people in Swift Current were they to 
need treatment for their addiction? It’s not available in NDP 
Saskatchewan. We need beds not politics. When will the 
Premier deliver on that? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not sure if the member knows that within the 
Premier’s Project Hope is a tripling of the treatment beds for 
stabilization and for longer treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re working with the regional health authorities. 
We’re working with communities. We’re working with First 
Nations. And, Mr. Speaker, I can say based on the agenda that 
we’ve talked about that we’re well ahead of schedule for 
providing that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, treatment beds, we already have almost . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. The minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, we 
have over 250 beds within the province of Saskatchewan. To 
say that there’s nothing being done is far from the truth, but we 
know that we can make improvements. We are making these 
improvements, and we’re well ahead of schedule for making 
these improvements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for the 
Crown Management Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order, order. The Chair . . . 
Order. 
 
Members, we’re on agenda item of ministerial statements. The 
Chair recognizes once again the Minister for Crown 
Management Board. 
 

Entrepreneurial Foundation and Fund Established 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce 
today that government has joined with the private sector to 
establish the Entrepreneurial Foundation of Saskatchewan and 
the Saskatchewan Entrepreneurial Fund. 
 
Two years ago the Premier made a commitment to establish a 
foundation and a venture capital fund that would promote 
entrepreneurship and provide assistance for small- and 
medium-sized businesses for start-ups and expansions. We have 
met that commitment today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The growth and development of the small-business sector is 
extremely important to our economy. We need to ensure that 
that sector thrives. We need to start by building our 
entrepreneurial base, especially among our young people, our 
rural people, northern, First Nations, and Métis people, as well 
as co-operatives. 
 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

The Entrepreneurial Foundation of Saskatchewan will provide 
business advice, mentoring, and support services for new and 
existing entrepreneurs. The goal will be to help them develop 
investment-ready business plans. And these business plans will 
then be eligible for investments from the Saskatchewan 
Entrepreneurial Fund. The fund will provide financing of up to 
$1 million for each of these approved proposals. Our research 
shows that there is a funding gap for projects that require less 
than $1 million in equity, so we hope that the fund will fill the 
need. 
 
CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] will 
provide up to $25 million for the fund over the next five years, 
as well as the $1.8 million operating grant for the foundation. 
 
SaskCentral, on behalf of Saskatchewan’s credit unions, will 
also invest $25 million in the fund, as will Prairie Financial 
Management, which will be the fund manager. 
 
Both the foundation and the fund will actively seek other 
partners, including financial institutions and private sector 
companies. We believe it’s extremely important for them to 
become involved and we certainly welcome their participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the foundation will be guided by a nine-member 
board of directors from the public and private sector. And these 
successful and very experienced advisers and business people 
will help promote the foundation and build its membership. The 
foundation’s first CEO [chief executive officer] is himself a 
successful entrepreneur. Ben Voss is a professional engineer 
from Saskatoon, and he will be a role model for other young 
people who will want to follow in his footsteps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had an exciting announcement this morning in 
Saskatoon with over 200 people in attendance and many, many, 
many young people and First Nations and Métis people, along 
with northerners and rural Saskatchewan people and 
co-operators. This is an exciting day for the business 
community in our province and we are extremely confident that 
the Entrepreneurial Foundation of Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan Entrepreneurial Fund will be met with pleasure 
by the business community and will be of great success in our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, the 
official opposition believes strongly in the need to develop a 
vibrant private sector in order to create the jobs we need to keep 
our young people in Saskatchewan. The efforts in this area so 
far have been a dismal failure. We’ve had SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], Channel 
Lake, Navigata. The list goes on and on. What we need is an 
economic renewal in this province driven by the private sector. 
We’ve tried it one way — the other way — for 60 years and it’s 
not working. It’s time to try something new. 
 
Today we commend the credit unions and Prairie Financial 
Management for their involvement and expertise in this project. 
But this project, however helpful, is no substitute for a policy 

framework that encourages Saskatchewan people and people 
from outside the province to come to Saskatchewan and invest 
their own money in the province. To attract that kind of 
large-scale investment we need to get our fundamentals right. 
We can’t have high corporate taxes, we can’t have a corporate 
capital tax, we can’t have the highest property taxes in the 
country, and we must have a competitive labour environment. 
These, among others, are avenues that have not been explored 
in the last six decades in our province. The product of this lack 
of imagination can be seen today — job losses, people leaving 
the province, and less and less oil and gas drilling starts every 
year. 
 
Taxpayers’ dollars should not be used as a substitute for private 
sector investment that has been scared away by oppressive 
taxation and a failure in other areas to get the fundamentals for 
investment right. A Saskatchewan Party government would be 
opposed to investing public money in mature industries. We 
believe in entrepreneurial education, not gambling taxpayers’ 
dollars as risk capital. This does not preclude investment 
partnerships with the private sector in non-mature industries 
that involve the commercialization of innovation and research 
and development. We in the Saskatchewan Party believe 
strongly that this is the appropriate role for government in the 
economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Introduction of Page 
 
The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? Before 
orders of the day, members of the . . . Order please. Before 
orders of the day, members, I wish to inform the Assembly that 
Glenna Coleman will be returning as a Page for the fall session. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 
orders of the day I’d request leave to move a motion of 
substitution on a committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has requested leave to 
make a motion with respect to substitution on committees. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government Whip, member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution on Committees 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 
Assembly I would move: 
 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

That the name of Len Taylor be substituted for the name 
of Harry Van Mulligen on the House Services Committee. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Dewdney, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the name of Len Taylor be substituted for the name 
of Harry Van Mulligen on the House Services Committee. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the Opposition 
House Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I would like to move a motion of 
substitution as well, or several. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

That the name of Mike Chisholm be substituted for the 
name of Ken Krawetz on the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Humboldt. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I put that motion I just want to revert 
back to the last motion. The member for Saskatoon Nutana was 
not present so I would ask that this motion by the member for 
Regina Dewdney be seconded by an alternate member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Could I just repeat that first motion one more 
time so that we can have it properly on the record. 
 
It has been moved by the member for Regina Dewdney and 
seconded by the member for Regina Nutana, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the name of Len Taylor be substituted for the name 
of Harry Van Mulligen on the House Services Committee. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Now we’ll proceed to the motion moved by the member for 
Melfort, seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Mike Chisholm be substituted for the 
name of Ken Krawetz on the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Doreen Eagles be substituted for the 
name of Donna Harpauer on the Standing Committee on 
House Services. 

 
The Speaker: — The motion that has been moved by the 
member for Melfort, seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Doreen Eagles be substituted for the 
name of Donna Harpauer on the Standing Committee on 
House Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Allan Kerpan and Ken Krawetz be 
substituted for the names of Lyle Stewart and Wayne 
Elhard on the Standing Committee on Privileges. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Allan Kerpan and Ken Krawetz be 
substituted for the names of Lyle Stewart and Wayne 
Elhard on the Standing Committee on Privileges. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And finally I’d 
like to move, seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Donna Harpauer and Jason Dearborn be 
substituted for the names of Allan Kerpan and Doreen 
Eagles on the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the names of Donna Harpauer and Jason Dearborn be 
substituted for the names of Allan Kerpan and Doreen 
Eagles on the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

Agencies. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the Government 
House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I request to move a 
motion respecting changes to membership in a committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the name of Doreen Hamilton be substituted for the 
name of Graham Addley on the Private Bills Committee. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords, seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the name of Doreen Hamilton be substituted for the 
name of Graham Addley on the Private Bills Committee. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, I request to move 
a motion respecting changes to the regular sitting hours of the 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
on Thursday, November 17, 2005 the times for daily 
meeting and adjournment shall be 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. And 
when the Assembly adjourns at 1 p.m. it shall stand 
adjourned until Monday, November 21, 2005 at 1:30 p.m. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 
Battlefords, seconded by the member for Melfort: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
on Thursday, November 17, 2005 the times for the daily 
meeting and adjournment shall be 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. And 
when the Assembly adjourns at 1 p.m. it shall stand 
adjourned until Monday, November 21, the year 2005, at 
1:30 p.m. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont, the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s my intent today to speak against the amendment to 
the Speech to the Throne — along with substantive reasons why 
I take this position — and in favour of the Speech to the Throne 
with particular emphasis on the unbreakable social fabric. And 
I’ll contrast in my remarks the approach of our government 
with the proposed intent and quotes of the members opposite in 
approaching social policy in our province. That is after all what 
government is all about. It’s the policies that shape our society, 
the allocation of resources, and envision the desired outcomes 
for the people we serve. 
 
I’ll spend a little bit of time on the necessity for elected people 
to serve as role models for the democratic process and the 
progress of a civil society. And further, I’ll spend some time on 
some new initiatives announced in the Throne Speech reflecting 
on how these would’ve been less effective under policies of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I wish to speak briefly about the role of the federal government 
in the policy areas for which I am responsible, and about a 
small, rural town that’s building their future around caring and 
the work that we can do together if we focus our efforts. 
 
But first I want to welcome you back into the Chair, Mr. 
Speaker, and thank you for your service in the legislature, as 
well to welcome the member from Regina Wascana Plains to 
the role of Deputy Speaker. It’s a good day for women. I’ve 
watched that member chair many committees over the years, 
and I’m sure that she’ll do an excellent job in keeping the 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

process of our workplace, along with yourself. 
 
This was a great year for me in Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker. 
I awarded medals to my centenarians, one of whom, at the age 
of 100, is still curling and dancing and is still considered quite a 
catch. I also had the huge pleasure of awarding Centennial 
Medals to 25 deserving members of the community. And it was 
very rewarding to see the very basic people who work on 
community associations — Neighbourhood Watch, war 
memorials, services to persons with intellectual disabilities — 
and to see all the very ordinary ways in which we serve our 
communities on a daily basis, but having people noted for the 
work they do to make it a great place for families and children. 
So I just want to thank all the constituents of Regina Rosemont 
for the privilege in representing them. 
 
It is a modest area of the city, made up largely of working 
families trying to make ends meet and volunteering to make the 
community safe and enjoyable. I attended several centennial 
events in churches and schools in our area and enjoyed a real 
sense of celebrating who we are and why people have chosen to 
stake their claim to the province of Saskatchewan. And there’s 
no question, Mr. Speaker, a lot of it has to do with the people. 
 
I want to preface my remarks a bit about the conduct of the 
House today. You know, whenever I’m out in the community, I 
love this job. When I talk to my officials and people in the 
bureaucracy and we discuss the most effective way to serve 
people, I love this job, Mr. Speaker. When I sit through a 
question period and some of the remarks we heard in opposition 
speeches, Mr. Speaker, I hate this job. I don’t want to hate this 
job. And I don’t wish to join the thousands becoming cynical 
about the political process and our national treasure of 
democracy. 
 
But there is a phrase that many of you here may be familiar 
with and that’s, we reap what we sow. And when we so 
disrespect lack of concern about facts, poor behaviour toward 
one another, we sow the seeds of the demise of democracy. 
How am I to encourage a young and hopeful person to strive to 
enter this place, to be treated worse than anyone has ever treated 
them, and only because they seek to serve their community at 
the very height of our democratic process? 
 
I got to thinking about the excellent choir from North Battleford 
that, at the Throne Speech, sang “Children of Peace.” And I 
thought, well you know, we see a lot on TV about the children 
of war. But what do we really think about the children of peace? 
What is the huge peace dividend that should accrue to our 
children? What is the legacy that we will provide to our 
children from this place in our role as legislators to secure their 
future? What is our role as elected representatives to 
demonstrate the kind of behaviour we expect from them and the 
kind of respect we expect should be shown every living person? 
How do we teach our children to react to bullies and people 
who call them names, if not by example? 
 
I’m starting to sound like a grandmother, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
wish to imply . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You are. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That we should . . . Oh, keep reminding 

me. I do not wish to imply that we should not disagree, not by a 
long shot. We disagree on a daily basis and we should dig for 
the best answers, the best solutions, and the best questions we 
can ask ourselves. 
 
But I’m concerned when the first line of questioning in written 
questions when the House opened is a line of questioning that 
puts into question the trustworthiness of every public servant 
and every Crown agency and department. What else could be 
construed by those questions? 
 
I’m concerned when, in their enthusiasm to make points, the 
opposition makes unconfirmed mention of questionable actions 
by employees of government and casts aspersions on northern 
people who may have placed a stronger emphasis on being 
members of a community than crossing the finish line first. 
Would a person desert their friends and neighbours on a field of 
battle so they could be first? I certainly hope this is not the 
model we’re presenting to our children. 
 
I was speaking earlier today to a woman in the police service in 
Saskatchewan and we were discussing why dangerous drugs are 
such a widespread problem. It used to be associated more with 
an underworld or gangs. But we know that today it has a good 
middle-class and upper-class foothold. And why is this, Mr. 
Speaker? I’m sure you ask, I’m sure many people ask 
themselves that question. Is it because there aren’t enough 
government programs? Is it because parents have no time? Is it 
because someone didn’t do their job when help was sought? Is 
it because children don’t have enough good role models? 
 
Well it’s likely all of these things and more. But let’s be sure 
that in this place we’re not part of the problem. Let’s do our 
best to show the importance of respect, the need for thoughtful 
discussion, and the need for challenging each other to do better. 
And let’s show our young people what an energetic democracy 
can deliver for them. 
 
These are the children of peace. And let there be a real benefit. 
You know, one of the things that’s so great about small towns 
. . . I’ve been out lately doing some opening of group homes 
and it’s the way that they pull themselves together and wrap 
themselves around the residents. They have different religions, 
usually several churches in the same small town, different 
economic conditions and abilities. 
 
And the other day I was out in Ituna with the local MLA from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood and they were opening more 
independent apartments for people with learning disabilities. 
And as you can imagine, the tenants were just thrilled to be 
moving into a brand new apartment without their parents, 
without a live-in caregiver, but the most interesting part is the 
story of this town that’s decided that their strength is their 
economic future. And so they’ve decided that caring will be a 
major role for their community, and they’re building a number 
of facilities and trying to create a community that will wrap 
around people who choose to live there in a very caring way . . . 
and people who have special needs. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And I thought about how wonderful that is for vulnerable 
people to know they can be part of a community so they won’t 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

have to worry about being beat up when they walk down the 
street. A place where someone looks at what they can do and 
not what they can’t do. 
 
I was at the Association for Community Living conference 
recently, their 50th anniversary conference. And there was a 
story about a young man served by one of the community 
agencies in BC [British Columbia]. There were people there 
from right across Canada. And this young man carried around 
with him a file in which many of the people who had worked 
with him had outlined all the things he wasn’t capable of doing. 
 
The fellow in the abilities council who worked with him 
discovered that he had a love of horses. So they went and 
appealed to a fellow who ran a ranch in the Fraser Valley, and 
they took the young man on to help work with the horses. And 
today there’s a very happy, self-fulfilled young man who’s part 
of the community and looks happiest beside a horse. But he 
looked pretty good in his Santa Claus outfit at the school 
Christmas party as well. 
 
So we need to look not just at what people can’t do but what 
they can do. And I think in urban centres, as well, we can, if we 
work together in the right way, create the kind of wraparound in 
the community that still exists in many rural Saskatchewan 
communities today. And when each person does their job — the 
parent, the teacher, the police, government, business, and the 
young person — I think we’ll find, Mr. Speaker, that it all 
comes together. 
 
So I want to particularly comment on some aspects of the 
Throne Speech and the unbreakable safety net or the 
unbreakable community that we build around people. I want to 
talk first of all about our energy program. Certainly the 
feedback that I got from people, that this was a very thoughtful 
and well-constructed program. And I want to contrast it to the 
proposal that the members opposite put forward. Because that is 
where you really test the ability to govern and the quality of the 
idea and program you can put forward. 
 
Now for a basic household, our subsidy was $50 higher — 
that’s neither here nor there; that’s a small part — in 
Lloydminster it was $32 more per household. But the important 
part of this was the part of the program targeted at vulnerable 
people. 
 
The Sask Party program did not provide any supplementary 
assistance for lower-, moderate-income households above the 
basic amount, which was a little less than the amount that we 
announced. And I would like to say that I was very pleased for 
the people on social assistance; the transitional employment 
allowance; training allowances; and Saskatchewan seniors, 
some 8,600 in number who received an extra $20 a month over 
the life of the program; as well as the basic benefit that was 
available to other households. Again that was something that 
was not a feature of the opposition’s proposal. 
 
The other thing that was not mentioned other than a tax credit 
for energy conservation was that the program, as designed by 
the opposition, would have only benefited people who could 
afford the upfront money to make capital changes to their 
residences. 
 

And we’ve built on the federal EnerGuide program and in fact 
have created a program where people who are low-income and 
middle-income are able to get those renovations done, and as 
well people who have houses that are from 1980 to 1990 
because the EnerGuide program only covers houses built before 
1980. 
 
So this is really a more comprehensive program, and I think for 
vulnerable people in Saskatchewan today, they’re quite happy 
that we were the government that had the opportunity to 
construct this program for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I think it illustrates, Mr. Speaker, 
the fundamental concept of no person left behind. 
 
Now I just want to go to the Sask Party program and policy in 
the areas that I work on, the safety net programs, that was on 
their website . And I’ll pick out two highlights because most of 
it was so general, you couldn’t really tell what it would or 
wouldn’t do. 
 
But one tenet of the program was to require employable welfare 
recipients to work in order to qualify for welfare benefits. And 
we do have a program that supports people in moving into 
employment, but it’s not draconian in the way that that is. And 
I’ll explain a little bit more. 
 
Their goal was to reduce the number of employable people by 
25 per cent. Since we’ve instituted our program of supporting 
people as they move into independence, we’ve reduced the 
number by 41 per cent and have had 10 consecutive years of 
reducing the number of people on social assistance in the 
province. That’s 10 years, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t just think of 
this yesterday, and it isn’t something we’re just planning to do. 
It’s something we’ve already done. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we work on removing the welfare wall 
and helping people with the transition. We provide supports to 
help families move into work, even at minimum wage, without 
making less working than they would make if they were on 
assistance. And we have 7,800 families today who have taken 
advantage of that, with 16,000 children in those families. They 
receive, Mr. Speaker, supplementary health benefits; housing 
supplements; a market housing cost adjustment; the 
employment supplement program for wages; the increased child 
care subsidies in Regina; and we’re working in Saskatoon on a 
transportation, affordable transportation program; as well as an 
improved disability allowance and improved retention of 
earnings; and a substantially increased opportunity to own 
housing around the province in the North, in the South and in 
rural areas. 
 
We’ve made a substantial effort through the RICs [regional 
intersectoral committee] and other community bodies to 
integrate services. And now there’s committees that the 
government is involved in working in Regina, Saskatoon, 
Yorkton, Nipawin — all around this province — to integrate the 
services to create a wraparound for the families we talk about. 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s possible for people to see that this 
a much more substantial approach than just tying welfare to 
looking for work which is pretty thin policy when you get right 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

down to it. 
 
The other part is that they’ve talked about directing a portion of 
the social assistance to food. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 
how you tie a dollar to a carrot unless you give people food 
stamps. And I have to assume that that’s what that means. 
 
The approach we’ve taken in Building Independence is to try to 
give people an adequate lump sum which we compare to 
adequacy standards in Canada, and they make their choices 
about how to spend that money. We’re not paternalistically 
making their decisions for them. However if people need help, 
certainly help is there for them. But the idea is to give people an 
income that they can manage, and certainly people that we talk 
to are very appreciative of that approach. 
 
Under our transitional employment allowance we do give 
people $20 a month additional pre-employment money. We 
support the cost of relocation to a job, a $140 job start 
allowance when they do find that job. And we don’t just require 
them to work. We give them that support to live adequately 
even when they’re moving into what usually in a starting 
position will be a lower income job. But certainly with training 
and supports the idea is to keep moving up as . . . or trading up 
as they call it today on a lot of popular shows. 
 
Now after-tax poverty in Saskatchewan has reduced from 17.4 
per cent to under 12 per today, which means we still have work 
to do. And I don’t shy away from that when I meet with all the 
community groups and people who support this segment of our 
community. I show them the numbers. I show them the charts 
and say here’s where we are; here’s where we’re trying to go. 
And we have that very well laid out in terms of adding 
additional resources to make sure that people are at the 
adequacy level in Saskatchewan. 
 
And because I mention after-tax income, I want to contrast the 
Sask Party’s proposal for changes to tax rates to what we did 
when we removed 50,000 people from the tax rolls, lowered the 
tax bracket, and as well created a spousal deduction. 
 
Now the end result of the Sask Party’s proposal would be a 3 
per cent increase in the taxation rate for low-income 
individuals, taking it up to 13 per cent. And as well it doesn’t 
have the feature of the spousal exemption which is the feature 
that helps single income families end up being more on a par 
with families with incomes. 
 
I had asked specifically for detail on this because I was sure we 
had a pretty good tax package there for low-income people, and 
I’m very proud of the work done by our Department of Finance 
in making that happen under the tax changes that took place. 
 
So I think I’ve made my point. The Sask Party is working hard 
at presenting a caring image, but the facts just don’t support it. 
Whether it’s employment, energy cost or taxation, there is no 
plan, and the plan there is would leave people worse off than 
they are today. There is no additional support for low-income 
employed families, no additional support for energy costs, and 
an increase in the effective taxation rate without a spousal 
exemption. And don’t forget the food stamps. 
 
So as our Premier has indicated and as we have affirmed in the 

Throne Speech, no one is left behind by intent in our 
government, and we’re making steady progress on our plan. 
And unlike the party opposite, we always build the vulnerable 
into our program planning. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about CBO [community-based 
organization] wages because we have been working with SARC 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres]. We 
helped to fund the study they did on wage levels, and we will be 
making announcement together with them next week. 
 
We are very happy with the work that’s happened because it’s 
dealt with recruitment, retention issues, classification systems 
within their workplace. And I know when I spoke to them about 
it on Throne Speech day and indicated that it was very good 
work that they had done, they reminded me that we’ve been 
partners in this process and that they have greatly enjoyed 
working with us. And they look forward to a long and close 
working relationship far into the future. And it will be very 
rewarding to stand with them at that news conference and make 
this announcement, Mr. Speaker. We see it as a shared success. 
And having travelled across the province, I’ve seen first-hand 
the important work they do. 
 
In early learning and care, Mr. Speaker, which is another 
important announcement in the Speech to the Throne, I want to 
take us back to the work of Fraser Mustard who is a medical 
doctor who talks about the actual effects on children’s brain 
development of early learning experiences and love. Those are 
the two important components. I have to tell you that even 
puppies who aren’t touched behave very badly. And so it’s 
important that children have not only the love they need, but the 
early learning experiences. 
 
And one of the things that Fraser Mustard has found out 
through his research is that it actually affects the way your 
synapses develop in your brain and the pathways that connect 
the thought processes. So it’s tied to literacy. It’s tied to health. 
It’s tied to economic outcomes. There’s been a lot of 
longitudinal studies in Canada, the United States that show the 
impact of early childhood programs on good outcomes for 
children of all economic backgrounds. 
 
And these programs can be delivered by parents, by caregivers 
in homes, in daycare centres, in preschools, in pre-Ks 
[pre-kindergarten], in schools. There’s a whole variety of ways 
that children get this. That isn’t what matters. What matters is 
that they get it and that they get the attention they need. 
 
So we are, with the assistance of money provided through 
Minister Dryden’s auspices — and I think he wishes it could 
have been more, but we figure it’s better to get a good start on 
this — we are going to move to a comprehensive system of 
supporting children and families to have those good early 
childhood supports that are so important. And we’ll be working 
closely to do that. 
 
The Saskatchewan blueprint for early learning and child care 
will be announced within the next few weeks, and the plan has a 
major child care component. It is based on discussions with 
many stakeholders, including the child care sector and parents. 
We’ve listened to parents, early learning and child care 
educators, board members of child care centres. And many of 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

their recommendations are part of the new plan. 
 
We do value the contributions that they’ve made towards the 
development of our plan and look forward to working with our 
partners in creating a system of early learning and child care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s very exciting, Mr. Speaker, because the reality of today is 
that most people work, or they’re going to school. And we 
certainly don’t want to be neglectful of the important role of 
care in the children who are otherwise occupied as their parents 
are doing these other things. 
 
A detailed announcement will be made. Research has 
documented, as I mentioned, that children will benefit from this 
access. And quality in child care is largely dependent on the 
people who work with the children — on their salaries, on their 
training levels — and on the programs that are offered. So the 
program that we announce will have all of those components. 
 
The Throne Speech references expanding accessible child care 
throughout the province, access linked to things like 
affordability and availability. 
 
I was very pleased when I heard at the Community Living 
conference that we are the only province in Canada that, as a 
priority, has no waiting lists for disabled children. And I 
thought that was just — I didn’t even know that — I thought it 
was great to hear that. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But one of the things that’s so important is that you want 
children to have optimum development. And children who have 
perhaps started behind their peers need that extra enrichment to 
really do everything they can. And again parents and relatives 
and everyone are involved in that. The QUAD [quality, 
universal inclusiveness, accessibility, and development] 
principles speak to the areas that will be directing our 
investment — quality, universally inclusive, accessible, and 
developmental. And you’ll hear more on that as we move into 
our announcements. 
 
All in all we’re determined to develop and lift all components 
of early learning and child care to create the base for a 
comprehensive system across Saskatchewan. The newspaper 
mentioned that 25 million of the 146 million in federal funds 
will be spent on pre-kindergarten. And this means a significant 
portion of the funds are being spent on child care and other 
related initiatives. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve taken more than my share of the 
time, but I just want to mention a couple of other things in the 
Throne Speech that stood out for me in my background. I spent 
the summer touring both the west side and the east side of the 
North of the province. And certainly the road issue and housing 
issues were two things we talked about, and I’ve got . . . The 
department has worked on and presented to me a plan for even 
further enhancements in already what’s a pretty strong home 
ownership program in the North. But you’ve heard the 
announcements on the northern road strategy. 
 
With immigration, people said, well what’s new about that? 

Well I think going from 500 new immigrants to 5,000 is quite a 
big change. And this will require good strong support systems 
for people who are not perhaps having English as their first 
language and as well need their credentials verified and 
assistance in moving into the Saskatchewan community. 
 
The Premier’s volunteer sector initiative again emphasizes the 
importance we place on the work done by the community sector 
and the kind of work that they can do that they do so much 
better than anyone else because people enter into those jobs 
because they care. And you can’t really mandate caring. We 
know that when people go work in those community 
organizations, they’re there because they care. And I mentioned 
that we’ve got an announcement with SARC, but we will follow 
quickly upon the heels of that announcement with an 
announcement on the work in child care and early learning 
CBOs as well as other human service CBOs, who will receive 
the same attention that they did. 
 
The midwifery support. While having a pregnant relative at the 
moment who totally intends to use the services of a midwife, 
you can imagine how glad I was to know that we’re moving 
ahead with that because that makes me popular around the 
family. And I didn’t influence in any way the minister in 
moving forward. I don’t want to be accused of any conflict of 
interest here in helping this happen. But certainly I’ve thought 
that midwifery was very important from the time that I was a 
young woman and expecting my first child. 
 
Missing persons. Certainly people feel that that’s a very 
important initiative that’s taking place. The children’s hospital I 
know will be a comfort to a lot of parents. The Aboriginal 
court. These are just some of the things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just want to finish by reading a couple of the headlines: 
Speech from the Throne a “Bolder vision.” “Imaginative 
Throne Speech.” They highlighted the immigration, the missing 
persons. And there seems to be one person at least that writes 
for the StarPhoenix who might be related to the member for 
Wood River over there. He says, “ . . . we could have hoped for 
a throne speech with more than an assurance that, for better or 
worse, we are all in this together.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are all in this together. And whether it’s 
Aboriginal employment and the private sector having to step to 
the plate and hire Aboriginal people; whether it’s parents and 
police and government working together to make sure that kids 
have the good direction; whether it’s legislators behaving 
responsibly to set a good example and get things done for the 
young people of the province, I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
enjoyed presenting this information on an unbreakable social 
fabric and I respectfully submit the facts as I found them. I 
speak energetically against the amendment and enthusiastically 
in support of the Speech to the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I guess 
I’m pleased to be able to stand and reply to the Speech from the 
Throne. I’ve heard a number in this particular House of 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

government. I had the opportunity to listen to throne speeches 
in a former political life from a different type of government. 
 
But before I talk about the things that I see or I didn’t see in the 
Throne Speech, I want to respond a little bit to the member for 
Rosemont, Regina Rosemont who just finished speaking. She 
prefaced her remarks, Mr. Speaker, by dressing down the 
official opposition for having the gall, having the gall to look 
into what is our job — to hold the government accountable. Mr. 
Speaker, the reason we ask those written questions, the reason 
we ask the oral questions, the reason we are questioning some 
of the things that the government do, is because frankly their 
record sucks. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s our job. That’s our duty. 
 
And I think that if you would go back to when the government 
was on this side of the House, I think if you . . . In fact we did 
today go through some old Hansards, and they’re asking 
similar type questions for the government of the day that we’re 
asking them of the government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a book that’s known by I 
think everybody in this Chamber — perhaps some more than 
others. It’s from the Bible, Madam Speaker. And the quote goes 
as follows, and it says: “Let he who is without sin cast the first 
stone.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m appalled. I am shocked that that member from 
Rosemont has the audacity to stand in her place today and dress 
down the official opposition for doing our job. I’m appalled at 
the high-handed approach, the sanctimonious way that she 
stood in her place and questioned why we would ask questions 
about the government or hold them accountable or that we 
would say something as a comment in question period, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Madam Speaker. I apologize. 
 
I say to you, who makes the rules for this Chamber? Those of 
us who work in this Chamber. And if we all agree as a group 
. . . And frankly I agree with her that I sometimes don’t like the 
way the actions of this Chamber take place and some of the 
things that are said. My wife is a teacher. She’s brought her 
classes here many, many times. And every time they go home, 
they’re disappointed with the behaviour of MLAs in this 
Chamber. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, I would say to you, does this only go 
one way? Is it only the opposition of this day, of this legislature, 
who is responsible for saying things across during question 
period or at any other time? I say not. I say this goes both ways, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, I don’t know, to be frank, where the heck she 
gets off standing in her place complaining about the official 
opposition. Madam Speaker, this is the very same member who 
last spring had to apologize to the Chair and apologize to this 
House for calling the member from Saltcoats a dumb . . . 
four-letter word, expletive deleted. Is she not the same one? 
And she has the gall to stand in her place today and dress down 
the opposition? Let he who is without sin cast the first stone. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to . . . I’m not sure whether this is your 
first opportunity to sit in the Chair or not, but obviously we’re 
looking forward to having you as the Deputy Speaker. And I 
will do my best to try to keep my comments appropriate 

certainly while you’re in the Chair and when the Speaker’s in 
the Chair. And welcome. 
 
I want to talk about the Throne Speech, Madam Speaker. I want 
to talk about the Throne Speech. And I have heard, and many of 
us have been here for a couple or more throne speeches, and 
I’ve heard more, as I said, in a different House of government. 
And I want to talk about what throne speeches are all about. In 
my opinion throne speeches are about a vision. They are about a 
plan for the future by any particular government. In this case it 
happens to be a socialist government. But truly, Madam 
Speaker, throne speeches are merely just words. And words 
without actions are ineffective, Madam Speaker, they’re 
ineffective. 
 
Now to start my remarks, I want . . . If you came into this 
legislature two days ago and you didn’t have any background 
about Saskatchewan, and if you didn’t know the people 
involved or the parties involved or anything like that, you could 
come into this . . . If you would have listened to the Lieutenant 
Governor read the Throne Speech in her most eloquent way, 
you would think that in a centennial year for Saskatchewan we 
are celebrating our 100th anniversary in the middle of an oil 
boom, and the nice words that were in the speech — and again, 
Madam Speaker, I say they were words and that’s what they 
were is merely words — you would, if you were a stranger and 
didn’t know, you might think, wow, what a great place to live. 
What a great place to be. And you’d be right. Except as you will 
see, Madam Speaker, I want to outline in my remarks today 
some of the things that I see are missing. 
 
The member from Rosemont finished her speech by reading 
some headlines from news items. I’ll read one too, Madam 
Speaker. And it says, “Big reality gaps in throne speech.” So 
that’s another headline that came from a major newspaper that 
she failed to read, and perhaps she missed it by accident so I 
wanted to make sure that it got on the record. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, the Throne Speech is all about that 
vision. It’s all about credibility. It’s about leadership. It’s about 
confidence in this particular government and in the province. 
But when I heard, when I listened to the Throne Speech, it 
brought to me as many questions as it did answers — in fact 
more questions than answers. And let me talk briefly about a 
few of them. 
 
The first one that came to my mind was the idea of 
immigration. And, Madam Speaker, there would be no one in 
this Chamber or in this province who would not agree that we 
need more people here — that we are slightly under 1 million 
people — and we could argue for days about whose fault that is. 
The fact remains we need more people. And that’s . . . 
 
Madam Speaker, the questions that arise from something that 
talks about increased immigration is that it’s a great idea but 
what are we going to do with these fine people that come here? 
We know that we’re down 6,000 jobs over the last year. I mean 
what are we going to do with these . . . what kind of jobs, what 
kind of hope, what kind of life do they have? And I watched 
these 15 new citizens to Canada become Canadian citizens two 
days ago now I guess, and those things come to my mind. What 
do they do for jobs? Where are their livelihoods? What’s their 
future here? When you have a record of losing 6,000 jobs in the 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

last 12 months in the middle of an oil boom in a centennial year 
where this should be the very best of times, that’s what I’m 
talking about — credibility and leadership. 
 
Madam Speaker, another item that was in the Throne Speech 
the other day was planting trees. Well, Madam Speaker, who 
could argue that having more trees is not a good thing in 
Saskatchewan? Who could argue with the ecological benefits 
and maybe even the economic benefits at some point in time? 
 
But, Madam Speaker, we’re talking about 50 million acres of 
arable farm land right now and the government’s plan is to 
transform 10 per cent of that land — plant 10 per cent of that 
number into trees. That’d be roughly about 5 million acres. 
 
Well then the questions start to come. Who’s going to decide 
what is going to be marginal land? Who’s going to decide that? 
Will there be some kind of compensation for taking arable farm 
land out of production and planting it to trees? What’s the 
long-term plan for those trees? We know that it takes 60 to 80 
years to turn a tree around so that it can be harvested. Is that the 
idea? Will these trees, forests, be planted for harvest at some 
point in time? And how do we compensate the people, the 
farmers, the landowners for an 80-year wait for a tree? I’m not 
sure. There’s just too many questions that they have failed to 
even address. 
 
Madam Speaker, another highlight — and it should be a 
highlight — from the Throne Speech was the development of 
highways. Most of us have all travelled that stretch of highway 
between Saskatoon and Prince Albert and again none would 
argue, none would argue, Madam Speaker, that there needs to 
be a huge development and improvement on the No. 11 
Highway. The idea of twinning that particular section of No. 11 
Highway is a great idea. Can’t argue with it. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Have we decided how much it’s going to cost? How are we 
going to earmark funds, taxpayers’ money, to build that? When 
is it going to be built? Who’s going to be in charge of being the 
person who oversees this type of project to make sure that it 
happens and happens within budget? Again questions that were 
failed to answer. Did they say, yes well we’ll twin number 11; 
it’s going to be done by X amount of time? No they didn’t. My 
question is, how many times will they announce this particular 
project before we ever see any concrete action? Sixty years, my 
colleague says, because that’s when they announced . . . When 
was that? That was property tax reduction that was announced 
60 years ago by Tommy Douglas. It still hasn’t happened. 
 
When you talk about highways, my colleague from Humboldt 
yesterday raised a petition in the House about No. 5 Highway. 
Many of us again have travelled that section of highway from 
Saskatoon to Humboldt. Madam Speaker, it’s a very, very busy 
highway with no shoulders — absolutely no shoulders. It’s a 
dangerous, dangerous, hilly stretch of highway that absolutely 
needs some sort of attention very, very quickly. And those are 
all things that I didn’t hear mentioned in the Throne Speech 
yesterday. 
 
I want to talk about one more section of highway, Madam 
Speaker, and it’s a section that I think probably belongs to the 

member from Arm River-Watrous . And it’s a section of No. 15 
Highway that starts at Semans, Saskatchewan and runs west. 
And I think it’s about, I think it’s 18 or 20 kilometres — I’m 
not exactly sure what the distance is — but it’s about Highway 
15. Well, Madam Speaker, here’s how I want to bring that 
particular section of highway up. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North this spring — he’s also the 
member who was responsible for Saskatchewan’s centennial — 
he was in the House one day, and I was here and I heard him 
say it. I don’t know the date exactly. He said that 
Saskatchewan’s highways will be full of people returning to the 
province. And you know what, Madam Speaker? He was right. 
We had a great summer. People came from all over. The 
highways were full of people returning and travelling to 
Saskatchewan. It was a really, really good situation. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, nobody returned on this section of No. 15 
Highway because, you know what? It’s closed. And you know 
what, Madam Speaker? It’s been closed for two years. Two 
years Highway 15, a section of Highway 15, has been closed. 
Now I’m not going to stand here and say that that’s the most 
busiest highway in Saskatchewan. It’s not. It’s not No. 1 or it’s 
not No. 11 or it’s not No. 5 or 16. But you know what? It’s a 
busy highway because I live on No. 15, and I know how much 
east-west traffic goes on that highway. 
 
But there’s a section between Semans, and it runs about 20 
kilometres west. It’s been closed for two years. Now when you 
drive, when you go on No. 15 Highway, in order to get around 
it, you have to take a nice scenic tour throughout the RM that 
surrounds Semans. And you know what? The roads, the RM 
roads are actually really good, and I have no complaints there. 
They’re well. They’re hard. They’re wide. And so wasn’t a big 
issue to travel on them. But my point being is that’s the kind of 
leadership, that’s the kind of vision that we see from this 
government. We’ve got a highway, a major highway, that’s 
been closed for two years. Unbelievable, unbelievable. 
 
Madam Speaker, also in the Throne Speech the government 
talked about doubling the output of manufactured goods. Again 
those are good words. Those are good words, and nobody on 
this side would argue with that. You know, you could argue that 
maybe it can’t happen in 20 years or maybe it could happen 
faster. That’s not the issue. The issue is the words were good. 
The words were good. But the questions that come out of those 
words, nobody has taken the time to answer them. How are they 
going to do it? Who are they going to do it to? 
 
I understand, I believe it’s Doepker Industries, and I stand 
corrected on that, but who have been a leader in Saskatchewan 
in manufacturing. They are expanding and that’s a great, 
wonderful thing, Madam Speaker. But do you know where 
they’re expanding? British Columbia. 
 
So my question then is, how are we going to double the 
manufactured goods in this province when some of the leaders 
in manufacturing in Saskatchewan choose to expand outside of 
the province? Those are the kinds of questions that lack the 
answers — the leadership, the vision for the province. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I said at the outset, you know, that if 
you listen to this Throne Speech and you just listen to the 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

words, one might think that everything was well in hand and 
under control in this province. But just like the letter versus the 
spirit of the law — and we’ve all heard that term used a number 
of times — there are of course the words versus the spirit of the 
Throne Speech. Not the words but the actions of this 
government, not the words but the actions that really, I believe, 
tell the tale and are the indicator of what kind of leadership we 
do have in the province. Let me outline just a couple of those 
that have happened very recently that are of great concern to 
me. 
 
Just yesterday, just yesterday the member for Melville-Saltcoats 
stood in his place right after question period and asked for leave 
to introduce a motion to have an emergency debate on rural 
issues, on agriculture. And the House Leader who is the 
member from North Battleford, and I think others, said no. And 
of course as we know by the rules, you only have to have one 
person who doesn’t agree, and it doesn’t happen. 
 
Madam Speaker, they killed an attempt by us, by our party, to 
talk about an issue that is hugely critical to a good, good portion 
of Saskatchewan. Now I understand, Madam Speaker, that the 
NDP don’t really care much about rural Saskatchewan, and 
that’s obvious by their actions, not by their words. Their actions 
speak far louder than their words. 
 
They killed our attempt to talk about issues that I wanted to 
spend a minute talking about. I wanted to talk about an issue 
that happened in Hudson Bay where the SaskTel employee took 
early retirement through an early retirement program, which is 
of course legitimate. And I have no issues with that person. But 
it’s a huge concern to the people of Hudson Bay because they 
lost a link to service from SaskTel that now has to be filled by 
someone from Tisdale. 
 
And I wrote a letter to the Minister Responsible for SaskTel, 
and he did his job. I’m not complaining about any action or lack 
thereof from the minister. He did his job. He passed the issue 
over to the CEO of SaskTel. And the CEO wrote me a letter 
back and said that, you know, this person, their service rep, had 
taken early retirement and that they felt it was economically 
viable to fill that position from somebody in Tisdale. 
 
And that’s all within the rules and the law and the words of 
what their policy is. But it’s the spirit, Madam Speaker, because 
if, you know, if you live in Hudson Bay, you know that Tisdale 
is 120 to 125 kilometres from Hudson Bay. And you also know 
that it’s through the forest. And you also know that you have a 
tendency to get lots of winter-type weather through that forest. 
And it’s difficult to have satisfactory service on short notice 
from somebody who lives in Tisdale. 
 
It’s an issue with the people in Hudson Bay, and they are very 
concerned about it. And I raise that in the House today because 
again as I say, it’s not just the words of the policy. The words of 
the policy were fine. Everybody did their job. It’s the spirit, and 
that’s where this government has been lacking. 
 
I want to talk just for a second about the SaskEnergy 
announcements yesterday. And if you listen to the words, 
they’re fine. But once you start to really look at the program 
offered, if you start to look at what the questions might be, you 
realize that, you know, you’ve got a possibility of six different 

applications. You’ve got a possibility of dealing with three or 
four different departments in order to try to work your way 
through the convoluted system that the government put in place 
for a conservation program that . . . I don’t who thought of it or 
how many people it took to think it up, but the only thing they 
missed offering in this deal was free sweaters from Wal-Mart. It 
was the only thing that wasn’t in there. And I just don’t 
understand how they’re going to try to make this program work. 
 
The words in the Throne Speech, Madam Speaker, there was 
some small words in some small section about crime and 
fighting crime, and those are good words of course. But if you 
look at the questions that surround the crime and the crime rate 
in this province . . . You know that the Premier himself lives in 
one of the highest, if not the highest, and I’m not sure it is the 
highest, but it certainly could be. It could be the highest per 
capita crime rate and perhaps the most violent crime rate in 
Canada. That’s the Premier of the province. 
 
That’s the Premier of the province that told us six years ago that 
they were going to hire 200 new police officers and have to date 
fallen far short of fulfilling any where close to that . . . 
[inaudible] . . . . It’s all words. It’s all words, Madam Speaker, 
and they’re all good words. But it’s the spirit of the words 
where this government and this leadership fall short. 
 
In fact Saskatchewan has become Canada’s crime capital under 
this particular NDP government. And the crime has really 
increased by 35 per cent over the last decade. Unbelievable, 
unbelievable. I’ve heard some of the government members 
talking about how they’re so happy that the crime dropped by 
1.9 per cent last year. Well I would say to you, Madam Speaker, 
that if you set the bar low enough, almost anyone can get over 
it. It’s not acceptable. It’s not good enough. It’s not good 
enough. 
 
In question period today they talked about . . . some of the 
questions were about beds for drug addicts and people who 
require rapid treatment. There are no beds scheduled for some 
of these programs for two years. To think about how many 
young people will lose their lives, lose their futures, before any 
help is there at all. Those are the failures or the shortcomings as 
I see it. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, another thing that happened just in the 
last two days — a lot of these actions that I talk about that 
happened just in the last three days. And that’s why we question 
the vision that this government might have. We found out 
yesterday that the federal government told our Premier to take a 
hike when it comes to equalization. It’s over. Negotiations are 
done. You get nothing. Well where is the Premier on this issue? 
Where is this government? I cannot believe that we would settle 
for watching some of the other provinces settle on equalization 
deals that were good for their provinces. And yet when 
Newfoundland and when Nova Scotia . . . and when yet the 
Prime Minister tells our Premier to take a hike, he says, oh well 
we’re not going to give up. We’ll do something down the road 
with no plan. There’s no vision; there’s no leadership. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I’d say to you that we . . . And I know 
I’ve heard my leader and my colleagues have all offered their 
help on this file if the government would be interested in taking 
that. And I would say to you, Madam Speaker, that if this 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

Premier would show the leadership, we could all — every MLA 
from this province — we could be on an airplane next Monday 
morning and be in Ottawa, and we’ll do a job, we’ll do a job 
talking to each of the MPs [Member of Parliament] in Ottawa 
because that’s what’s required — somebody to show some gall, 
some leadership; somebody who will stand up for this province. 
 
And we have not seen that because you know what, Madam 
Speaker? The Prime Minister doesn’t give a hoot about this 
Premier, and his actions are showing it. In fact I think that what 
this Premier sort of seems to me like when he goes to Ottawa is 
sort of like a fly on the south end of an elephant — of really no 
consequence or significance and really doesn’t bother. Really 
doesn’t bother. No leadership. 
 
And lastly the last example that I want to talk about today about 
the actions, not the words but the actions . . . and this is 
probably one of the biggest issues that I think and one of the 
biggest examples of lack of leadership that I know of that have 
taken place in the last few years . . . is the Premier’s recent 
appointments of two new cabinet ministers. Madam Speaker, I 
can’t believe that. I can’t believe that this Premier has the 
audacity, has the gall, has the holier-than-thou attitude to 
appoint the french fry king back to cabinet. And, Madam 
Speaker, I want to quote from the Premier from June 23, 1987, 
and I read this quote into the record and it goes, quote, it says: 
 

But they do expect, and they have the right to expect, 
honesty. They have the right to expect to be able to trust 
this government, to be able to trust the men and women 
they elect. They have the right to expect that commitments 
made ought to be binding . . . 
 
People, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will forgive mistakes; they 
may even forgive incompetence; but they will . . . [never] 
forgive betrayal. 

 
[15:30] 
 
And, Madam Speaker, I am saying to you that this appointment 
to cabinet by the former minister for SPUDCO is the most 
distasteful action that any premier can take in any legislature, in 
every government, in any country because what he’s saying, 
Madam Speaker, what he’s saying by appointing the member 
for Prince Albert North to cabinet, what he’s saying, he says, 
it’s okay. He said, you people in the province are stupid. That’s 
what he’s saying. He says, I’m going to do whatever I want to 
do, and I’m putting him back in cabinet. 
 
Because you know what, Madam Speaker? And I want to read 
again a quote from the deputy minister’s report to Premier 
Calvert on SPUDCO. And it’s dated February 17, 2003, and I 
quote: 
 

The response of Minister Lautermilch to Mr. Sawby is 
troubling . . . The Minister’s correspondence was less than 
forthcoming in terms of the arrangement with Con-Force. 
The characterization of this business relationship as a 
partnership where government enjoyed a minority interest 
was inappropriate. 
 

By reappointing that very same minister to now a position of 
great trust is a slap in the face to every man, every woman, and 

every child in this province because what he’s saying is, I’m 
going to reward incompetence. I’m going to reward the fact that 
that minister covered up, misled, mishandled that SPUDCO file 
for not one year, not two years, but six years. 
 
Forget the money. It’s $35 million. Big money, it’s huge 
money. There’s no apologies for the 35 million. I’m saying to 
you that what he did transcends the loss of $35 million. He said 
to the people of Saskatchewan in effect, you people are stupid. 
You don’t know what you’re talking about. I don’t have to 
follow the rules. I do not have to show my ethics. I do not have 
to show credibility. I will appoint who the heck I want to 
cabinet. And he’s back in cabinet. 
 
And that, Madam Speaker, is disgraceful, and I am sickened by 
that kind of action. Madam Speaker, we’ve heard members 
from opposite over the years call us grumpy old men. They’ve 
called us a grumpy party. Well you know what, Madam 
Speaker? They called us mad. They called us grumpy. You 
know what, Madam Speaker? I’m mad as hell. I am. I am mad. 
I’m almost . . . in fact I’m almost hopping mad. 
 
But when I see things like this happen, we appoint the minister, 
the french fry king, back to cabinet. We walk away from an 
equalization deal and say, oh well, well you people didn’t help 
us. What would you have done? They didn’t forget that they’re 
the government. They gave up on that. 
 
You know they talk about the SaskEnergy program. It’s 
ridiculous. It’s convoluted. It probably won’t work, you know, 
those kinds of things. They killed the opportunity to help rural 
Saskatchewan. That’s why we’re mad. And I would say to you 
that the people of this province are mad. And that’s why we ask 
those questions. That’s why we send in written questions. And 
we want to know, and we want to know what their dealings are. 
Because you know what? We don’t trust them. The people in 
this province don’t trust them any more. And that’s why we ask 
those questions. That’s why we ask those questions. Madam 
Speaker, that’s really the sad part of all this. 
 
I want to finish my comments now by saying that I had the 
opportunity to go to British Columbia this summer. I had a son 
that moved out to Nanaimo. Thankfully he came back; he was 
just there for the football season, but he came back. I got to talk 
to a lot of people out in BC. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 
introduce guests. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain Touchwood. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I’d 
like to thank the member from the Carrot River Valley for 
yielding the floor so that I may introduce some guests. 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

Madam Speaker, we have with us this afternoon in the 
Speaker’s gallery three counsels from the RM of Cupar. That’s 
my home RM. We have Stan Weisbrod, and Stan is the 
brother-in-law of Allison in the Law Clerk’s office. He is a 
member of council. Ron Bohn from Southey. Stan is from 
Cupar. And Curtis Hart from Cupar who represents the division 
5, the division that I represented when I was on that RM 
council. And they’re here this afternoon to watch the 
proceedings of the House. They are in Regina to attend the 
SARM convention, and I would ask all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to welcome them to their legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Junor, seconded by Mr. Harper, 
and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wall.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Madam Speaker, I too want to join with my 
colleague to welcome our guests here today. But unfortunately, 
Madam Speaker, I sort of lost my place in my speech, so I fear I 
will have to start over again. 
 
Madam Speaker, I am almost finished; I promise. I started 
about telling you a story about when this summer I had the 
opportunity to travel to British Columbia. We had a son there. 
And I got to talking to some folks because I knew they’d had an 
NDP government for some time, but lately they’ve seen the 
light, and they’ve elected a different party to government. But 
you know you get to talk to lots of people as you’re there, and 
you talk to the restaurant people. And I kept saying well you 
know everybody seems to . . . it just felt so good there. It felt 
like a ray of hope. Everybody was happy. There was things 
happening. There were jobs. There were businesses opening. 
There’s construction and it’s good. 
 
So I said well boy, you guys, this a great place this BC. You 
guys have got a lot of stuff going. And they said well you know 
what? It wasn’t always the case. It wasn’t always the case, 
Madam Speaker. They said when we had an NDP government 
we felt smothered, and we felt like the government had no 
direction, no vision, no credibility. And the best thing we ever 
did in this province was to get rid of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — That’s my report on my summer holiday, 
Madam Speaker. My point being, my point being is that I’m 
wondering how good a province we would have here if we 
simply changed the government. And I would say to you that I 
believe it would be a much vastly improved place. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to end my remarks by asking a simple 

question. And that simple question is, who is better off as a 
result of this Throne Speech? Who in this province feels much 
better today than they did yesterday after listening to the Throne 
Speech two days ago? Pretty simple, Madam Speaker. Not one 
person in this province is going to be better off as a result of 
this Throne Speech, save an NDP MLA because they’re really 
the only people that seem to have benefit from this leadership, 
this credibility, this Premier over the last number of years. 
Because as we heard in question period — and I have the list 
right here, Madam Speaker — every one of the NDP MLAs is 
drawing some extra pay for some sort of different job. Oh 
except for one. Correct. But I’m sure that’s likely to change 
very quickly. 
 
So who is really better off as a result of this Throne Speech? 
And, Madam Speaker, I’m saddened by the fact that in this our 
centennial year, when this province is 100 years old and we’re 
starting a second century and we in this Chamber are 
responsible to make sure that this province gets off to a good 
start for the second century, in a centennial year that’s in the 
middle of a boom . . . and yet there’s no hope for many people 
in this province. That’s a sad thing because, Madam Speaker, in 
a land built simply on hope and dreams by our parents and their 
parents and our grandparents before them, that there is no hope 
from the people that we have chosen to lead us into the second 
century. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you. Thank you, colleagues. Thank you, 
Madam Speaker. Of course my first words must be to my 
friend, the new Deputy Speaker, the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
know you for considerable time. I know you will discharge your 
duties as Deputy Speaker to the best of your considerable 
abilities, and I know that this Legislative Chamber is in very 
good hands with the operation of the Speaker’s Chair, the 
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. And I wish you the very best 
as you serve in that capacity. 
 
Having been a former deputy speaker myself, it’s a great job 
and it’s a great honour I know to serve all members of this 
Chamber. And I know that’s how you feel. I don’t want to put 
too many words in your mouth, but know that I join a good 
many others in wishing you the very, very best in this capacity 
as Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, I also want to say a few words of thanks to the 
constituents, my constituents in Regina Coronation Park, north 
end of this wonderful city, this city that is bucking the national 
trend in housing sales. Nationally housing sales, I read in the 
paper, are down about 2 per cent. What do I read about Regina? 
Up 5 per cent this year, up 5 per cent. We’re just blowing the 
doors off of the national average. And interestingly the value of 
those houses has escalated something like — if my memory 
serves me right — about 15 per cent here in Regina. So we’ve 
got increased housing sales and increased price which is good 
for those of us who may own a house, and yet housing is still 
very affordable here in Regina. 
 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

Madam Speaker, my constituents honour me by electing me. 
And I try and honour them by serving them in this Chamber, 
and I try and speak out to their issues. 
 
I was out canvassing door to door a couple of weeks ago and 
asking around energy conservation, what it was that we should 
be doing. And not just energy conservation, really the crux of 
the matter then was what do we do about a potential 41 per cent 
increase in our home heating, natural gas price, And I was so 
impressed with the people who were at home and who 
responded to me because they clearly said we need two parts. 
We need to address the increase and dampen that, although 
nobody was as bold as to say we needed to dampen it all the 
way down to where it did get dampened. Although in more 
normal times, I think a 10 per cent increase would have been 
seen as big. But compared to the 41 per cent increase that was 
projected, this seemed pretty wonderful. 
 
But the other thing that really impressed me was the concern of 
my constituents for people that were working poor. Now I have 
a fair, probably more than my share of people that would fit in 
that category. In Regina Coronation Park, there’s a huge 
number of people that work and don’t find themselves with the 
surplus of money at the end of the month. In fact often months 
are four or five days too long; the month is simply longer than 
the paycheque. But somehow they have a tremendous spirit of 
getting the job done, and they just work a little harder, and they 
budget a little tighter and get through the month. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, those were my first words — 
congratulations and thanks and gratitude to my constituents. 
 
This Throne Speech is the first one in my time in the legislature 
where I’ve actually asked the Government Whip if he could 
bump me up on the speaking list, bump me ahead because I was 
so anxious to say some things about the Throne Speech and 
about the vision that this government is exhibiting and that this 
Throne Speech is exhibiting. To me, it’s about vision, and it’s 
about how we live and how we work and how we create a 
society together where all of the hopes and the dreams of every 
single Saskatchewan resident have a chance to succeed. And I 
chose that word carefully — have a chance to succeed, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
Government can lay the groundwork. Government can 
encourage better out of us all. Government can set minimum 
standards. We do this in areas of employment. We do it in 
minimum wage. But a minimum wage or minimum health and 
safety standards are just that. That’s the floor. That’s the 
minimum. And that’s our collective responsibility in this 
Chamber. But what we really strive to do is to encourage people 
to exceed that and go beyond that. 
 
I know there’s . . . I’m hesitant to speak for every member in 
this House, but I don’t know of a single member that believes 
that minimum wage is where we want everyone in society to be. 
Everyone, I believe, wants wages and earnings to be 
considerably higher than that. But we have to set a limit, a 
bottom limit somewhere and then build on that and hopefully 
help all of our members of society that way. 
 
[15:45] 
 

This Throne Speech is about improving the economy of 
Saskatchewan, and it’s about working to pay the bills. It’s about 
working to pay those bills so that we can help Saskatchewan 
residents work for a better future. 
 
And our better future includes . . . one of the things that really 
caught my eye was the pre-kindergarten, the four-year-old 
program that will provide for, voluntarily, for two half-days for 
four-year-olds in a pre-kindergarten course or class, if I can 
describe it that way. Being the grandfather of a four-year-old 
who is very bright . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no . . . 
 
Mr. Trew: — I know; it’s hard to believe that I could be a 
grandfather. Thank you. But I’m a proud grandfather as my 
colleagues know and as they’re joking. But it is a wonderful 
thing to see a four-year-old and their thirst for knowledge and 
their just desire to learn, their desire to be a part of our world. 
And it’s wondrous as everything is brand new to them, Madam 
Speaker. It’s just a joy to see it. And I know that this is going to 
help make brighter futures, and I know that a stronger economy 
is going to help pay for that. 
 
The stronger economy also is going to help pay for new training 
support in our publicly funded and publicly administered 
medicare system, our health care system. New training support 
there. 
 
This stronger economy has enabled us to announce in this very 
Throne Speech that we’re going to fully fund the CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization], the Saskatchewan 
portion of the CAIS, the federal agriculture support program for 
2005. And that’s a considerable chunk of change there. And it’s 
interesting because the Conservatives have always told farmers 
every day in every way that New Democrats don’t appreciate 
farmers and don’t support farming. And it is always 
disheartening to me that Conservatives would practise anything, 
Madam Speaker, that is a divide and conquer tactic like that. 
 
I spent a considerable amount of time on a farm this summer 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and with all respect, due respect, 
members opposite think that I’m somehow jerking their chain. I 
spent a considerable amount of time on a farm this summer and 
this spring. I assisted in the seeding. I assisted in the 
summerfallow. And I assisted in the harvest. And having grown 
up on a farm, I want to just sort of . . . Why I protest so much, 
Madam Speaker, is that if you listen to Conservatives, there’s 
nobody on this side that ever had anything to do with the farm. 
 
Well I grew up on a farm. My daughter lives on a farm. My 
grandchildren live on a farm and obviously my son-in-law. And 
I’m very proud. They’re struggling. They’re paying their bills. 
They’re doing everything they possibly and humanly can to 
make that farm work. And I’m happy to try and support them in 
that. And I know that I look at my colleagues on this side of the 
House, and you know what? There’s others that can tell a 
similar story about their relatives, their friends on the farm. 
We’ve got tremendous farm background on this side of the 
House. 
 
Madam Speaker, this is Saskatchewan’s centennial year. And 
what a centennial it has been. We have honoured those who 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

have turned 100 years old and older. We’ve presented them 
with medals. I know every MLA has had the opportunity to 
present medals to the centenarians in our own constituency. 
And I want to share what a joy that has been for me, and I think 
others have said that too, to meet families — some of whom 
I’ve known before, some of whom are now new friends, new 
acquaintances — and to hear the pride of those families in their 
loved ones and to see the joy as they receive that special 
recognition, this specially minted medal for people who turn 
100 years old. 
 
Part of why I talk about that is because this being our 
centennial, it’s a year to reflect. And we have to look back and 
learn from the past. And, Madam Speaker, we have to look to 
the future. From question period and some of the comments of 
members opposite, you wonder . . . they seem to have written 
essays on how I spent my summer vacation. And in most cases, 
it was reading Hansard of the Premier — how I spent my 
summer vacation. And I’m sure it’s an interesting read. 
 
I spent a bit of time checking on a couple of previous throne 
speeches because I wanted to try and capture what were the 
highlights or the highlight. What was the one thing that the 
1986 Throne Speech was about? 1986 was when the 
Conservatives were just re-elected for their second term — the 
Grant Devine Conservatives — re-elected in Saskatchewan. 
And I look at the 1986 Throne Speech and what it was about 
was public participation, Madam Speaker, public participation. 
 
And two years later Saskatchewan people supported the longest 
walkout in Commonwealth parliamentary history, the longest 
bell-ringing in parliamentary history, and the people of 
Saskatchewan stopped dead the privatization of SaskEnergy. 
And this year they’re reaping, in huge reward, the rewards of 
their actions from then. Because we own SaskEnergy, the 
people of Saskatchewan own SaskEnergy, we’re able to set the 
rate for that natural gas. We’re able to cap the increase for this 
year, and we’re able to do it in a meaningful way that is 
measured. It’s thoughtful. It’s controlled. It makes sense and 
it’s very, very helpful. But 1986, their Throne Speech was about 
public participation, read privatization. That’s what they were 
about in 1986, and they’re really no different today. 
 
Then I look at, Madam Speaker, the 1991 Throne Speech and 
what it was about. It was clearly the shortest Throne Speech 
that I’ve ever seen. 1991 was when Roy Romanow became 
Premier. That was the year — I cast myself back to 
remembering — that the Conservatives had failed to pass a 
budget, had failed to pass a budget that year. So a quote from 
the Throne Speech of December 2, 1991 — right near at the end 
of the year but shortly after the October election. And it says, 
and I quote: 
 

The primary work of this session will be to provide supply 
for my government for the remainder of the current fiscal 
year. My government has the greatest respect for the 
fundamental tradition that public funds must be 
appropriated by the legislature, and that members have the 
right of grievance before supply. 
 
Members will be accordingly be asked to take steps to vote 
supply on the basis of the estimates first presented to this 
House in April 1991 by the previous administration. This 

will end the need to fund the ongoing operations of 
government through special warrants. 
 

And that was sort of the first order of business, and that was the 
main order of business in the very late fall, early winter of 
1991. 
 
But interestingly we also spoke of taxation, and this is the other 
major piece of that session. And it says, and I quote: 
 

This legislature will also be asked to repeal legislation 
which provided for the expansion and harmonization of 
the provincial sales tax. The elimination of this additional 
tax burden will safeguard jobs throughout our province 
and put millions of dollars back into the pockets of 
Saskatchewan consumers, thereby stimulating the 
provincial economy. 

 
And I remember that well because there was considerable 
discussion about whether we shouldn’t just reap the extra 
roughly $600 million a year that harmonization with the GST 
[goods and services tax] would bring to the province and blame 
the then government — you know, the previous government — 
or whether we should do what we did, and that was end the 
harmonization. 
 
We have the PST [provincial sales tax] on the smallest grouping 
of goods of any province that has the provincial sales tax in 
Canada. We’ve got the smallest PST of any province that has a 
PST. And of course the code that I’m saying there is, Alberta 
doesn’t have a PST. They have a health care premium. They 
collect money by a different method. We do it every time you 
buy a consumer good other than a health product or reading 
material or some other things that we have exempted — 
medications, children’s clothing, that sort of thing. 
 
Madam Speaker, government is clearly to me about doing 
things together that we cannot do alone. Government’s about 
setting minimum standards — I mentioned that earlier — and 
encouraging better. That’s what government’s all about. And 
it’s about the future. And it’s all about hope. This Throne 
Speech is about my Saskatchewan’s future, and it’s about our 
Saskatchewan future where no one is left behind. 
 
This speech is about energy investment. It’s about energy 
investment in heavy oil upgrading. It’s about cleaner coal 
technologies and more. And this investment in growing the 
economy is so that our Saskatchewan treasury can afford the 
future. And that future includes things like the $30 million that 
we’ve announced in this Throne Speech — $30 million to 
address community-based organizations, wages, recruitment 
and retention concerns — $30 million. 
 
You have to grow an economy because there is . . . I was just 
about to say there’s no Santa Claus. But I think there was a 
Boston newspaper that actually claims differently. And I 
support that particular letter. Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa 
Claus. There is no free lunch, and everything has to be paid for. 
We know that. We know it painfully well. You have to grow 
the economy. You have to earn that $30 million before you can 
spend it on an ongoing basis. So that’s part of what we’re about. 
We’re about paying the bills so that we can in fact grow the 
things for our community. 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

This Throne Speech, Madam Speaker, is about things like the 
new Saskatchewan Youth Award that recognizes commitments 
and accomplishments of Saskatchewan’s youth. On the other 
side they say, go. On this side we say, go for it. You can do it. 
We can help you. We can encourage you. They say, go. We say, 
go for it. That’s the difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is all about celebrating our 
successes in our Crown . . . Madam Speaker, this Throne 
Speech is about celebrating our successes in our Crown 
corporations. We say that Crown corporations can and do 
deliver much-needed services every day and in every way — 
every day and in every way. We see things like I’ve talked 
about — the SaskEnergy, the gas, where we’ve spent $130 
million out of the provincial economy, the provincial treasury; 
$130 million to ratchet down the natural gas increase for homes 
and for farms. They’re capped at very close to 10 per cent — 
10.2 or 10.3 per cent. 
 
And we spent an additional $37 million on energy conservation, 
Madam Speaker — $37 million on energy conservation. That 
covers a wide range of things, but one that captures immediate 
attention is the grant for programmable thermostats. And it’s a 
grant that equals basically the price of many of the 
programmable thermostats. And it’s just as simple as that. But 
these are some of the things that we’ve been able to do. 
 
Madam Speaker, I see in today’s Leader-Post something about 
another Crown corporation — SaskTel, a little telco, a little 
telephone company that is one of the best-run telephone 
companies in the universe. It’s a telephone company that misses 
the services of a Bob Hamilton who retired from there, but 
otherwise it is a very good telephone company. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And I want to just read the headline and then a couple of 
paragraphs out of today’s paper on SaskTel. This is a Crown 
corporation the Conservatives would privatize and that New 
Democrats fight elections on and we say we’re proud of it. This 
is a telephone company to keep. This is a telephone company 
that’s delivering services to all of us at very low rates. 
 
The headline says, on the Wednesday, November 9, 2005 
Leader-Post, “SaskTel Mobility customers happy.” That’s the 
headline. Opening paragraph — and this is filed in Ottawa, this 
story — “If you really want to be happy with your cellphone 
service, move to the Prairies.” 
 
SaskTel . . . And laugh, members laugh. Members opposite, 
Madam Speaker, laugh. We have a Crown corporation that is 
providing services in a better way than any other telephone 
company in Canada and they laugh. They’ve got a solution for 
it, but we know what that solution is — it’s privatize it. It’s let 
the head office move out of Saskatchewan. That’s their 
solution. 
 
Our solution is keep SaskTel right here; keep it providing the 
very best telephone communication services and other services 
that they possibly can. Let’s keep the jobs right here in 
Saskatchewan, and let’s watch it grow. 
 
The article goes on: 

SaskTel Mobility was the most popular carrier, ranking 
more than 10 per cent above the national average among 
contract service providers. It received particularly high 
ratings in customer service, call quality, billing, and 
service plan options. 
 

Not bad. Not bad. The greatest little telco in Canada. They say, 
sell it. We say, let’s run it. Let’s be proud of it. Let’s keep those 
thousands of jobs right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Speaker, this Throne Speech is all about 
Saskatchewan’s future. It’s all about my future. It’s all about 
our collective future. And it’s a future I’m going to be very 
proud . . . as we go forward into it. 
 
I debated whether to say this in the Throne Speech or not, but 
I’m going to. Madam Speaker, we struggle with a citizenry that 
struggles to respect the Legislative Assembly and members. 
And I reflected upon it. I’ve been here some time now. Many of 
us have. And it seems to me that citizens reflect what we reflect 
in the Chamber. When we treat one another with respect, when 
we treat one another as we would like to be treated ourselves, 
citizens can respect this Chamber. Most of the time that 
happens. Most of the time it happens. Not all of the time, 
Madam Speaker. Not all of the time. And when it falls apart. 
that’s when citizens have difficulty. Citizens have difficulty 
then in respecting this, this institution and respecting 
politicians. So I guess that’s sort of my opening salvo in urging 
that a civility return. 
 
Madam Speaker, the Throne Speech is about our future. The 
Throne Speech is about my grandchildren’s future, our 
grandchildren’s future. It’s about the future of children so that 
in 2025, 20 years from now there will be no child left behind. 
 
I’m very proud of this Throne Speech. There’s many, many 
more things in it that others have covered very capably. I’m just 
real proud of it and I’ll take my place so others can . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Ms. Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to 
rise today to address the Speech from the Throne. Before I get 
into the main body of my speech I’d like to address a couple of 
the comments though that the previous member mentioned. 
 
In this one particular case I happen to agree with the member 
that there is indeed a Santa Claus, Madam Speaker — a Santa 
Claus for the NDP MLAs because each and every one of them, 
with one exception, has received additional pay. So there 
certainly is a Santa Claus if you’re an NDP MLA. 
 
And I agree with that same speaker, Madam Speaker, that there 
is no free lunch. Because there is no free lunch for every person 
and every taxpayer in this province in paying the extra bill for 
all the extras that every one, save one, of those NDP MLAs. So 
there is a Santa Claus, Madam Speaker, for the NDP and there’s 
no free lunches when it comes to paying for the taxpayers of 
this province, Madam Speaker. 
 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

Madam Speaker, on another area though the member from 
Coronation Park was wrong. The policy of this party is not to 
sell the Crown corporations as he was saying. He’s 
misinformed, Madam Speaker, or else he’s trying to misinform 
the public on this particular area. He’s either misinformed 
himself or he’s trying to provide misinformation to the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Cell service across Saskatchewan, Madam Speaker, from 
SaskTel works very well where it works. But obviously the 
member doesn’t get out of Regina very often and drive around 
the province or he would notice that his cellphone isn’t 
working. Maybe if all he does is drive from Regina to 
Saskatoon, yes his cellphone works, but take a drive on a few of 
the other highways, you know. And I suspect, Madam Speaker, 
that most of the members opposite never drive on any of the 
other highways or they wouldn’t have let them get into such a 
deteriorated state as they are today. 
 
So those members would know that both their cellphones don’t 
work once you get off those main highways, and that it’s not 
safe to drive on those highways that are not the main highways 
across Saskatchewan. So I think the member from Coronation 
Park needs to get out around the province and see what’s 
actually happening across this province, see whether his 
cellphone is working, see whether it’s safe to drive on the road. 
 
The member from Regina Albert South a few years ago went 
down to Redvers in my constituency to attend a health meeting. 
Drove down No. 8 Highway — this is about 10 years after the 
NDP have been in power — and tore the muffler off his car on 
No. 8 Highway. That’s the condition of that highway. But I’m 
sure the member from Coronation Park has never even been 
down that road, Madam Speaker, because his cellphone 
wouldn’t work there either. So, Madam Speaker, when the 
member stands in his place it would be somewhat helpful if he 
was at least informed. 
 
Madam Speaker, there is some good things that have been 
happening around the province though in spite of the member 
from Coronation Park and his colleagues. Madam Speaker, 
centennial year was a good year across Saskatchewan. It gave 
an opportunity for our friends, our family, our neighbours to 
return home to Saskatchewan — return home, Madam Speaker, 
because so many of them are no longer in this province. 
They’re not in this province, Madam Speaker, because the 
opportunities are not here in this province under that 
administration. 
 
And while it’s great to have them return to their original 
community — it’s great for families to have an opportunity to 
see their family members and their friends again after so many 
years — it’s even good for the economy, Madam Speaker. It 
even was good for the economy because people, the 
celebrations . . . People needed to spend money. Hotels were in 
use. Parks were all being used. Gasoline was being purchased to 
travel in from across Canada and the US [United States], 
Madam Speaker. So there certainly was a benefit. And there 
was a warm feeling across Saskatchewan for the centennial year 
and for the return of the people. 
 
But, Madam Speaker, when the celebration was over on the 
weekend and the families packed up and headed back to where 

they now lived, it left a hollow feeling in the hearts of people 
across Saskatchewan. It left a question of, why do you have to 
go back? Why can’t you stay here in this province? And that 
question was being asked across Saskatchewan, Madam 
Speaker, by families, by grandparents, by children, Madam 
Speaker, as to why they couldn’t stay and be with their cousins, 
their aunts and uncles, their grandparents. Why, Madam 
Speaker, couldn’t they stay? Because there’s no opportunities 
here under an NDP government. They’re the ones, Madam 
Speaker, that drive people from this province. What do they do 
to encourage them to come back? What do they do, Madam 
Speaker? 
 
Yes we got an oil boom going on in Saskatchewan right now. 
And we got 6,200 less people working in Saskatchewan this 
year than last year — with an oil boom going on, Madam 
Speaker. That’s the kind of thing that the NDP government 
trumpets as a good thing in Saskatchewan. Well it’s good for 
government coffers that there’s an oil boom, but the people 
across Saskatchewan aren’t seeing the benefit of it. 
 
It reminds me of the member from Coronation Park wanted to 
relive the 1986 and 1991 campaigns. Let’s take a step back 
even a little further and relive the 1982 campaign. I remember 
the statement: the family of Crown corporations is strong — 
Allan Blakeney’s theme. The member from Coronation Park 
was a part of that. And what did that say to the people across 
Saskatchewan? Yes the government is doing well, but I’m 
losing my home because of the interest rates. I’m losing my 
business. I’m losing my house. Did the government care? No. 
 
And it’s the same thing today, Madam Speaker. The 
government revenues are doing well, but people are suffering 
and the government doesn’t care. The same as in 1982, Madam 
Speaker. The same as in 1982. 
 
I’d like to address some of the points from the Speech from the 
Throne and they tie into what I’ve already been saying. The 
third paragraph in the speech to the throne, Madam Speaker, 
talks about that: 
 

Our ancestors were people of vision, courage and 
optimism. They dreamed of a prosperous land and a 
progressive society in a province richly blessed . . . [with 
natural] bounty. 

 
And that’s true, Madam Speaker. Our ancestors did have vision 
and courage or they would never have picked a frozen plain that 
Palliser said was a desert to live. They took that, Madam 
Speaker, that vision, that courage, and that dream and they did 
build a good province. 
 
They also believed that — it’s not mentioned in here though, 
Madam Speaker — they believed in growing this province, in 
growing it. They weren’t prepared to settle for the first 10 
immigrants that came to this province and say that’s enough 
and if anybody leaves, as the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] 
said, that leaves more for the rest of us. No, they believed in 
growing the province. 
 
The member from Saskatchewan Rivers last year says, grow, 
grow, grow. That’s all you guys ever talk about. Why do we 
need to grow the province? Madam Speaker, we need to talk 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

about growing. We need to grow this province so our kids have 
a place to live and work instead of going someplace else. 
 
That’s what the members opposite don’t understand and don’t 
realize. They’re only concerned about what they have today, not 
about what their children can have tomorrow. There is no vision 
on those benches over there. It’s simply about what I can have 
today and that’s why every NDP MLA, except for one, has 
additional pay, Madam Speaker. It’s about today’s greed in 
today’s pocket, not about the future. 
 
Madam Speaker, the Speech from the Throne goes on to say, “a 
province offering them abundant opportunities to pursue 
meaningful and rewarding careers.” That’s what people when 
they founded this province were looking for, that’s what they 
hoped to build, and that is the promise that has been betrayed by 
the NDP-CCF [New Democratic Party—Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation] Party since it came to power in 
1944. 
 
They have understood wealth redistribution but they have never 
understood wealth creation, and that’s why our population 
remains the same — stagnant since that time. No vision on how 
to build a province. And it’s certainly not the fact that the 
people of this province don’t have the ability to build a province 
because at that time Alberta was almost half the size that 
Saskatchewan was. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The people from Saskatchewan moved to Alberta and built a 
province that’s three times the size that Saskatchewan is, and its 
economy is booming. It’s the envy not just of Canada but of the 
world. And yet it’s Saskatchewan people that built that 
economy. They would have loved to have done it here but were 
denied the opportunity. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Speech from the Throne also talks 
about the government’s goal that children in the centennial year 
have the best possible chance to grow up free from addiction. 
And that’s a very laudable goal. Everyone in this province 
supports that. 
 
In fact it was my colleagues, the member from Kelvington and 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, that brought forward 
the problem of crystal meth addiction in this province. The 
government didn’t want to hear about it. They tried to sweep it 
under the table. And the fact is the minister of Education said 
that there was no need to focus on crystal meth, that there was 
no need to have a program in place for it. Tried to deny that 
there was even a problem there. That was the NDP vision. 
 
So what do we have today? What do we have today for the 
leadership from the NDP on this issue? Well they proclaimed 
Project Hope. I think a better name for it would be project hype 
because all it’s amounted to, to today is an advertising 
campaign. 
 
There’s lots of talk on the radio about a program that’s going to 
happen in 2007 or later, but where’s the help for the kids today? 
It’s not there. The money is being spent on an advertising 
campaign which the Premier was opposed to previously, and 
now he promotes it. Now he signs the cheque to allow the 

spending. Madam Speaker, the Premier’s words don’t match his 
actions. He spoke one thing at one time and does something the 
complete opposite. He has now become what he was criticizing. 
 
Madam Speaker, the Speech from the Throne talks about a 
green and prosperous economy. And I’d like to read from it. It 
says: 
 

Today, because of the vision and hard work of 
Saskatchewan people, we are a ‘have’ province, and the 
only ‘have’ province in Canada that does not charge its 
citizens a health care premium. 

 
And that’s true, Madam Deputy Speaker. That’s right. And the 
member from Athabasca says, right on. But you know our 
neighbour to the west doesn’t charge PST. So I guess we got a 
choice here — health care premium, PST. You know, how does 
that work out? Well in Alberta a family of four pays $1,056 a 
year for their health care premium. You know that’s a 
significant amount of money. What does a family of four in 
Saskatchewan pay on average for PST? Well if you look at the 
budget book it works out to, Madam Deputy Speaker, $4,064. 
So health care premium for a thousand bucks, PST for 4,000. 
Who’s getting the bargain? Who is being served by their 
government, Madam Speaker? Who is getting the return? 
 
Madam Speaker, when the government brags about no health 
care premium, maybe they should also mention what the cost is 
to this citizen because, to quote the member from Coronation 
Park, there is no free lunch. And it’s the same thing in health 
care, Madam Deputy Chair — there is no free lunch. So the 
people of Saskatchewan, every man, woman, and child in 
Saskatchewan pays $1,000-plus in PST, in part for their health 
care premiums, for the health care costs in this province. You 
know. 
 
And one other thing that might be of interest, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to you, is that in Alberta seniors are exempt from the 
health care premium. So not only do they not pay the PST, they 
don’t pay the health premium either. You know, interesting 
isn’t it? Somehow the government keeps forgetting to mention 
these cost comparisons. 
 
So, Madam Speaker, some of the other things that are going on 
in this area. It talks about: 
 

Active work will be undertaken to include more youth and 
Aboriginal people in the labour market and business 
sector. 
 

That’s very good, Madam Minister. That’s important that we 
get more youth working. Well I know that the government’s 
program for getting youth working in this province is to have 
them hired by the Crown corporations. After all, it was the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana that put in place a program to 
hire more youth in the Crown corporations. That was the goal 
for youth in this province; they wanted to work for the Crown 
corporations, Madam Speaker. 
 
This statement that was in the Speech from the Throne also 
talks about Aboriginal people. And I would like to read a quote, 
Madam Speaker, from this year’s Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority 2004-2005 annual report. The very first sentence, 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

Madam Deputy Speaker, says: 
 

Creating employment for First Nations was one of the 
primary reasons the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority Inc. (SIGA) was established in 1995. 

 
And this is signed by Chief Alphonse Bird, Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. The primary reason that SIGA 
was created was to create employment for First Nations. Very 
good. I agree with that. And fact is, I supported the original 
casino down in White Bear for that very reason. 
 
So what’s happening today? Well First Nations under SIGA are 
trying to establish a new casino at Dakota Dunes outside of 
Saskatoon. Now remember one of the primary reasons for 
SIGA and the casinos was to find employment for First Nations. 
So what did the minister for Economic Development do here a 
month or so ago? He mandated that SIGA had to take every 
employee from the Emerald Park Casino regardless of whether 
they were First Nations or not. 
 
How does that fit into the criteria to hire First Nations, to 
provide employment for First Nations people? And fact is, 
SIGA was given an exemption from the human rights Act to be 
able to hire up to 80 per cent First Nations. How does the 
minister of Economic Development forcing SIGA to take the 
employees from the Emerald Park Casino — they’re not taking 
over their business — how does that square with the role of 
SIGA to provide First Nations employment? 
 
Where were the members of the NDP caucus on this issue? Did 
they support that mandate from the minister of Economic 
Development that forces SIGA to take those employees? Where 
were the individual members? Where was the member from 
Athabasca? Where was the member from Cumberland? Did 
they support this? 
 
Madam Speaker, there was a reason why SIGA was given 
exclusive right to casinos in this province, excluding Casino 
Regina. It was to provide employment for First Nations. That 
was the primary reason, one of the primary reasons as stated by 
Chief Alphonse Bird, as stated previously by government in 
their contracts with SIGA. And yet the government just throws 
that out the window when they want to. 
 
And I would like to know, and I’m sure people across this 
province would like to know, where was the NDP caucus on 
this issue? Where were the members of the NDP caucus on that 
issue? Were they supporting the mandate of SIGA for primary 
reasons for the employment of First Nations people or were 
they playing the political expediency? Where were they, 
Madam Deputy Speaker? I think that’s a question that needs to 
be answered. 
 
Another thing that caught my eye in the Speech from the 
Throne, Madam Speaker, was a statement that during the 
session: 
 

. . . my government will continue a process of consultation 
with northerners towards the recognition of the Churchill 
River as one of Saskatchewan’s natural legacies. 
 

What does that mean, Madam Deputy Speaker? What does that 

mean? Is that a code for a new hydroelectric plant being put in 
place on the Churchill River? Does that mean that they’re 
looking at putting in a dam on the Churchill River and are in 
negotiations with the First Nations up there? 
 
You know if you’re looking at . . . because there is talk about 
new electrical production in this province and one of those talks 
is about new hydroelectric in the North. I know what the fight 
was like down at Rafferty-Alameda when it come time to dam 
off a couple of streams. And from start to finish it took 18 
years, Madam Deputy Speaker, from the time the decision was 
made to go ahead on that to the time it was all finally 
completed. 
 
So when it says that we’re in consultation with northerners on 
the Churchill River, what does that mean? Does that mean that 
the government is looking at putting in place a new 
hydroelectric dam someplace on the Churchill River and they’re 
in negotiations with the First Nations in the area to do that? Are 
they going to go through all the environmental steps that are 
necessary to put in place a hydroelectric dam? Because it’s not 
a short process, but if you’re going to do that you need to let 
people know. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s important that these things be 
laid out clearly before the public and not being covered up and 
done in some sort of nefarious manner, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Under energy and mining, which falls under the critic area of 
not only energy and mining because this deals with electricity 
as well, there’s some actual misinformation in the Speech from 
the Throne, Madam Deputy Speaker. It says under energy and 
mining: 
 

To capture the energy of the wind, projects already 
underway will produce 172 megawatts of zero emission 
power, five per cent of Saskatchewan’s electrical 
generation . . . 

 
Madam Speaker, there may be 172 megawatts of capacity put in 
place, but there’s a difference between capacity and generation. 
Just the other week in Crown Corporations Committee, I asked 
Mr. Waller, who is the head of CIC, Crown Investments 
Corporation, that exact question. How efficient are your wind 
turbines? They have a capacity, let’s say, of 100 megawatts. 
What do they produce? If you have a thermal generator that has 
a capacity of 100 megawatts, they produce 100 megawatts. 
What does wind generate? And his response was, well roughly 
30 to 40, 35 to 40 per cent. 
 
So if 172 is the generating capacity, you’re actually only 
producing about 60 megawatts. So that’s what the government 
should have said in here or they should have said that they have 
172 megawatts of capacity, not of generation. So again the 
government is trying to mislead what it’s telling the public, 
Madam Deputy Chair. 
 
It goes on to say in this very sector, it talks about ethanol 
production in this province. 
 

[That] . . . Saskatchewan is poised to become a major 
producer of grain-based ethanol . . . 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, it is indeed. Saskatchewan is 
moving ahead with the production of ethanol, but it’s happening 
in spite of the government, not because of the government. And 
fact is this government put every roadblock up that it could to 
prevent the Lloydminster and Weyburn facilities from going 
ahead. The only ones who were going to be able to produce 
ethanol in this province was the government-designated 
company Broe. 
 
And fact is the Premier marched out there just west of Regina 
and had a sod-turning ceremony with the kids out there and a 
big sign and a circus tent. Well it turned out to be a real circus 
because the only thing that dug in the ground that day was the 
sod-turning spade and nothing happened after that. It’s now just 
a barren spot. There was no ethanol plant going in there, 
Madam Speaker. But there was an election coming up, and the 
Premier had to make believe that he was actually doing 
something in this province, and it was all a sham. There was no 
ethanol plant. Eight hundred and some thousand dollars . . . 
 
[16:30] 
 
An Hon. Member: — $100,000 worth of gravel went in there. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — $100,000 worth of gravel. I’m sure the 
farmer that’s now farming that appreciates that gravel being on 
his crop land now. It probably came from Findlater . 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Premier and the NDP government 
have done everything they could to prevent ethanol from 
coming to production in this province, but it’s moving ahead in 
spite of them not because of them, Madam Speaker. 
 
You know, and I mentioned earlier the oil boom that’s taken 
place. You know and it takes place right in my own 
constituency. There are rigs drilling, but not near what you 
would expect when oil is at $60. Everybody’s busy. You try to 
hire somebody in my constituency, and you’ve got a tough time 
because they’re working. But they’re not living at home. 
 
They’re out working in Alberta. They’re not working in 
Saskatchewan. The crews and the crew trucks are all out in 
Alberta working. The contractors are all out in Alberta working. 
The engineers and the construction, the prefab places — they’re 
building stuff for Alberta. It’s not for Saskatchewan. Sure our 
people are working, but they’re working in Alberta and coming 
home once a month. Not a very good way to live with your 
family, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But that’s the way it is because you have to support your family 
and you have to support your other enterprises in Saskatchewan 
because the Government of Saskatchewan has no vision on how 
to build that economy and get that production happening here. 
They’re living on the backs of the production that was built 
previous to them on programs that they criticized at that time. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it goes on to talk about — in the 
Speech from the Throne — “One of the richest uranium mines 
in the world is gearing up to go into production at Cigar Lake in 
2007.” 
 
Saskatchewan produces about one-third of the world’s uranium. 
We produce the very richest uranium in the world, Madam 

Speaker. Yes, and I heard the Premier the other day say he’s 
willing to look at further uranium production, uranium usage in 
Saskatchewan. You know, the Minister for Economic 
Development talks about refining uranium. He even talks about 
electrical production, and yet the Premier the next day turns 
around and says, “not on my watch in Saskatchewan.” You 
know, one day he’s on side, and the next day he’s on the other 
side. Well which way is he, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
In fact oh was about a year or so ago, he talked about uranium 
industry as being the tailpipe of the energy world, the dirtiest 
energy possible. And yet here a couple or three weeks ago, he 
was talking about having that very production in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I would suggest to you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
there is a moral question here as well. If we’re prepared to dig 
out of the ground the richest uranium in the world, if we’re 
prepared to ship that around the world, have we given up moral 
responsibility for that product when it leaves our boundaries? I 
think that’s a question that the government and the people of 
Saskatchewan need to ponder. Where does our moral 
responsibility with uranium begin and end because the Premier 
seems to be all over the map on this issue. 
 
One day he’s for it. The next day he’s against it. The Minister 
for Economic Development seems to be for it. The Minister for 
the Environment’s against it. I think you got a fairly 
schizophrenic caucus over there, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
doesn’t know what they want or where to go. And it’s strictly a 
finger in the air to check where the political winds are blowing. 
 
You know I note that there was a very small mention of 
agriculture in the Speech from the Throne, and that small 
comment is that the government has agreed to pay the 2005 
CAIS program. Well the government pushed for an expansion 
of the CAIS program with the federal government. The federal 
government agreed to expand it. And then the province said, but 
we’re not going to pay for it. This was in 2002-2003, 2003. So 
every year they have said, no we’re going to put in the base 
amount that they believe in which was the original agreement, 
and we’re not going to fund the rest. Even though they’re the 
ones that demanded it, we’re not going to fund the rest. 
 
And then, so you go through that crop year, and you go through 
the next year. And finally the government says, well in 2004, 
they said for the 2003 year between Christmas and New Year’s, 
well yeah, I guess we’ll put in the money. So we come to the 
2004 year. It wasn’t till this summer that the government said 
they would fund the 2004 CAIS payments. So at least they’re 
getting a little bit further ahead. We actually are still in 2005. 
That’s an improvement, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the 
government would say in 2005 that they would fund the 2005 
CAIS program. 
 
But what does that mean for next year, for the 2006 year? The 
government called for the expanded CAIS program. The federal 
government agreed to it. Now can the agricultural producers 
across this province go to their banker, because they’re in 
desperate straits and say, yes the government will fully fund the 
2006 crop year, so you can give me a loan based on that so that 
you know and I know what my protection is in case there’s a 
crop failure. It hasn’t happened yet. It hasn’t happened yet. 
 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

And people are out there, have been buying their fertilizer and 
their chemical and their supplies for next year already. Even 
though they’re struggling to make those payments, some of 
them are out there doing it. Some of them aren’t doing it 
because they don’t know where the money is going to come 
from. 
 
Commodity prices are in the tank, the lowest they’ve been 
proportional-wise probably since the 1930s or before. And yet 
the government is proud of themselves because they finally 
managed in one year to agree to pay that year’s CAIS program. 
Because every other year, they were a year late in making that 
determination. 
 
So when is the government going to make that decision to say 
yes to agriculture producers across this province, that we’re 
going to meet our commitments? The Premier seems to have a 
problem with that. He says one thing and then does something 
completely different. When is he going to meet the commitment 
that he made to agriculture producers that the Deputy Premier 
went to Ottawa and fought for? When is he going to make that 
commitment for the 2006 crop year so next year agriculture 
producers will know what their coverage is? 
 
It’s totally unacceptable that this Premier makes the promise 
and then completely breaks it. Agriculture producers across this 
province have not forgotten that Premier’s broken promise on 
property rights . . . property taxes, Madam Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Property rights too. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Property rights as well. That’s right. 
 
The Speech from the Throne talks about honouring veterans. 
And veterans are a very, very important segment of our society. 
We owe those veterans our way of life. And a lot of them 
sacrificed the ultimate sacrifice to give us what we have today, 
to give us the right to stand in this legislature even and speak 
our minds. You know, and to honour them by naming a 
highway after them I think is fitting. I think though that those 
very same veterans, it might bring back unpleasant 
remembrances to them when they drive that highway though 
because of the craters on the highway. It might remind them of 
what they went through in the First World War and the Second 
World War with craters by the mile, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know if you’re going to name a highway after veterans, 
don’t you think you would want to pick a highway that’s fit to 
travel, that people would want to drive on, that people would 
want to see what’s along that highway? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the highways in this province are 
atrocious. And now the government, the Premier, has appointed 
a new minister as the Minister for Highways. It’s the SPUDCO 
minister — the member who was responsible for the SPUDCO 
debacle, you know. And he had to apologize. He was let go 
from cabinet because of that. And now the Premier has seen fit 
to reappoint the man who betrayed the trust the people of 
Saskatchewan put into him, you know. And people of 
Saskatchewan believe in fairness. But they also believe that 
people who disabuse their trust should not be trusted again. 
 
So this morning I was listening to the radio. And the members 

might find this interesting. I was listening to the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You were listening to the radio? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — That I was listening to the radio, but 
also that I was listening to the CBC. And I heard a comment on 
there from Tom Roberts. And he had been talking to the new 
Minister of Highways. And to quote Tom Roberts, he said, 
“Right now the government is talking to other governments and 
other parties on how each party will pay for the upgrades.” 

 
Upgrades for what? Well what he’s talking about is the 
government’s discussion on upgrading the roads in northern 
Saskatchewan. It’s a good idea. The fact is, part of the 
Saskatchewan Party policy is to rebuild and upgrade the roads 
in northern Saskatchewan — absolutely — through the member 
from Athabasca’s constituency, through the member from 
Cumberland’s constituency. We support that. We believe those 
roads need to be upgraded. And they’re in desperate shape. The 
roads in southern Saskatchewan are in equally desperate shape. 
But the roads in northern Saskatchewan are in desperate shape. 
And so we have a minister of the Crown who talked about a 
partnership arrangement, who talked about a partnership 
arrangement between the government and Con-Force and yet, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to describe to you a 
comment that was written into the deputy minister’s report to 
the Premier on SPUDCO. And this is dated February 17, 2003, 
and I quote. And it says, and this is a quote, Madam Deputy 
Speaker: 
 

The response of Minister Lautermilch to Mr. Sawby is 
troubling . . . The Minister’s correspondence was less than 
forthcoming in terms of the arrangement with Con-Force . 
The characterization of this business relationship as a 
partnership where government enjoyed a minority interest 
was inappropriate. 

 
Inappropriate. And for that misinformation the government 
member, the minister of the day, had to apologize. And now 
that very same minister is looking at entering into partnerships 
with governments and other parties across northern 
Saskatchewan to pay for the government’s promised highway 
upgrades. 
 
Well the members on this side of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, believe that the government should be paying the 
entire cost of the upgrades. The government reaps the resource 
benefits from that area. That’s what those monies in part are 
used for. Why is the government going to someone else to pay 
the bill? They already pay their road tax, they pay their income 
tax, they pay their PST, they pay all their fees and other things 
that they have to pay. So now you’re going to go back to them 
again and demand more money for a road that is rightfully 
theirs in the first place. But that’s not new with this 
government. 
 
In my own constituency, No. 48 Highway . They let it 
deteriorate to such a state that the heavy trucks on that highway 
were no longer driving on the highway, they were driving on 
the municipal roads and wearing them out. So what does the 
government do? They go to the municipalities, to Maryfield and 
to Walpole RMs and say, gee isn’t that terrible that your roads 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

are being pounded out? We have a partnership for you. If you’ll 
pay for 50 per cent of the highway, we’ll fix the highway so 
they won’t drive on your municipal roads. There was no 
corresponding offer to reduce their fuel taxes or their income 
taxes or their PST or any of the other monies that the 
government collects from the people living in those two RMs. 
But they’re expected to pay, Madam Deputy Speaker, for half 
of the highway. 
 
[16:45] 
 
You know there’s talk of building a bypass around Regina. Are 
the tax payers, property tax payers of Regina going to pay half 
of the cost to build the bypass around Regina? You know, I 
doubt it. I don’t think the government would dare go to the tax 
payers, property tax payers of Regina, and demand that they 
pay half of the cost to build a bypass around Regina. 
 
But they have no qualms whatsoever of going to two RMs or 
going to northern Saskatchewan, to the government and other 
parties there and saying, if you want your road fixed then 
you’ve got to pay for it. Well most people are already paying 
for it, Madam Deputy Speaker. They’re already paying just like 
every other member, every other person in Saskatchewan is 
paying. So why do they have to pay extra? Why? Because the 
government is forcing them to with threats. 
 
You know, in another time, in another jurisdiction, in another 
venue, it would be called extortion. If Al Capone came into 
your business place and said, you know, fire is a real threat, you 
know, there’s so many people are getting Molotov cocktails 
thrown into their stores and they’re all burning up. You know, if 
you pay us we’ll protect your establishment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Al Capone used to hang out in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — That’s right. In fact is some of the hotels 
in Moose Jaw burned down even. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, you know, so Al Capone and his 
colleagues were going to protect that establishment from those 
arsonists, you know. And as long they paid then there was no 
fire, but if they quit paying all of a sudden there was problems. 
And that is exactly what this government is doing. If you want 
your highway fixed, pay us. If you don’t pay us, we’re not 
fixing your highway and they’re going to destroy your 
municipal roads — or in northern Saskatchewan you’re not 
going to have any roads. 
 
That, Madam Deputy Speaker, I believe is absolutely wrong. 
The people of this province have paid for those roads and 
highways and the government has no right charging the people 
in those areas again to get those roads. 
 
An Hon. Member: — More. More, Dan, more. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh yes. I’m just turning the pages here 
for my next sticky. 
 
And you know, I listen with interest to the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview speaking the other day, and actually the 
member from Saskatoon Rosemont today, speaking about the 

issue of midwifery . . . Regina Rosemont, about midwifery. 
 
You know, I remember this issue coming forward probably six 
years ago or so. We had a group from the midwifery association 
came and made a presentation to us, gave us their pitch as to 
why we should be supporting midwives in this province. And 
we did. We believed that they offered a valuable new possibility 
within the health care system — new to Saskatchewan, 
certainly not new to other jurisdictions. There have been 
midwives, perhaps in other provincial jurisdictions. I know 
there have been. But certainly in England and in Europe the 
practice of midwifery is well-known and utilized. 
 
But it was interesting listening to the members opposite talk 
about that because in the statement here, the Speech from the 
Throne, it talks about: 
 

Midwives will offer their skill and training as part of 
multi-disciplinary teams in hospitals . . . 
 

Very good. Very good. But it sets off some alarm bells for me 
as well because there is only five or six midwives in this 
province. Does that mean that there is only going to be five or 
six multidisciplinary teams in this province? What happens in 
those hospitals where there isn’t a midwife? Are they going to 
lose their obstetrics? You know, is Estevan or Yorkton or North 
Battleford or Moose Jaw, if they don’t have a midwife, are they 
going to lose their obstetrics? I think that’s a real problem, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that I think the government needs to 
clarify. 
 
Are they planning on eliminating obstetrics in those hospitals 
that do not have midwives? Because, Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
remember a campaign back in the ’80s where the NDP ran 
around the Assiniboia constituency telling the constituents there 
in a by-election that the government of the day was going to 
close every hospital in that constituency. There was five of 
them. The NDP went around and said that the government of 
the day was going to close every hospital in that constituency. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, when the NDP became 
government in 1991 they closed four of those hospitals. It 
wasn’t the previous government administration. It was the NDP 
that closed those hospitals. 
 
And so when you take a look at this, five or six midwives, 
they’re going to be part of the multidisciplinary teams. Does 
that mean the multidisciplinary teams are going to be limited to 
five or six? I think the hospitals across Saskatchewan need to 
know whether that’s what the NDP plan on doing. Are they 
going to eliminate obstetrics in all of those hospitals that don’t 
have midwives? 
 
I think there’s a serious concern out there, Madam Speaker, and 
I haven’t heard the government comment on that because they 
say one thing and then turn around and do something else. 
They’re very good at blaming other people, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, but then they turn around and do the very same things 
that they are accusing others of doing. 
 
Now we’ve seen the province go through amalgamation, the 
education amalgamation process. And the government’s 
bragging now about providing a pre-kindergarten program for 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2005 

four-year-olds. And there are a good number of four-year-olds 
that can utilize those kind of services. 
 
The fact is my own son when he was a little guy — he’s not 
little any more. He’s way up there — used to sit on my knee 
when he was three and four years old and watch me on the 
computer. And he was about four years old, and one day I did 
something different on the computer. And he had not asked me 
any questions yet about the computer, but he had sat there quite 
a bit and this one day he says to me, why did you do that? Well 
what do you mean? Well you did it this way this time, and you 
did it that way last time. You know, so while he wasn’t asking 
questions, he was certainly learning. And there are a good 
number of four-year-olds around the province that are capable 
of handling pre-kindergarten. 
 
But when we’re looking at expanding education in some areas, 
we look across Saskatchewan, and we see education costs on 
the rise. You go to most municipalities in my constituency, and 
you will see that the cost of education is rising to them. And 
what do they receive in return? Actual fact they’re receiving 
less service. We had two schools close, close to me this year so 
they’re paying more and getting less service, and that’s how this 
government is treating education across this province. They talk 
a good show, but they don’t deliver. 
 
The same with youth — the government has been talking about 
a new Saskatchewan youth award. You know, when I heard that 
I wondered, what is this, a new Saskatchewan youth award? 
They’re going to give youth a medal or some sort of certificate. 
You know what youth want in this province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker? They want a job. They want a meaningful job, a job 
that’s going to lead them up the career ladder. You know, is the 
Premier . . . You know, I can see him right now sitting in his 
high chair with a fancy ermine stole on and a big 
silver-coloured wig saying to the youth of this province, let 
them eat cake. You know. The Premier acting out the role of 
Marie Antoinette and let them eat cake. So his message to the 
youth is: sorry there’s no jobs, but here’s a medal. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the people and the youth of this 
province want jobs. They want a meaningful job. They want a 
job that’s going to let them grow and prosper in this province. 
They want a job that’s going to let them stay in this province 
and raise their families. 
 
And why do they want those jobs? Certainly for their own 
benefit. But they want those jobs so that they can also support 
their parents and their siblings and their friends and neighbours. 
Because you can’t pay . . . As the member for Coronation Park 
said, there’s no free lunch. You can’t pay for our social 
services. You can’t pay for our health. You can’t pay for our 
education unless there’s people creating wealth. And the youth 
of this province want to stay in this province and create this 
wealth, but the government is denying them the opportunities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what this province needs is a vision — 
a vision of prosperity, a vision of growing this province where 
our youth are going to stay here, where their grandparents are 
going to remain here because their grandkids are here. We need 
a vision for the future — a vision that we will have prosperous 
streets, prosperous blocks, new buildings going up — that will 
have people in our universities that are able to graduate and 

come out with a real job. Not with a muck job, not with a job in 
Alberta, not with a job in Toronto, but a real job in 
Saskatchewan where they have an opportunity to grow. 
 
And that job, Madam Deputy Speaker, is not necessarily in a 
Crown corporation or working for the government. When you 
work for the government you’re living on somebody else’s 
taxes. There’s a need for the private sector and the co-operative 
sector in this province to grow, to play the role that they play 
across the world. 
 
You know even, Madam Deputy Speaker, even in China the 
private sector is growing. It’s only in Saskatchewan where the 
government is trying to diminish the role of the private sector, 
only in Saskatchewan. Even in China the private sector is 
growing. The private sector is creating the wealth. The private 
sector is creating the jobs. You need . . . There is a role for 
government, and there is a role for Crown corporations, but 
they should not be the sole economic generator in the province 
as the NDP envision. 
 
You know, we had new citizens — I believe there was 15 of 
them in here earlier in the week — that received their Canadian 
citizenship. We receive an extremely low number of people as 
immigrants into this province. You know 50 per cent of the year 
or better, we have no problem with bugs. You know there’s no 
mosquitoes here for roughly six months of the year, you know. 
And yet people don’t come. Why is that? 
 
We certainly have a beautiful province that people love to visit. 
We certainly have the natural resources to develop a prosperous 
economy. You know, we have uranium. We have oil. We have 
huge wheat fields, cultivated land. We have potash. And yet we 
don’t have the economic development that others have. We 
have the new diamonds that are coming on stream. We have 
huge coalfields. 
 
And yet why aren’t the immigrants coming here? They’re not 
coming here because there’s no job opportunities. Their career 
advancement is not able to happen in this province. So that’s 
why, Madam Deputy Speaker, people in this province . . . or the 
immigrants don’t come to this province. Even Manitoba, even 
Manitoba is certainly outpacing us when it comes to immigrants 
because the government there — even though it’s an NDP 
government, even though it’s an NDP government — have seen 
the value of bringing immigrants into this province. 
 
You know, you take a look. Each and every one of us is either 
an immigrant or a son and daughter of immigrants. So our 
families came to this province years ago. And they recognized 
the benefits of Saskatchewan. They recognized the benefits of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, we need to engage the people 
around the world. We need to let them know that there are still 
opportunities in this province — opportunities that are yet 
unrealized. And we need, as a government, to step back and let 
them realize those opportunities. Let them build their future in 
Saskatchewan, as our ancestors saw the opportunity to build 
their future and their children’s future and their children’s 
future. 
 
But that vision is not here today in that government. They are 



November 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

busy trying to manage the decline and have forgotten — if they 
ever knew — what it took to build that vision. That, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I think, is a huge disservice to what this 
province should be and could be. I believe the government’s 
philosophy has failed this province miserably. We were 1 
million people back in the 1930s and ’40s. We’re still 1 million 
people, and in fact is those numbers continue to decrease, 
decrease when we should be growing, when we have such huge 
potential. It’s unrealized because of the philosophical brakes 
that this government puts on our economy. 
 
You know, this government likes to talk a lot about its social 
conscience — you know, how it helps people, how it takes care 
of those that are more vulnerable. But it’s forgotten, in its own 
desire to be strong economically within the government’s circle, 
the impact it’s having on individuals outside of that government 
circle. 
 
You know, if I recollect correctly, Saskatchewan Housing a few 
years ago entered into contracts for natural gas with someone 
other than SaskEnergy. So the government’s new program for 
natural gas rebates . . . because of the high increase in cost, the 
government is not providing that benefit to the people who are 
living in Sask Housing houses. They’re excluded from that, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m. this House stands 
adjourned till tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Harpauer .....................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Brkich ..........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Weekes .........................................................................................................................................................................................43 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...............................................................................................................................................................................43 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Bakken Lackey............................................................................................................................................................................43 
  Hart ..............................................................................................................................................................................................43 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McCall .........................................................................................................................................................................................44 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................44 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................44 
  Beatty ...........................................................................................................................................................................................44 
  Elhard ..........................................................................................................................................................................................45 
  Hart ..............................................................................................................................................................................................63 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Centennial Medal Recipient 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................45 
 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 
  Iwanchuk .....................................................................................................................................................................................45 
 Health Care Services 
  McMorris.....................................................................................................................................................................................45 
 Art and Annie Haase Celebrate 70th Wedding Anniversary 
  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................46 
 Addictions Strategy 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................46 
 Community Planning Day 
  Morin ...........................................................................................................................................................................................46 
 Saskatchewan Aviation Hall of Fame Awards 
  Bakken Lackey............................................................................................................................................................................47 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Equalization 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................47 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................47 
 Relief for the Education Portion of Property Tax 
  Huyghebaert ................................................................................................................................................................................48 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................49 
 Responsibilities and Pay for Government Members of the Legislative Assembly 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................49 
  Calvert .........................................................................................................................................................................................50 
 Treatment Beds for People with Addictions 
  Draude .........................................................................................................................................................................................51 
  Addley ..........................................................................................................................................................................................51 
  Wall ..............................................................................................................................................................................................52 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Entrepreneurial Foundation and Fund Established 
  Atkinson.......................................................................................................................................................................................52 
  Stewart .........................................................................................................................................................................................53 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
 Introduction of Page 
  The Speaker.................................................................................................................................................................................53 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution on Committees 
  Yates.............................................................................................................................................................................................53 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................54 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................55 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Taylor...........................................................................................................................................................................................55 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Crofford .......................................................................................................................................................................................55 
  Kerpan .........................................................................................................................................................................................59 
  Trew .............................................................................................................................................................................................64 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................67 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Premier 
 
Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 
 
Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service  
  Commission 
Minister Responsible for Immigration 
 
Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 
 
Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Northern Affairs 
 
Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 
Minister Responsible for Investment 
  Saskatchewan Inc. 
 
Hon. Joanne Crofford 
Minister of Community Resources and  
  Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 
Hon. David Forbes 
Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of  
  Energy Conservation 
 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for the Status of  
  Women 
Minister of Property Management 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 
Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Health 
Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 
Hon. Peter Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 
 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 
Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 
Minister of Rural Development 
 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
 
Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 
 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 
Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information  
  Technology 
Minister Responsible for Literacy 
 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 
Minister of Finance 
 
Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


