















































Hansard: May 09, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 108A  MONDAY, MAY 9, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2909 
 May 9, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Highway 32 in the 
southwest part of the province continues to be an issue of 
serious concern to the residents of Cypress Hills, and the prayer 
addressing their concerns reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Leader, Prelate, Sceptre, 
Medicine Hat, several others, Eatonia, and Mendham. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege again 
for me to rise on behalf of constituents concerned about the lack 
of group home spaces in Swift Current. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
who have long-term disabilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the community of 
Herbert and the city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
I have a petition that states that on behalf of the staff, 
participants, and families of the Wheatland Regional Centre 
Inc. and other like centres across the province that provide 
services for individuals with disabilities . . . they are concerned 
that the provincial budget responses do not come close to 
meeting the minimum recommendations of the human resources 
plan put forward by SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres]. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly will please consider implementing the 

minimum compensation recommendations for staff 
members to support people with disabilities as outlined in 
SARC’s human resources plan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the fine 
community of Rosetown, and I am pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about Highway 35 and the state 
of disrepair. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
make the necessary repairs to Highway 35 north from the 
United States border in order to prevent injury or loss of 
life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the 
area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that want to halt crop insurance premium hikes 
and coverage reductions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Dundurn, Simpson, Hanley, 
Regina, and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition from constituents opposed to possible 
reductions of the health care services in Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



2910 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

Signed by the good citizens of Cando and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of west central 
Saskatchewan opposed to the rerouting of Highway 51. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 51 is rebuilt to 
go through the town of Kerrobert so that local businesses 
may be given the opportunity to promote themselves to 
and gain business from patrons passing through Kerrobert. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens of both 
Kerrobert and Kindersley. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 106, 666, 715, 716, 720, and 730. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to introduce to you, and through you to 
all members of the Assembly, 29 Grade 12 students from F.W. 
Johnson Collegiate in my riding, Mr. Speaker. These are very 
gifted, wonderful students, Mr. Speaker, who come to our 
Assembly from F.W. Johnson each and every year. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Jeff Perry, who has 
been a long time visitor to this Assembly each year with at least 
one of his classes. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have everyone 
welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, the person that tries to make me look good in this 
Assembly. Granted I don’t give her a lot to work with some 
days but, Mr. Speaker, Beth Epp, the constituency assistant for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs . . . Beth is down today taking part in 
an orientation for the Royal visit. 
 
And she’s the smiling face and the pleasant voice that people in 
the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency see and hear when 
they call my office. And I’d like to ask you and all members to 
welcome Beth to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, the Minister Responsible for the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery this afternoon, we have 22 public servants that are 
touring the Legislative Assembly this morning and this 
afternoon. They are employees in the departments of 
Agriculture and Food, Community Resources and Employment, 
Environment, Finance, the provincial lab, Health, Justice, the 
Legislative Assembly, the Public Service Commission, and 
SaskTel. Later this afternoon after question period, I’ll have an 
opportunity to meet with the public servants along with our 
colleague from the official opposition. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these 
people who provide important public services to our citizens 
day in and day out. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister in welcoming the contingent of public 
servants to the Assembly this afternoon. I understand they’ve 
already had a very busy day. And I can only hope that when 
3:30 or so comes around and you’re very, very tired and won’t 
have very difficult and incisive questions for myself, but I look 
forward to it anyway. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for this Assembly to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce a special guest to the Assembly this afternoon. He 
is sitting behind the government members here with the 
Minister from Government Relations. I’d like to introduce Paul 
Dennert who is a legislator from South Dakota. He is a member 
of the House of Representatives and serves on the 
appropriations committee in that House. Mr. Dennert is a 
farmer and a cattleman. He operates a family farm along with 
his son. 
 
We’ve had a very good visit. Mr. Dennert’s had the opportunity 
to meet most of the government members and will have a 
chance to meet members from the opposition as well over the 
next day and a half. We’ve had a great time comparing South 
Dakota and Saskatchewan and have agreed that those are 
simply the two best places to live on the continent. And with 
that I’d like to invite all members to welcome Mr. Dennert here 
to Saskatchewan and to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member in welcoming Representative Paul Dennert to the 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2911 

House today. It’s been my pleasure to work with what I knew as 
Senator Dennert prior to his most recent election as Co-Chair of 
a subcommittee of the Midwest-Canada relations committee. 
 
Now the member has described Mr. Dennert’s occupation and 
some of his personal information. But I’d like to add to that, 
that I know him on a professional level. And as a consequence 
of our dealings, I found Mr. Dennert to be a man of integrity, a 
man who practises good common sense. But because the issue 
of BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] was the one that 
we worked on most closely together, I’d also say he’s a man of 
courage. And I’d like us to acknowledge his presence here 
today and the good work he’s done on our behalf. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to welcome to the Legislative Assembly my 
constituency assistants for the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy: Marcie Swedburg and Marilyn Charlton, if they’ll give 
a wave. They’re in your gallery. They work very diligently 
every day on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
and certainly go above and beyond the call of duty to assist 
myself. And I’d like to welcome them here today, and I’d like 
all members to help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure today to welcome 
a return of a special guest to the Saskatchewan legislature, and 
that is Ilene Grossman who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
She is the assistant director for planning and development for 
the CSG [Council of State Governments] Midwestern office. 
She staffs the Midwest-Canada relations committee for the 
MLC [Midwestern Legislative Conference]. 
 
Ilene is responsible for the MLC legislators’ exchange and 
escorts a delegation from the American Midwest to 
Saskatchewan every year so that the Midwest legislators will 
get a first-hand look at our system of government and have a 
chance to discuss issues with our MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. 
 
In addition she manages the 13-state Midwestern Governors 
Association which includes all 11 Midwest states from the 
MLC plus Missouri and Kentucky. Welcome back to the 
Saskatchewan legislature, Ilene. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Rendez-vous Canada 2005 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, May 7 to 11 is Rendez-vous 
Week in Saskatoon. Over the course of the week, more than 
1,400 travel writers and travel buyers from Europe, the United 

States, Asia, and the rest of Canada will be in town to take part 
in Rendez-vous Canada or RVC, Canada’s premier 
international tourism industry marketplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every spring RVC brings together international 
buyers with Canadian sellers of tourism products. This is the 
27th year of Rendez-vous Canada, and typically it is hosted by 
Toronto, Montreal, or Vancouver. Saskatoon is the smallest 
centre to ever host the event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is rarely thought of as an 
international tourist destination. However, Mr. Speaker, many 
in the industry believe it is simply undiscovered. Saskatchewan 
is rich in possibilities, whether we are speaking recreationally, 
culturally or in terms of natural heritage. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a strong tourism foundation on which to build. 
 
Tourism Saskatchewan tells us that in my Saskatoon Fairview 
constituency alone, tourists spend over $7 million annually and 
help to employ over 1,100 people. Mr. Speaker, organizers are 
expecting that RVC 2005 will generate around $300 million in 
business over the week and that the event will generate over 
$4.5 million in direct economic spinoffs in the Saskatoon area. 
 
I would thank the organizers of Rendez-vous Canada 2005, in 
particular the people at Tourism Saskatoon and Tourism 
Saskatchewan, for doing a great job of showcasing 
Saskatchewan and putting together this world-class event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 
9 to 15 is National Nursing Week. The theme of this National 
Nursing Week, the theme is: Patients First. Safety Always. 
 
If I can use a health care analogy, nurses are the heart of our 
health care system. From holding a patient’s hand and 
comforting them to assisting in emergency surgery, nurses are 
an integral component of the health care system. They help 
educate patients and contribute to the overall well-being of 
Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one concern to the nursing profession right now is 
a safe patient-to-nurse ratio. It is important to provide proper 
care and help with nursing burnout, Mr. Speaker. And we know 
that with the nurses in negotiations right now, that is a major 
issue that is at the bargaining table. Healthy workplaces will 
help us all maintain and recruit nurses within this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members as well as the general public to 
recognize and thank the nursing profession for the great work 
and dedication they provide our health care system throughout 
the whole year. I know I will be thanking them. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 



2912 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Raiders Have Great Season 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to say a few words about this year’s Prince Albert 
Raiders hockey team. Over the course of the last number of 
weeks this group of young men have given a real demonstration 
of perseverance and of character. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Raiders had a pretty good regular season. They 
had quite a few injuries and some of their top players were out 
all year, but they battled through and they managed to secure a 
very respectable third in their division and a playoff spot as 
well, sir. 
 
In the first round they went up against the Saskatoon Blades, 
led by Raider Ryan Depape who scored the first goal, the 
winning goal, in the first game as well as scoring the overtime 
winner in game four. The Raiders swept the Blades four 
straight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they then moved on to Alberta. They took on the 
Medicine Hat Tigers. And after six games, Brent Ottmann got 
the winner in double overtime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to players like Kyle Chipchura, who 
returned to the lineup after suffering a severed Achilles tendon 
and picking up 11 points in 12 games, and Rejean Beauchemin, 
who led the WHL [Western Hockey League] playoff 
goaltenders with a 1.85 goals-against average, the Raiders put 
together two four-game winning streaks and won 11 straight 
games on home ice in their playoff run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to say that their run came to an end a 
few days ago. But throughout the playoffs they played with 
determination and heart, and Prince Albert recognizes them as 
being their champions. 
 
I want to thank all the Prince Albert players, the coaches, and 
the fans for a great Raider hockey season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Holocaust Remembrance 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was my 
pleasure this past week, along with the minister of Education 
and other political and municipal leaders from across Canada, 
to march with thousands of Jewish men, women, and students 
as they commemorated the March of the Living in Poland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the March of the Living was organized to 
commemorate and remember the tragic deaths of some 6 
million Jews during the Nazi reign of terror which took place 
during the Second World War. Our tour of Poland to 
commemorate this event took us to Warsaw where we toured 
the Warsaw ghetto where Jews were confined, to Lublin and the 
Majdanek concentration camp where many Jews lost their lives. 

We then travelled to Krakow and were taken to the Auschwitz 
concentration camp. On Thursday, May 5, we joined some 
12,000-plus marchers marching from the train station in 
Krakow to the death camp at Auschwitz-Birkenau. Here we 
joined with the marchers in a ceremony to remember the 
millions who lost their lives and then celebrate the liberation of 
the camps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, words cannot express the horror, the terror, and 
the evil that was perpetrated on so many innocent people — 
men, women, and children — simply because they were Jews. 
We can only hope and pray that as we remember and learn from 
the past that we will strive to live with and respect people 
regardless of their race, religion, or nationality to ensure that we 
will never again experience another tragic event of this nature. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well well well, Mr. Speaker. Here’s something 
you won’t hear from the doom and gloomers on the other side 
of the House. The Saskatchewan job numbers are in for the 
month of April and, Mr. Speaker, last month more than 476,000 
people were employed here in Saskatchewan. That makes April 
Saskatchewan’s 13th straight month of year-over-year job 
increases, Mr. Speaker. That’s impressive. And it gets even 
more impressive, Mr. Speaker, when we add in that full-time 
jobs are up, youth employment is up, and we have one of the 
lowest unemployment rates in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province is on a roll. We just got another 
credit rating upgrade. Capital investment is projected to 
increase by twelve and a half per cent, the highest projected 
growth rate in the country. And Export Development Canada is 
predicting that our growth will be double the national average. 
 
Newspaper editorials are talking about it, Mr. Speaker. Here’s a 
quote from a paper in, I think, the member for Cannington’s 
constituency. First it talks about all the positive economic 
stories in the province and then says, “Government leadership 
cannot be overlooked in all this good news.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, government leadership cannot be 
overlooked. Well, Mr. Speaker, it can be if you sit on the doom 
and gloom side of this Assembly, and, Mr. Speaker, because 
good news for Saskatchewan is bad news for the party opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatoon Hosts International Travel Trade Event 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to join with the member from Saskatoon Fairview in 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2913 

highlighting the country’s largest international travel trade 
event that’s taking place in Saskatoon right now. Over 1,400 
delegates arrived Saturday for Rendez-vous Canada. The 
conference continues through May 11 and is expected to 
generate unprecedented levels of tourism interest from 
international markets. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana and I had the opportunity 
to attend the opening reception yesterday. Rendez-vous Canada 
is being held at Saskatoon’s Prairieland Park and pairs 
international buyers with Canadian travel suppliers. It provides 
an efficient opportunity for international buyers to meet 
suppliers of Canadian tourism products, services, and 
information in one place annually for four days of programmed 
business. Many of the delegates will experience Saskatoon and 
Saskatchewan for the very first time. 
 
Saskatoon is able to showcase some of its many unique events 
and sights. Travel buyers and writers will tour areas such as the 
Beaver Creek Conservation Area, the Saskatoon Berry Farm, 
and the University of Saskatchewan. Attendees will be 
encouraged to do business with local tourism officers. 
 
This is the first time that Rendez-vous Canada has come to 
Saskatchewan. Todd Brandt, CEO [chief executive officer] of 
Tourism Saskatoon, has worked in conjunction with Roy 
Anderson, the president/CEO of Tourism Saskatchewan, in 
hosting the conference. The spinoff benefits of exposure for our 
tourism products around the city and around the province are 
tremendous. Organizers anticipate 300 million in business 
during the week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members to join me in 
congratulating Todd Brandt, Roy Anderson, Randy Fernets, and 
all volunteers involved in this important event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Prince Albert Potters Win International Prize 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
few kilometres northwest of Prince Albert, just off Highway 3, 
there’s a pottery studio owned by Denyse and Rod Simair. The 
Simairs describe the studio as, quote: 
 

A place where we experience a challenge . . . yet find a 
refuge . . . a place where . . . our grandiose ideas meet with 
the reality of humility . . . a place where we can 
continually learn and expand. 

 
Not surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, the work that comes out of the 
studio is extraordinary. The Simairs produce stoneware as well 
as large, wheel-thrown raku vessels. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
Simairs also practise a largely unknown, extremely difficult, 
and highly specialized art called crystalline ceramics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Simairs spent a year learning the glazing 
process that’s at the heart of crystalline ceramics. The failure 
rate is high. But as Ms. Simair says, “if you can manage it, you 
can achieve magic.” 

Mr. Speaker, Denyse and Rod were among 25 crystallieri from 
eight different countries recently invited to France to take part 
in a rare exposition of crystalline glazes. A committee of jurors 
made up of 125 ceramic art professionals, along with the first 
125 visitors at the exhibition, cast their votes to determine the 
Simairs should be the recipients of the Grand Prix Crystalline 
2005 for their piece entitled Butterfly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Denyse and Rod Simair for their outstanding achievement. The 
kinds of results they have seen are not possible without great 
dedication to the craft. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Negotiations with Federal Government Regarding an 
Energy Accord and Equalization 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, over the weekend the Ontario 
government signed a new fiscal arrangement with the federal 
government worth $5.75 billion. Question to the Premier is, 
when can Saskatchewan expect both a new equalization deal 
and an energy accord for our province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me say initially that I 
welcome the new fiscal arrangement that the province of 
Ontario and the Government of Canada have made. It is an 
arrangement in my view that has the national government 
clearly recognizing that the strength of a provincial or regional 
economy lends therefore to the strength of the nation. And as I 
review the Ontario fiscal arrangement, this is an arrangement 
that will add strength to Ontario and therefore to Canada. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, been in significant 
negotiations with the national government over the last period 
of weeks and days and hours. And I anticipate very shortly we 
will be able to announce a significant arrangement with the 
province of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also over the weekend 
in the Toronto Star, an official from the Premier’s office was 
quoted as saying that a proposal from Ottawa was going to be 
coming in days. I assume that’s what the Premier is alluding to. 
I think the people of the province of Saskatchewan, in addition 
to those who subscribe to the Toronto Star, would like to 
welcome this information if it is indeed true. 
 
So would the Premier highlight for this Assembly whether he’s 
referring now to both a new equalization deal in the long term 
and also a specific energy accord for our province. 



2914 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I believe, as the Leader of 
the Opposition well knows, we have very readily committed 
this province to engaging in the process that will review 
equalization with the federal panel that has been established. 
The Minister of Finance I know is working on that right now. 
 
In terms of seeking an energy accord, an accord, a financial 
arrangement with the national government that will strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s economy, that will enable this economy to 
build, particularly around energy, Mr. Speaker, I anticipate 
announcements in a very few days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would assume that all members of 
this Assembly and indeed most people in the province and other 
academics like Mr. Courchene, Professor Courchene, have 
looked at this issue, would agree that the case for a recognition 
of the unique nature of Saskatchewan’s resource revenue is far 
more compelling in terms of a new equalization deal even than 
what Ontario was able to present. Ontario did get at least a new 
fiscal arrangement on the weekend. 
 
And I’d ask the Premier to clearly indicate to members of this 
Assembly, obviously not the terms of what he is referencing, 
but whether or not he’s specifically talking about an energy 
accord that would treat our natural resources — specifically oil 
and gas revenue — differently and more fairly when it comes to 
equalization for our province. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I believe if the Leader of 
the Opposition would recognize, we have through the efforts of 
the people of Saskatchewan, through industry and working 
people in Saskatchewan, the efforts of this government, have 
now achieved the status of a have province. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, what that means of course is today we are 
out of equalization. And it is the intention of this government 
— and I’m sure of this province — to keep Saskatchewan out 
of equalization, to keep the economy strong enough to keep out 
of equalization. We are seeking, Mr. Speaker, an arrangement 
with the national government that will strengthen our economic 
capacity to ensure that this province never again becomes a 
recipient of equalization in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Food Allowance 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Community Resources. Would this government 
with the most money it’s ever had, being a have province . . . 
But in its latest budget, this government ended 20 years of 

inaction by increasing the basic food allowance for people on 
social assistance by a whole $10 a month. That means a single 
person now gets $120 a month. Mr. Speaker, this increase is 
barely a start, and it’s not good enough. Mr. Speaker, when will 
this government consider indexing the basic allowance to match 
the rate of inflation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Every year we undertake measures to improve the status of 
low-income persons, and certainly the feature that the member 
opposite is talking about is one thing that we do. But we 
provide supports in a whole range of other areas with housing 
costs, child care costs. Supports to the actual shelter allowance 
was changed this year to more reflect the real rates in 
communities, and as well the quality shelter supplement. So 
people have an ability to have a significant additional amount of 
resources this year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that this is an issue we all 
have to work on in our communities because we have too many 
people who do not enjoy the advantages that most of us do. And 
certainly I’ll look forward to that member supporting increases 
to the minimum wage as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as the 
minister didn’t answer the first question we’ll try again. This 
government is ignoring calls from food banks. It’s ignoring 
recommendations from anti-poverty groups and organizations 
across this province. I read over the weekend how there’s 6,512 
people in Regina alone and 10,000 in Saskatoon on social 
assistance. That’s 16,500 families going to the grocery stores 
with $100 a month. These families get hit hard and there’s very 
little change in their expenses. This government has made a 
start with an increase to the basic allowance. It’s time to get to 
the next step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government consider indexing the 
basic allowance to match the rate of inflation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE 
[Community Resources and Employment]. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of 
initiatives are considered at budget time, and they’re put on the 
table with all the other requests. And certainly within our area 
we have many new budget requests every year because we deal 
with individuals with disabilities, we deal with child protection 
— we deal with a range of issues. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, for example in Regina under 
our Building Independence program the number of people who 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2915 

depend on assistance for their income has gone from 9,000 
cases to 6,000. For a single parent, which was one of our target 
groups, if you move under the Building Independence program 
your income goes from 17,000 a year to 26,000 a year. So we 
have made substantial improvements in adequacy for people 
with children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll try and get 
there one more time with the answer. The number of people 
using food bank has jumped by 40 per cent between 2003 and 
2004. Children using food banks are up 25 per cent. Ten new 
food banks in Saskatchewan alone last year. Ten dollars a 
month more for the basic allowance is only a start; I’m not 
going to make much . . . it’s not going to make much of a dent 
in child poverty with 44,000 children reported living below the 
poverty line in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former premier, Roy Romanow, made a 
commitment almost 10 years ago to eliminate the need for food 
banks. Indexing the basic allowance is one more step down that 
road. Mr. Speaker, will the minister answer the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, when the leader of 
the party opposite was asked how much it should be increased 
by, he didn’t have an answer to that. Apparently today we have 
a new policy that’s popped up on the floor of the legislature, 
which is indexing. 
 
We did put . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I have to say the 
born-again progressives on the other side have not yet 
convinced me of their sincerity. But what I will say, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please, 
order please. Order please. Order. Order please. I would like to 
bring to the member of Rosetown’s attention that question 
period is for dealing with issues rather than personalities. And I 
would like her to withdraw that personal remark addressed to 
the opposition. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I presume you mean me, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ll withdraw the comments and proceed with my answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have two concerns in allocating the resources this year. One 
was not only to put more resources for food into people’s 
pockets but to make sure it got to the kids. And that was one of 
the reasons why in this budget there was additional resources in 
the amount of $500,000 put directly into the programs and the 
schools so that children were getting food directly through the 
school food programs and supporting their educational efforts. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a hugely targeted initiative for 
people with children and people with disabilities that have 
significantly improved their independence and their quality of 
life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug-Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday I gave second reading 
of the private member’s Bill, An Act providing for the 
Protection and Assessment of Children who are Abusing Drugs. 
I would like to make it perfectly clear that this Act is designed 
to give parents the tools to help their children with addictions. 
The private member’s Bill will enable parents to apply to the 
court for apprehension and confinement. 
 
I understand that the minister is looking at changing section 18 
of The Child and Family Services Act. Can the minister explain 
to the Assembly what kind of tools such a change will provide 
to parents? How is this going to empower Saskatchewan 
parents? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the child 
protection branch of our department responds to issues that are 
raised by members of the community, whether they be parents, 
teachers, police, whoever they may be. This has been the 
process. And then at that point, they’re visited by a worker who 
then does some investigation of the situation and makes the 
decision as to whether it should be referred to a court process. 
 
Regardless of the process that we use, someone is going to have 
to make an assessment in order that it goes before a judge with 
evidence to place before the judge. I’m expecting a report later 
today that will give me more information on what is in fact 
possible. And I suspect we can continue moving forward as we 
have been, in a collaborative manner, with the member putting 
forward ideas and myself checking into what’s possible under 
our current legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, section 18 of 
The Child and Family Services Act requires a police officer to 
go to a representative appointed by the minister or the minister 
herself if they believe a child has to be apprehended. This does 
not give parents any more power than they already have. There 
are only two ways that parents can get their children into drug 
treatment. First one is to have them arrested, or secondly is to 
go directly to the Minister of DCRE [Department of 
Community Resources and Employment]. There is really no 
middle ground. 
 
Can the minister explain why is she reluctant to let parents be 
parents and give them the tools they’ve been asking for to get 
help for their children. 
 



2916 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite 
understand what the member is getting at because when a 
person brings forward a concern, what we have done that is 
different than what we did before is we didn’t apprehend people 
over the age of, well of the age of 16 and 17 before; only 15 and 
under. So this ability to apprehend is a power that we had but 
had not used. 
 
We’ve now used it because we were approached by concerned 
people and will consider, on a case-by-case basis until we have 
a final resolution to this, other situations where people feel that 
a child in that age group requires to be apprehended and held in 
custody even though they’ve committed no crime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I guess what the minister doesn’t 
understand is we don’t believe that people should have to go to 
the minister of Social Services to get help for their children. We 
believe parents should be able to go directly to the courts and 
have their child helped. 
 
On Friday, the minister said making parents go to the courts to 
get their children treatment may be too much. Doesn’t she think 
having to come to the legislature and beg for help is too much? 
Or how about parents having to go to the police and have their 
child arrested, isn’t that too much? Parents want legal tools. 
They want the right to be parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in committee the other day, the minister admitted 
that there were 6,000 child apprehensions last year; 6,000 times 
the state intervened on behalf of children. Why doesn’t this 
minister believe that parents could apprehend on behalf of their 
children? Aren’t parents as well equipped to deal with their 
children as the courts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, right now the parents do 
have the ability to go to the court with the person from the 
department. And in fact that person provides a support role in 
ensuring that the information is there that’s needed, that the 
assessment is there that’s needed. I don’t think it would be 
necessarily helpful for a person to go directly to court without 
any of that preparatory work having been done. 
 
That being said, as I say I’ve said to the member before — and I 
totally believe this — that parents do want more tools. I believe 
that a lot of young people are very concerned when they see 
friends get into things that they can’t handle. And certainly I 
have every intention of improving the ability to intervene in 
these matters but I also want to do it with some consideration to 
the resources, the people, and the processes involved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, less than a year ago this 
government mocked the Sask Party when we expressed our 
concerns about the drug crystal meth. Now the Premier not only 
acknowledges the problem but is willing to head a Premiers’ 
Conference on the issue. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, now the Premier is . . . not only 
acknowledges there was a problem but is willing to head a 
Premiers’ Conference on this issue and we thank him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the Sask Party is listening to the parents of 
children with addictions that are asking them to allow them to 
have the right to involuntarily admit their child into treatment. 
Will this government listen to the Sask Party now and do what 
we know parents want them to do? Will they allow parents to 
have the right to be parents in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister for CRE. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this very 
carefully, but not all the young people that we deal with have a 
relationship with their family. So I have to think of this from the 
point of view of those children as well as these children and 
what is going to work for the children of the province. 
 
I did indicate I wanted to speak to some of the Aboriginal 
representatives that we’ve been in discussion with on these kind 
of matters before. I do want to talk to the Children’s Advocate. 
All of that is in process. And in fact no matter what we do we 
will be doing it sooner than they’re doing it in virtually any 
other place. And that’s my commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Funding for Centennial Projects 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, several weeks ago the opposition 
asked for a list of centennial projects that have been rejected. 
Officials in the department tell us that the list has been prepared 
and is on the minister’s desk. The minister told the media 
Friday the full list is available, but she will not release it now. 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation refusing to immediately release the list of rejected 
centennial projects? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that question. 
I’ve said this before in the House that we have a process in 
place. There’s a board of trustees that approve or not approve 
these projects that have been submitted, and there is no question 
that there is some great project ideas out there. 
 
And one of the final processes that’s going to be taking place is 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2917 

at the end of this month like, you know, the member opposite 
mentioned. And at that time, you know, some of the final 
decisions will be made as to whether appeals have been 
approved or not approved. And at some point, the list of 
projects that have been approved and not approved will be 
made available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we know that 
the list is available, it’s just that the minister won’t release it 
today. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation says the whole thrust of the centennial celebration is 
that it is community driven. Mr. Speaker, 167 of 351 
applications received from communities for community projects 
have been rejected. Mr. Speaker, why is it that close to half the 
applications for this portion of the centennial money have been 
rejected. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say again that I am 
so proud of the work that the board of trustees do for this 
province. And there is all kinds of great projects that have been 
approved, and the fact is there’s only a certain amount 
available, you know, to work with. And it’s not an easy 
decision for these folks to work on. But at the end of the day, 
there is a process in place. It’s arm’s length, and that’s the way 
it should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has over $800,000 
for fireworks for some communities but nothing for the 
Saskatoon Optimist Club. The minister has $600,000 for 
Tommy Douglas’ movie, movie that clearly doesn’t meet any of 
the normal criteria for centennial investment. It’s a capital 
project. It’s an investment that is in no way cultural. It is a 
movie that whenever there’s a public event, a cabinet minister 
has to be invited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it sounds like politics more than a celebration. It 
seems like any ideas the government have get money, and 
anything that comes from the community is rejected. Mr. 
Speaker, given these facts, how can this minister say our 
centennial celebration is community driven? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, the fact is there’s hundreds 
of community projects that are happening over there, all over 
the province, and there’s all kinds of celebrations happening. 
There is no question as far as that goes. 

And getting back to the issue of project approvals and not 
approvals, the list is not final yet, Mr. Speaker. And like I said 
before, the decision is not up to me. It’s an arm’s-length board 
of trustees that makes these decisions. And it’s the right way to 
handle these project requests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Immigrant Nominee Program 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is lagging far behind when it comes to the 
immigrant nominee program. This program brings skilled 
workers and professionals to our provinces from around the 
world and we become richer for it. 
 
In the fiscal year 2004-2005, Saskatchewan brought 242 people 
to the province under this program. By comparison, in the year 
2004 over 4,000 nominees were accepted in Manitoba. Mr. 
Speaker, why the big difference in the success of the program in 
these two provinces? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the members will know, we have a new nominee program 
arrangement with the federal government. We are entitled this 
year to nominate up to 400 individual nominees along with their 
families. At present we have over 800 people that are in the 
process of moving to Saskatchewan. We have an arrangement 
with the federal government where we’ve been able to expand 
our skilled categories from 11 . . . or about 2 per cent of our 
skilled workforce to about 45 per cent of our workforce. 
 
The federal government does in fact run the immigration 
process in this country. And we’ve been very successful in 
getting the federal government to be more flexible in order that 
we can recruit and attract new immigrants to the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, very successful. You can’t 
argue with the numbers — 4,000 in Manitoba versus 242 in 
Saskatchewan. You have to ask yourself why there’s such a big 
difference. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one reason may be the well-developed 
community support program that they have in Manitoba. In 
Saskatchewan most of the work is being done by volunteers 
who are doing their best but have little support from this 
government. Mr. Speaker, why is the community support 
program for new immigrants so far behind in Saskatchewan 
compared to other jurisdictions and what is this government 



2918 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

doing to remedy the situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have entered into a 
new arrangement with the federal government where 
international students that come to our province can stay for 
two years after they graduate from their program. And they will 
be eligible to be nominated under the immigrant nominee 
program. 
 
I would remind the member opposite that immigration is a 
federal responsibility. I think we have done a tremendous job in 
terms of getting the federal government to agree to double the 
numbers of immigrants that can be nominated under our 
program. They’ve agreed . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Minister for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The federal government has agreed to 
double our immigrant nominee program in the last year. We 
now can nominate 400 individuals along with their families. We 
expect to recruit over 1,000 people to the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have a very successful partnership with the 
trucking industry where 240 immigrants will be nominated 
under that program. As well, Mr. Speaker, we are in the process 
of allowing international students to work off-campus, and this 
will be most helpful in helping us recruit new immigrants to the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, for 2005-2006 
Saskatchewan has set its goal under the immigrant nominee 
program. That goal is 400, 10 per cent of Manitoba. The bar is 
set too low, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, young people are 
leaving Saskatchewan, baby boomers will soon retire. It’s a 
frightening combination. Mr. Speaker, why are we setting our 
target so low under the immigrant nominee program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has had an 
arrangement with the federal . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Minister of Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
know the eloquence and etiquette hasn’t changed much over 
there. I am trying to answer the question. 

Manitoba has had an experience with the immigrant nominee 
program since 1988. They in fact nominate . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would request all members to provide 
the proper opportunity for the minister to respond completely. 
Minister. Order. Order please. Order. Order. Minister of 
Immigration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The facts are that Manitoba does not have an immigrant 
nominee program of 4,000. Their program is 1,500. When you 
include their families, yes, they have 4,000 people that are 
coming to the province. We have a program this year that we’ve 
been able to negotiate with the federal government for 400. We 
anticipate that we will have over 1,000 people come to the 
province. And in fact we have 800 people that are in the process 
of moving to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working very carefully and incrementally 
with the federal government and we anticipate that we will be 
able to expand our immigrant nominee program immensely, 
Mr. Speaker. And in fact we’ll have more to say about this in 
terms of an expansion this fall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Morin: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly some guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. To the 
very left — and perhaps they can wave as I announce their 
names — to the very left we have Garnet Dishaw who is with 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. Beside him we have 
Chris Banting who is the secretary-treasurer for the Retail, 
Wholesale Department Store Union. Beside him we have Paul 
Guillet who is the representative for the Retail, Wholesale 
Department Store Union, and Don Anderson who is also with 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
These are as you can see not spring chickens. These are trade 
unionists in the province who have dedicated their lives to 
bettering the working conditions of all workers in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And I’d like all the members of the Assembly 
to give them a hearty welcome to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2919 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Before orders of the day with leave to move 
a motion substituting names on standing committees. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has requested 
leave to move motions with respect to committees. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Melfort. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution on Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Wayne Elhard be substituted for the 
name of Michael Chisholm on the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 

The Speaker: — Order please, members. It has been moved . . . 
Order please. It has been moved by the member for Melfort, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt: 
 

That the name of Wayne Elhard be substituted for the 
name of Michael Chisholm on the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
today to order written questions 1,094 through 1,216 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 1,094 through to 1,216 have been 
transferred . . . ordered, ordered to be tabled, have been ordered 
to be tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 100 — The Police Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Police Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final reports of the Commission on First 
Nations and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform and the 

Commission of Inquiry Into Matters Relating to the Death of 
Neil Stonechild have highlighted the need for changes to the 
existing police complaint process. While the existing legislation 
provides for an independent officer, the nature of past offence 
illustrates the need to ensure that, on an institutional level, a 
transparent and demonstrably accountable process is established 
that will gain the confidence of the Métis and First Nations 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides for fundamental changes to the 
police complaint and investigation process in the province of 
Saskatchewan. These changes were recommended by a joint 
steering committee struck almost two years ago for the very 
purpose of reviewing the municipal police complaint process. 
 
The committee initially consisted of Saskatchewan Justice, the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the Métis Family 
and Community Justice Services, the Regina Police Service, the 
Saskatoon Police Service, and the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police]. And it was subsequently expanded to include 
the chiefs of police association and the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Police Officers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the steering committee has concluded that First 
Nations people are not using the existing municipal police 
complaints process as much as they should. And we are advised 
that they are not using the RCMP complaint process at all. First 
Nations people have, however, demonstrated through their use 
of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Special 
Investigation Unit, SIU, that they will use a police complaint 
system that they trust. 
 
Accordingly the new process contained in this Bill is intended 
to foster that same level of trust by continuing to work with the 
SIU in identifying and receiving complaints, by including First 
Nations and Métis individuals as decision makers and 
investigators in the new process, by making it as easy as 
possible to make a complaint, and by responding to complaints 
quickly and in a way that will demonstrate the complaints are 
being taken seriously and that they will produce results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes including informalizing the input and 
participation of the Métis and First Nations communities in the 
public complaint discipline and criminal investigation process 
by expanding the existing office of the complaints investigator 
into a more representative police complaints commission 
appointed following consultations with the FSIN [Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and as well as other policing 
partners. 
 
A key element of the new complaint process is the requirement 
for every appointment to the five-person panel to be the product 
of consultations with the FSIN, the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Police Officers, the chiefs of police association, and municipal 
police boards. 
 
Another key element is that every complaint regarding a police 
officer and every investigation with respect to a possible 
criminal offence with respect to a police officer will be subject 
to the direction of the Police Complaints Commission. The PCC 
[Police Complaints Commission] will then determine whether 
that investigation should occur by the PCC itself through its 
investigative arm, by the police service against whom the 



2920 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

complaint was made, by the police service with an outside 
observer, or by a separate police service. However such an 
investigation is conducted, the report would then be returned to 
the PCC to be provided to the chief of police for determination 
of action. Through this independent process, the investigation 
into any alleged police misconduct, whether by way of 
complaint or by way of investigation into a possible offence, 
would be subject to the governance of the PCC. 
 
By making this process responsive, representative of the 
community it serves and fully integrated on both the complaints 
and offence investigation sides is the goal of the joint steering 
committee that the Aboriginal community as well as the 
community at large can place greater confidence in these 
matters. 
 
In addition to these fundamental changes regarding the public 
complaint investigation process, this Bill also makes a series of 
other amendments. The first is the implementation of rules 
respecting cross-border policing to provide clear appointing and 
governance authority in cases where an out-of-province police 
officer needs to continue an investigation in Saskatchewan or 
when a Saskatchewan police officer must leave the province for 
similar reasons. 
 
These changes implement the uniform cross-border policing 
Act that was adopted by the Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada at its 2003 meeting. Given the increasing complexity of 
police investigations and the need for undercover officers to 
travel across jurisdictional lines in their investigations, we feel 
this is of critical importance to co-operative policing in Canada. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further amendment to this Bill authorized the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to annually issue commissions 
under the Great Seal of Saskatchewan to those police officers 
who have received appointments to any of the ranks of 
inspector, superintendent, deputy chief, or chief. This 
commission, modelled on a similar process undertaken by the 
RCMP, will recognize the sacrifices and commitments of our 
Saskatchewan police officers in providing professional 
municipal policing services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also introduces an important requirement 
to address the public concern that police investigations into 
incidents in which they are directly involved need greater 
transparency. 
 
This Bill provides that where serious injury or death has 
occurred while a person was in police custody or as a result of 
police action, the municipal police service or the RCMP 
detachment concerned will be required to immediately consult 
the deputy minister of Justice. This will allow the deputy 
minister of Justice to determine whether an investigation 
observer should be appointed from another police service or 
RCMP detachment in order to monitor an investigation and 
provide a confidential report back on that investigation to the 
deputy minister. Through this mechanism, an outside observer 
will be able to confirm for the deputy minister of Justice that in 
these delicate matters all appropriate steps are being taken to 
ensure a full and frank investigation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this provision, which includes for the first time the 
RCMP, is intended to operate in addition to the significant 
changes previously outlined with respect to the public 
complaint process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation represents a fundamental change in 
the manner in which municipal police services are governed in 
Saskatchewan. I thank the members of the joint steering 
committee for their hard work over a period of almost two years 
to produce these innovative and progressive changes. The 
Federation of Saskatchewan Police Officers, the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the chiefs of police association, 
as well as the various other committed partners of this process 
share a common ideal of increasing professionalism in the 
delivery of policing services. With these changes the 
accountability, transparency, and I believe the effectiveness of 
Saskatchewan’s police services can be ensured well into the 
21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this Assembly to 
join me in supporting this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of An Act to amend the Police Act, 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 100, The Police Amendment Act, 2005, be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and debate this Bill or make some comments on it. And the 
member talks about Neil Stonechild. I think everybody in 
Saskatchewan has probably heard that case. And he’s right that 
the people of the province should feel that they should be able 
to approach a police with any complaint. They should feel that 
they are safe in doing so and that the matter itself will be looked 
after professionally. And if this Act helps that along, that’s 
good. And I think that’s the intent of this particular Act because 
he is right when he talks about the Aboriginal, Métis. 
 
And there’s also other people that are nervous about laying 
complaints about police. They feel that they may even be 
targeted by the police themselves after. And there is an 
apprehension out there of nervousness that people . . . and they 
make a complaint, that maybe it won’t be followed through. 
And I’m quite sure that it is. But I think that we have to do all 
we can as members here to ensure that the public feels 
comfortable in approaching the police when they have a matter 
that they would like investigated because, if you can’t feel safe 
with your police, you know, that’s a scary thought. And I think 
we have to work towards ensuring with that at that end and 
looking at this particular Bill. 
 
It also talks about appointing an Aboriginal to the committee, 
which is good. That should have been a long time coming for 
. . . you know, in my mind it should have been there long ago. 
But I’m glad that he’s going along that lines there because 
every minority needs to be representative or should feel safe 
that they can approach their particular police with a complaint 
at that end. 
 
It also talks about cross-border investigations I believe here. 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2921 

I’m looking through it . . . something that when investigations 
do across the border and as time goes on as we come as a more 
global country with everything, it seems like crime too has 
become very cross-border. 
 
You look at the bike gangs and different gangs that have started 
in the East. At one time you never heard about gangs out here in 
the West, and now it seems like they’ve spread. First I can 
remember in Winnipeg talking about bike gangs and certain 
gangs of individuals that we never had out here. It wasn’t a 
problem years and years ago. You always considered it a 
problem that was down east or maybe in Vancouver, or it was 
in the United States, but not anymore. It’s a problem here in 
Saskatchewan, in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw — where 
gangs are starting to work in it. So anything that you can make 
towards working with interprovincial forces on any kind of a 
particular investigation, I can’t see anything particular wrong 
with that. 
 
There is also another thing he had mentioned here on talking 
about investigations here and also of the joint steering 
committee have worked on it. And I think they’ve come up with 
some good recommendations at that end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
Looking at this Bill though, I would also would like to send it 
out to our police critics — our critic and also the police — and 
to make sure that everybody out there is happy and that most of 
the recommendations are that was recommended . . . that people 
are happy with that. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 100 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 119 — The Election Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Election Amendment Act, 2005. Mr. 
Speaker, a modern elections Act is one of the cornerstones of a 
proper, functioning democracy. Under the direction of our 
independent Chief Electoral Officer, Saskatchewan’s candidates 
and political parties are held to a high level of accountability 
and transparency in the operations and financing of provincial 
elections. 
 
That being said, it has become apparent that The Election Act, 
1996 requires updating. Mr. Speaker, approximately a year ago 
a committee was struck comprised of representatives of all three 
major political parties as well as the Chief Electoral Officer 
with a mandate to identify issues of the operation of the existing 
election Act and to recommend amendments. The purpose of 
this Bill is to now implement the unanimous recommendations 
of that committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill includes proposed amendments that 
would authorize the development of a permanent electronic 

voters list, simplify authorization of advertisements, standardize 
treatment of surplus funds, provide that election signs be 
permitted in residential properties, require access for candidates 
to be permitted to condominiums, provide for facsimile 
submission of nomination papers in an emergency, treat polling 
as an election expense, increase the rebate to candidates to 
match the federal levels, increase the rebate to political parties 
to match the federal levels, provide that the Chief Electoral 
Officer will appoint returning officers, provide that a returning 
officer is not to break a tie vote, simplify absentee voting, and 
provide for the reservation of a name for a political party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while a majority of these changes are procedural 
in nature, changes are also made to accommodate recent 
electoral-related Supreme Court of Canada decisions regarding 
prisoner voting rights and reducing the number of candidates 
required to constitute a fully funded party from 10 candidates to 
2 candidates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the prospect of developing a permanent electronic 
voters list is one of the most significant recommendations of the 
committee. Under this Bill, regulations will be provided for that 
will allow the Chief Electoral Officer to immediately 
commence the process of ensuring that Saskatchewan has a 
current and accurate voters list that will facilitate voting and 
communications in an election in a much more modern and 
efficient manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the membership of the 
committee and the respective caucuses of the political parties 
for the co-operation and hard work in identifying these changes 
through this collaborative process. I would also like to thank 
our new Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Jean Ouellet, and his staff 
for their efforts in identifying the number of procedural and 
practical changes and assisting the committee in understanding 
the operations of this complicated legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly 
join me in supporting these changes to our electoral process. 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Election Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill 119, The Election Amendment Act, 2005, be now read 
a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to get 
up to discuss this Bill. I would like to join the member opposite 
in congratulating the Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Jean Ouellet, 
and wish him all the best. 
 
I know the previous one, Jan Baker, did an excellent job. I 
remember dealing with her since ’99. And she was very, very 
helpful and very, very informative when a person asked a 
question, and helped me quite a bit in the ’99 election when I 
was basically pretty green and you’re not sure what’s going on 
and you want to make sure that you’re following all the rules 
and regulations. And she did an excellent job. And I think Mr. 
Ouellet will be doing, I trust, will be doing an excellent job too 
at that end of it. 



2922 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

With this particular Bill, I’m just going through it with some of 
the recommendations on it which is to authorize development of 
a permanent electronics voters list — which is good, Mr. 
Speaker. I can remember attending a conference where — I 
think that was in Edmonton — where we had talked about some 
of the provinces that have put that in, and they seem to be very 
happy with that. 
 
And as we’re moving through the technology age, as we go on, 
electronic is going to be a part of it. And anything that 
simplifies the voters list, that helps you access it better than 
going through . . . I can remember getting mailed out our voter 
list, or going to pick it up, I guess, last time in Nokomis. I 
mean, it was like lists and lists and boxes and boxes of voters 
lists. And it would be nice to be able to access maybe that from 
a computer in your office rather than going through that hand 
by and which . . . The people that were volunteering in my 
office at election time did an excellent job of it, but I think they 
would like to . . . anything, any way that we can simplify it. 
 
Also talks about simplifying advertisements, some of the rules 
on it, I understand, on that end of it. I’m not sure exactly what 
that is. I’d like to get some more information on that. But any 
time we can simplify things in the election process, it should be 
good. 
 
It also talks about election signs on residential properties, which 
is good. I mean people all want to support their particular party 
at election time and want to be able to put lawn signs out on 
their front lawn and not be encumbered by bylaw or law that 
maybe says in a certain area that you can’t through election. 
Because people like to let . . . you know, some people like to let 
know how they vote and support their candidates in that. 
 
Also it looks at providing a fax submission for nomination 
papers in an emergency, which is good. Because over the past, I 
can remember at the federal end I think that we’ve even had a 
candidate pass on or get very sick sometimes and have to 
withdraw at that end of it. So being able use the fax is good. 
 
Any time you can simplify the election process . . . Because as 
all the members know opposite, it gets pretty hectic out there 
and man you got a lot of things on your mind. And it’s very 
stressful for that month of . . . You’ve got a million things to do, 
and you’re trying to follow the rules and the regulations that are 
set out, making sure that you follow the right procedures on it at 
that end of it. 
 
I know the minister opposite also talks about increasing rebate 
to candidates to match the federal levels. And also one of the 
things that I do like about this particular Bill, it provides that the 
Chief Electoral Officer will appoint the returning officers rather 
than the governing party at particular time. And I think that’s a 
good thing because any time when it comes to appointing the 
people, I think it should be on the merits of the person out there 
that have worked in the previous or whatever. Everybody 
should be able to feel that they can submit their application to 
be an electoral officer in their district, rather than just saying, 
well the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] in; I know that they’re 
not going to choose me. They’re going to choose a party worker 
that maybe did some door knocking for him at the far end. So 
taking that process out of there and trying to make it less 
political I think is a good thing. 

It also provides the returning officer’s not to break a tie vote. 
And I think we had that in the first election I was here in ’90 . . . 
I think it was a by-election where that actually happened. The 
electoral officer had to cast a deciding vote, if I remember right. 
And I mean that’s got to be pretty stressful on a returning 
officer to be able to cast it. And knowing that it wasn’t you 
know . . . so the whole district knows exactly how you’re voting 
on that particular time. And that’s not right. It should always be 
nobody should know if you don’t want them to know exactly 
how you voted at that end. So taking that out of there is a good 
thing. 
 
The prisoner voting rights, I understand, well that comes from 
an Act from the federal end that was challenged, I guess in the 
court, coming from the Supreme Court of Canada. But I know 
the average person out there, if he’s said that the prisoners will 
be voting, probably my . . . I know in my area, won’t really like 
it that much. They will say, you know, that they shouldn’t be 
able to. But unfortunately I guess that’s not determined from 
their stand from here in the province. That’s coming from 
Canada, at that end. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And also another one, to reducing a fully funded political party 
from ten candidates to two, I don’t about that one. I’d like some 
more information on that. I’m thinking, you know, if you can’t 
run 10 candidates, you know, I don’t know if you really 
constitute as a party itself. If you’re only running two, you 
know, basically that’s like two independents, you know. I’m not 
fully . . . don’t know more about that particular thing. I would 
like some more information on that, Mr. Speaker. So with that I 
would like to adjourn debate on this particular Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 119, 
The Election Amendment Act, 2005, be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 120 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005. I would 
like to declare that this Act will be treated as a confidence vote 
as it is an integral part of our 2005-06 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill decreases the tax on aviation fuel from 
3.5 cents per litre to 1.5 cents per litre effective March 24, 
2005. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the tax on aviation fuel 
purchased in Saskatchewan that is used commercially in 
international flights becomes fully refundable under the 
regulations made under the fuel tax legislation. The reduction in 
the aviation fuel tax revenue, Mr. Speaker, will be partially 
offset by an increase in expected aviation fuel sales. Therefore 
the net cost of the tax reduction and rebate is expected to 
amount to about $800,000 per year. 
 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2923 

Mr. Speaker, with these tax changes Saskatchewan joins 
Alberta in having the lowest aviation fuel tax in Western and 
Central Canada. As a result, Mr. Speaker, the provincial 
business climate for Saskatchewan’s airlines, aviation fuel 
dealers, and aviation service organizations is being improved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Fuel Tax 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 120, The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005, be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to make a 
few comments regarding Bill No. 120 I want to first of all begin 
by complimenting the provincial government in recognizing the 
need to look at the high cost of fuel in the province of 
Saskatchewan and the tax level on that fuel and the implications 
it has to this province and to each and every resident who lives 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation specifically deals with one 
level of fuel and it’s the aviation fuel. And to move from 3.5 to 
1.5 cents a litre certainly brings us in line with the provinces 
around us — in line with Alberta and lower than Manitoba. And 
as the minister indicated, we trust . . . just the fact that the 
commercial carriers or any air traffic in this province can now 
look at, especially when they’re flying across to other areas of 
Canada or the United States, would look at Saskatchewan as a 
place where they can purchase their fuel because they now have 
a more competitive nature to deal with. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all aware of the costs that we as 
taxpayers are facing or the travelling public are facing because 
of the ongoing increases in fuel costs. And those costs have to 
be passed on to the consumer. And as those costs are passed on 
to the consumer, no doubt airlines face the challenge of trying 
to get consumers to look at travelling by air. By addressing this 
issue on fuel gives them at least a little bit more that they can 
work with as they look at their costs and try and bring their 
costs in line, or the prices for their travellers in line with what 
would be more acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one thing this piece of legislation doesn’t do 
however is doesn’t acknowledge the concern that we have in 
Saskatchewan especially with the large agricultural base in the 
province of Saskatchewan. One of the issues that certainly is 
hitting the floor right now is the fact that farmers across this 
province are in the process of the spring seeding, the spring 
planting. And I have on many occasions heard many producers 
raising concerns about the high cost of fuel, the returns that 
they’re going to get out of the crop that they’re planting today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we would have hoped the government would 
have looked in some respect at the agriculture-related fuels and 
finding a more equal and level playing field, and follow the 
guidelines of the Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan who have been calling on this government, 
calling on the federal government to address some of these 
issues. 
 
And when I speak about agriculture, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just 

farmers but it’s also the trucking industry. And we’re aware this 
week of what has been taking place in the lower mainland in 
British Columbia as a result of the high fuel costs and what it’s 
driving trucking companies . . . the challenges that they’re 
facing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we compliment the government on noting that 
there is certainly some issues that needed to be dealt with. We 
have to find a more level playing field and addressing the 
aviation fuel issue. However we would like to have seen the 
government look at the other aspects of fuel, the economy of 
the province, and how we can drive this province, how we can 
build this province by enhancing whether it’s agriculture 
producers or the trucking industry or the rail industry in looking 
at their costs as well and trying to create a more level playing 
field. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill 120, The Fuel 
Tax Amendment Act, be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 125 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment 
Act, 2005. I would like to declare that this Act will be treated as 
a confidence vote, as it is an integral part of our 2005-06 
budget. 
 
In the 2004-05 budget we announced that we would be 
reviewing, in consultation with the oil and gas industry, the 
taxation status of resource trusts that own oil and natural gas 
producing properties in the province. As a result of this review, 
Mr. Speaker, the government is introducing amendments to the 
Saskatchewan corporation capital tax legislation to include 
resource trusts for the purposes of levying the corporation 
capital tax surcharge. These changes are effective April 1, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been introduced to specifically 
address a tax inequity issue between corporations and resource 
trusts involved in similar business activities and to preserve the 
province’s corporation capital tax base. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the corporation capital tax is an important source 
of revenue for the province. In this fiscal year it will raise 
approximately $373.7 million. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is strictly intended to close a tax 
loophole in order to restore tax equity in the oil and gas 
industry. It is not a general tax increase and is consistent with 
the government’s overall policy of maintaining and increasing 
the competitiveness of the Saskatchewan taxation environment 
for oil and gas industry investment. 



2924 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, as part of this government’s commitment to 
review . . . to a review of business taxation in Saskatchewan, we 
plan to include the corporation capital tax and the corporation 
capital tax surcharge in the business tax review. Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 125, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
interesting that the minister would begin by basically telling this 
Assembly that his government will view this piece of 
legislation, Bill No. 125, as a confidence vote in this 
government. And one has to ask, what kind of confidence are 
they really, really trying to bring to the people of Saskatchewan, 
to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Are they trying to create confidence in the investment 
community, looking at this province as a place to build and to 
come to and to invest? Or are they more interested in just 
continuing to drive out investment and then themselves have to 
find the money to do projects as a government on their own 
rather than looking at people in the private sector who would be 
willing to and will look at this province as a good place to 
invest? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one can only assume that since this government 
hasn’t been able to keep its promise of 0, 1, and 1, that now 
they have to look at other alternatives to generate a tax revenue 
to address the issues of the ongoing contracts that are now being 
negotiated that have gone beyond the 0, 1, and 1. And we’re 
quite familiar with the most recent contract that’s been settled 
with the teachers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not begrudge teachers being paid 
appropriately and accordingly and recognizing their skills. 
However our concern from the day the government talked about 
0, 1, and 1 isn’t coming from the opposition side of the House 
— one would say, well that might be interesting — but our 
concern was that this government promotes itself as being a 
government that’s open to fair and honest negotiation and has 
settlements in wage agreements. 
 
And yet when you said 0, 1, and 1, you basically ask yourself 
exactly what opportunity is there for openness in wage 
agreements and in the debate as groups continue to work to 
lobby to bring forward the reasons why they feel they need to 
arrive at certain levels of wage guidelines, whether it’s beyond 
the 0, 1, and 1. 
 
And this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is, as I mentioned 
earlier when you’ve got the 0, 1 and 1, we all know now that 
the cost of the teacher’s salary has certainly been higher than 
what the government first recognized. And where do they go? 
They go to the major industries and corporations in the province 
of Saskatchewan which I would suggest to you this province is 
going to need to begin to become much more open to the fact 
that investment in this province is good investment. 

The opportunity of inviting large corporations to come to this 
province and invest in this province is good for this province. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s good for the taxpayers of this province. It’s 
good for the labourers of this province. It’s good for people 
even within the union industry, Mr. Speaker, because of the fact 
that we have more investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And in this case we’re talking about the oil sector and the 
energy sector, Mr. Speaker. And you look, Mr. Speaker, you 
take a look at the companies that have invested or are here right 
now, although we need to be mindful of the fact we seem to be 
really lagging behind other provinces when it comes to real 
investment in the oil and gas industry in the province. 
 
In the area I represent, the Moosomin constituency, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have many young people who 
have left this province. And they’re following the dollars of 
drilling and the oil sector. Because of the fact the investment 
isn’t here, they’re leaving the province. And those are good 
paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. They’re leaving the province to go 
after those jobs. Why are we not bringing them into this 
province? And I would suggest to you that Bill 125 is going to 
be another inhibitor in keeping out that good, solid investment 
that really creates real job opportunities for the young people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has spoken out of both sides of its 
mouth. Early in the year they offered royalty holidays for wells 
using enhanced oil recovery methods, and as I believe is was 
the Premier used to say, awoke a sleeping giant. Just this past 
week they are now telling us they’ve hit — or the Monday after 
they made that announcement — they hit the oil sector with a 
lead pipe known as the corporate capital tax. Mr. Speaker, you 
can’t have it both ways. Mr. Speaker, you cannot on one hand 
say you’re inviting people in and then the next moment turn 
around and basically bat them over the head and say you’re still 
welcome to come into the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important for this government to finally 
realize that large corporations are not enemies. They’re job 
creators. They bring investment opportunities to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you can appreciate the fact that we 
have some major concerns with this Bill before this House at 
this time, and therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that the debate on second reading of Bill 125 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
[15:00] 
 

Bill No. 121 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of my remarks I will move second reading of 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2925 

amendments to The Farm Financial Stability Act. Mr. Speaker, 
the livestock loan guarantee program assists Saskatchewan 
residents in establishing production associations and borrowing 
funds on the strength of a government guarantee to the lender 
and the association’s assurance fund. These funds are used by 
the association to purchase feeder cattle or bred cattle on behalf 
of members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to introduce 
amendments that increase flexibility and safety to producers 
who are enrolled in the livestock loan guarantee program. 
 
The amendments are the result of consultations with an 
11-member producer advisory committee representing farmers 
and with a number of financial lenders, including banks and 
credit unions. The proposed amendments will confirm that the 
producer agreements under this program are exempt from 
certain provisions of The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act as 
has been the practice when producer agreements have been 
completed between the association and its members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will allow feeder and 
breeder associations to enter an agreement with the minister to 
proceed with debt collection after a guaranteed payout has been 
made to the lender, while working in partnership with 
government in recovery of government’s loss. 
 
Under the existing legislation an association loses the right to 
recover money from a member after a guarantee has been 
called. As well, the proposed amendments will provide 
increased safety to member funds. They will ensure that 
assurance funds held by an association are exempt from seizure 
by other creditors. They will provide increased flexibility to 
producers who want to leave their deposits in the fund so that 
these deposits are there for the next purchase, without these 
deposits being at risk from other members’ defaults. 
 
And lastly, the proposed amendments will provide authority to 
make regulations related to assurance funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes to the Act I have described are being 
made to address livestock producers’ need for programs that 
change to reflect the current financing environment while 
ensuring risk is manageable. I believe these amendments 
developed in consultation with stakeholder groups will result in 
continuation of the livestock loan guarantee program as an 
important source of financing, thus furthering the growth of the 
livestock sector. 
 
I would like to express my appreciation for all the input we 
received from stakeholder groups throughout this process. 
These stakeholders recognize the importance of the continuing 
alliance between producers, lenders, and government in 
supporting the financing needs of the livestock sector. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that The Farm Financial 
Stability Amendment Act be read a second time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food that Bill 121, The Farm Financial 
Stability Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

I recognize the member for Melville-Saltcoats, but I believe that 
Melville is up for introductions. I’d like to just get somebody 
else on record first if I could please. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Why is the member for Melville-Saltcoats on his feet? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Melville-Saltcoats has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members today 
25 grade 5 and 6 students from Saltcoats; also a couple of their 
teachers, Johnna McBride and Marlene Blatter, and chaperone 
Cheryl Morphy. 
 
I might also mention, Mr. Speaker, these students are from my 
hometown, in fact where I took a lot of my schooling. So I’d 
like to ask all members to welcome them here today. I’ll have a 
chance in a few minutes to meet with them. And will all 
members welcome there here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2005 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say a few 
words on Bill 121, the farm financial security Act. 
 
The provincial loan guarantee program has been very important 
to not only the feeding industry of Saskatchewan but also to the 
cow-calf producer. And it’s fundamental that the government 
keeps the loan guarantee program intact, improve it, and make 
improvements as far as security. 
 
And there’s a couple of key points that I know because I’m very 
close to the local Biggar feeder co-op and take loans out 
personally. But there’s many, many producers in Saskatchewan 
that do use the loan guarantee program. And the relationship 
between the government and the lender and the producer is 
important. 
 
And there’s a tendency in the past that producers that have a 
very poor financial situation — very poor financial, well, 
stability quite frankly — and they go to a bank or credit union. 
And the tendency is for the bank or credit union to kind of 
dump these producers off onto the local feeder association. And 
that’s not really fair to do that. It puts added risk to the whole 



2926 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

feeder association, the local feeder association, and the 
provincial plan if that becomes too prevalent. And that’s 
something the government needs to address, I believe. 
 
Also as we know with the BSE situation the last two years, the 
producers are under a lot of financial stress and the feeder 
associations have been key in keeping many producers afloat. 
And particularly in the feeder part of the plan is that money is 
lent to producers to buy these feeders. The producer has the 
obligation to put their own feed and inputs into these cattle. So 
the animals are actually gaining in equity all the way along, and 
so it’s very safe from the government’s point of view and from 
the stability of the plan and the feeder association. 
 
On the cow-calf side is a little bit more dicey, let’s say, because 
of the last two years and the value of a cull cow and those types 
of things. Except even though the feeder price and the calf price 
hasn’t been as high as we’d like, it’s still the value has generally 
been there. It’s normally when there’s been problems with the 
feeder association and bad loans, it’s in the first year or two 
when there’s been very few loans . . . payments been made on 
the loan and the equity hasn’t built up in the breeding stock. 
And of course the value of the breeding stock may collapse. 
 
So it’s important that the government keeps that balance in 
mind, both to help the producer, but also protect the local feeder 
association and the program as a whole. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the assurance fund will now be 
exempt from all creditors and that’s very, very . . . not all 
creditors but from the banking and the credit unions I believe is 
the way the Bill is read. 
 
Now there’s a number of housekeeping amendments. I think it’s 
very incumbent on the government not to make any changes 
that would drop the guarantee to an individual member or the 
association that needs to use this money. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, certainly we will talk to the stakeholders about 
this and just get their feedback about the changes that are being 
considered. And certainly we will be discussing that issue with 
them and I’m sure we’ll have questions later on. And I know a 
number of my colleagues would like to continue to speak to this 
so I’d like move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 121 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 — The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 
2005 and I will do so at the end of my remarks. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the effect of the Bill before the Assembly today is 
to make the amendments to a number of pieces of legislation 
administered by the Department of Labour. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, the Bill modifies section 18 of The 
Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 which sets up the 
radiation health and safety committee. The radiation health and 
safety committee advises the minister with respect to radiation 
health generally, safety measures, and recommended code of 
practices. 
 
The committee is to include a diagnostic radiologist, a 
therapeutic radiologist, a specialist in pathology or internal 
medicine with extensive knowledge of and training in 
hematology, a dentist or dental surgeon, a medical radiation 
technologist, and a physicist experienced in radiation physics. 
Most of these experts are nominated by their respective 
professional associations. 
 
Under the current wording of the Act, unless all named 
representatives are appointed, the committee is not validly 
constituted. Occasionally, Mr. Speaker, one of the nominating 
organizations is unable to find a qualified member willing to sit 
on the committee. The Bill before the legislature clarifies that 
the radiation health and safety committee can continue its work 
even if all of the members have not been appointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2003 a case in the Court of Queen’s Bench 
confirmed that an employee who is terminated with less than 
one year of employment is still entitled to holiday pay on 
termination. The Bill before us today clarifies that, under 
section 35 of The Labour Standards Act, an employer is 
required to pay a terminated employee his or her holiday pay 
even if that employee worked for the employer for less a year. 
This interpretation was always the intention of the legislation 
and the court confirmed it. This amendment therefore does not 
change the law, but makes it more apparent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also repeals the unproclaimed section of 
13.4 of The Labour Standards Act, the so-called additional 
hours section. The Bill will also repeal the unproclaimed 
section of 84(1)(e.11) which establishes the authority for the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations for the 
purpose of section 13.4. 
 
During the first two months of this year, this government 
undertook a consultation exercise to see whether it would be 
possible to develop regulations that would make section 13.4 
workable today. Ultimately what we heard was that it is not in 
fact possible to make additional hours under The Labour 
Standards Act workable. 
 
The issue of providing people with the opportunity to make a 
decent living from a secure job is a very complex one, and we 
have come to realize we need a different approach. And that is 
why we announced that we would be withdrawing the draft 
regulations and repealing the unproclaimed additional hours 
section in this session of the legislature. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
does not mean that we are abandoning the people we have been 
trying to help. That is why we also made the decision to appoint 
a commission on improving the work opportunities for 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2927 

The commission will make recommendations to improve access 
by part-time and vulnerable workers to employment income, 
employment benefits, and work opportunities in 
Saskatchewan’s growing economy. This will include 
identifying the issues faced by part-time employees and others 
employed in non-standard working arrangements. The 
commission will also examine existing government policies and 
programs that address these issues and assist workers in making 
a transition out of non-standard or low-wage work. I have asked 
the commission to present its report and recommendations by 
December 15 of this year. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there are several pieces of legislation that 
contain references to other legislation that has been repealed 
and replaced with newer Acts. This Bill updates those statutory 
references. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 122, The 
Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
that Bill 122, The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment 
Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 22 . As the minister laid out what this Bill is 
doing, it’s interesting that there’s a number of other 
amendments other than repealing section 13.4. And I just want 
to make the comment that that’s where the department and the 
government should be putting its time to . . . is giving fair and 
balanced labour laws to Saskatchewan to try to bring in 
governments . . . jobs and investment into the province. 
 
And then having this 13.4 on the books and then after the 2003 
election saying to their friends in the labour movement that 
basically that this is going to be their payoff for their support in 
the election and finding out that it was such a hideous section 
that the outcry from the people of Saskatchewan was so great 
that they had to back down. And it’s unfortunate the 
government went that way. They seemed to have found 
themselves that they couldn’t help their friends in this way. And 
one wonders what is coming next as far as a payback to the 
labour movement, and I suspect Bill 86 and 87 is that payback. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And I would just like to say, what the Department of Labour 
should be doing is looking after occupational health and safety 
— the welfare of workers, the safety of the workforce on the 
job site, Workers’ Compensation Board, labour standards — to 
make sure rulings are fair and balanced for both the employer 
and the employee. And this type of amendment which they 
thought they could sneak by is just totally unacceptable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to allow this to go to Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour that Bill 122, The 
Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Trade 
Union Act are important but as well we have Bills 86 and 87 
that are important, and at this time I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview that debate on second reading of Bill 122 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 123 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I will be 
moving second reading of The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been over a century since the plow met 
Saskatchewan’s prairie. Over the past 150 years, the majority of 
native prairie in North America has disappeared. In 
Saskatchewan it’s estimated that almost 80 per cent of the 
prairie has been lost. Mr. Speaker, the changes don’t stop with 
the Prairies. Since European settlement began, 73 per cent of 
the boreal transition zone in Saskatchewan has been converted 
to farm land. 
 
At first the transition from prairie to farm land was slow, but 
after World War II, farmers cultivated more land and grew 
more crops. Often marginal land was cleared, plowed, and used 
to grow grains and oilseeds. 
 
Southern Saskatchewan now has one of the most modified 
landscapes in the world. Over the past century we have seen 
more than 75 per cent of our natural area in the agricultural 
region be used for farms and other developments such as roads, 
towns, and cities. The farm land has given us bountiful crops, 
and agriculture still is an important part of the provincial 
economy. The producers who lease land included in The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act have proven to be good 
stewards and wildlife is benefiting. 
 
As well as being important to agriculture, this land has also 
been home to wildlife populations, some of which often weren’t 
previously found in this province. Examples include 
white-tailed deer, raccoons, red fox, and many small birds. The 
habitat protected by The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
provides food, water, shelter to more than 400 species of 
wildlife. 
 
Much of the best remaining wildlife habitat in Saskatchewan is 
on Crown land. These natural areas are very important for 
maintaining existing wildlife populations. The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act protects 1.4 million hectares of natural upland 
and natural wetland in the agricultural areas, while continuing 



2928 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

to support some agricultural uses and oil and gas activities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act designation has no effect on the lessee’s 
rights to continue leasing the land. The philosophy of The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is to conserve wildlife habitat 
while allowing traditional uses. As a matter of fact, much of the 
land under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is leased to 
cattle producers who use it for grazing and haying. Cattle as 
grazers play much the same role as bison used to. 
 
Under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, oil and gas 
companies may explore and drill, but they must minimize their 
impacts on the surface. They are also limited in the number of 
well pads permitted on these lands. 
 
The amendment to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, which 
we are speaking to today, recommends taking 2,223 hectares 
out of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. The largest area 
recommended for withdrawal is 2,012 hectares. It relates to a 
specific land claim settlement by the Mistawasis First Nation. 
Mistawasis First Nation has met all the conditions related to the 
sale of these Crown lands. If this amendment is approved, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food will sell the land to the 
Mistawasis First Nation at fair market value. The amendment 
will allow the rest of the designated land — a total of 210 
hectares in the Hudson Bay, Shell Lake, and Endeavour areas 
— to be made available to the current lessees and accommodate 
an existing commercial lessee’s plans for seasonal uses. 
 
The proposed removal of the land included in the amendment is 
mitigated by actions taken during the past two years which 
protected approximately 51,800 hectares of ecologically 
important Crown land. The withdrawals meet the needs of the 
producers and community interests involved, and the 
department is committed to placing other lands equal to those 
withdrawn under the WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Act] protection. This reflects the no-net-loss policy of the 
province. Mr. Speaker, this demonstrates that we are continuing 
to work to conserve habitat for our birds, fish, and animals. 
 
We have also used the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund to 
protect more than 84,000 hectares of prime wildlife habitat 
through both purchase and conservation easements. 
 
The representative area network is also an important part of the 
province’s efforts to conserve habitat. Today nearly 6 million 
hectares of important lands and waters are included in the 
representative areas network. That is 9 per cent of the 
province’s area as we proceed to 12 per cent, to our 12 per cent 
goal established under the biodiversity action plan. 
 
RAN [representative area network], the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund and The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
have put Saskatchewan at the forefront of national and 
international habitat and ecosystem conservation. We are 
showing that the wise use of public land can curb habitat loss 
while accommodating the interests of agriculture, wildlife, and 
the people pf Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move the second reading of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill 123, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 123, An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act. This is an Act that amends the current Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act. And it removes some clauses from the 
old Act to accommodate land claims by the Mistawasis First 
Nation which, as members know, is a First Nation located west 
of Prince Albert. 
 
Now listening to the minister speak, you would have thought 
that this was an environmentally friendly Bill that was adding 
lands to the wildlife habitation protection Act, but in fact the 
opposite is true. It’s actually taking land out of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act. So it was a little odd to hear the minister 
raving about land being put into the Act when in fact the Bill 
that he’s presenting today does exactly the opposite. And I was 
quite amused to see the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
wildly applauding. I thought, why is the member from 
Greystone — who I thought was an environmentalist — just so 
wildly applauding his colleague that’s taking lands out of The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act? It just seemed rather strange to 
me. 
 
The government explanatory note says that there will be no . . . 
there will be future efforts made to add equivalent lands to the 
WHPA to offset removal, so obviously that’s their intention. 
But we’ve seen the intention of the NDP many times is only 
words and not actually action. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that arise from 
the tabling of this Bill. Is there a process in place to determine 
how more land will be incorporated under the WHPA at a later 
date? How are they proposing that this will happen? Or is it just 
a pipe dream? Is it just a wish on behalf of the NDP 
government? 
 
Also because of this Bill and the settling of this claim, will there 
actually be less wildlife to protect? The minister didn’t touch on 
that possibility. And I think that’s a question that needs to be 
asked. And we should be looking into that very matter because 
if lands are taken out and the new owners of the land have the 
right to do with as they please, you know, what will be the 
outcome? You know, we’re not anticipating that it would be 
negative, but nevertheless we have to ask the question. 
 
Obviously for a government that claims to be a green 
government, this is a really strange piece of legislation that they 
have brought forward because while it takes land out of 
protection, it certainly doesn’t have the power to put land into 
protection. Also are the current owners of the land being 
compensated? We would assume that they are. I didn’t hear the 
minister clarify that, so that’s another question that needs to be 
asked about the piece of legislation. Will the compensation be 
fair? What process will compensation take? How will it be 
determined? And finally, as I mentioned, this Bill has the 
potential to lessen the amount of wildlife protected in the 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2929 

province. 
 
We know that the treaty land entitlement is a factor in this Bill, 
and we want to know how the process will unfold. Is it under 
the usual auspices? And I think I heard the minister say it was. 
If that is in fact the case, then we are pleased because we 
believe there needs to be a willing seller, a willing buyer, and 
that in the case of lease lands that the lessee of lands have first 
right of refusal. And we would understand that if there are 
future lands that are brought into the TLE [treaty land 
entitlement], that they would be under that process. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, these questions come to us 
immediately upon reading the Bill for the first time. There may 
be other questions that need to be answered. We as the official 
opposition certainly do our due diligence to review NDP 
legislation very thoroughly because we have found some bad 
apples in the barrel from time to time. And whether this is a bad 
apple or a good apple, we will take our time to determine. 
 
We want to consult with some of the stakeholders, make sure 
that they are aware of what’s happening and that they are 
satisfied that the government has provided them with adequate 
explanations. And once we ascertain all of that information, 
then we can decide whether to support this legislation or not. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that debate on second reading of Bill 123 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to move second reading of The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2005. 
 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act governs the Auto 
Fund, the universal mandatory automobile insurance program 
administered of course by SGI. The primary purpose of the 
Auto Fund is to provide basic auto insurance coverage for 
Saskatchewan drivers at affordable rates. The proposed 
amendment to the Act will ensure that coverage is as fair as 
possible for all Saskatchewan motorists while rates continue to 
stay affordable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon proclamation of this amendment, SGI 
customers who suffered catastrophic injuries prior to August 
2002 will all receive the same income benefit based on the 
industrial average wage. The increase in income benefits will 
affect approximately 200 customers injured prior to the 
introduction of no-fault in 1995 and before improvements were 
made to benefits in August 2002. In both cases, some customers 
are currently receiving an income benefit less than the industrial 

average wage. 
 
These customers who are permanently and severely injured will 
receive a minimum . . . at a minimum I should say, an income 
benefit based on the industrial average wage, which is currently 
at $430.56 per week. The benefit will be indexed to the 
consumer price index, Mr. Speaker. This will mean an increase 
of as much as $180 per week for some of the affected 
customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important benefit enhancement for 
these particular SGI customers who rely on these injury income 
benefits to live on. This change in legislation is being made to 
ensure that all customers who did not have a choice in their 
insurance coverage prior to 2003 are all receiving the same 
level of income benefits. 
 
That concludes my outline of the proposed amendment found in 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2004. 
This amendment works to make our compulsory insurance 
more fair, more efficient, and more socially responsible. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this change will ensure fairness for all 
Saskatchewan motorists while keeping auto rates affordable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for SGI that Bill 124, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2005, be now read a second time. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair recognizes the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
also pleased to respond to Bill No. 124, the automobile accident 
insurance Act (no. 2). And, Mr. Speaker, at first glance it looks 
like some positive things in this legislation. This Act, as I 
mentioned, amends The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, 
and this amendment will increase the income indemnity benefit 
payable to people who were permanently injured prior to 
January 1, 1995. And, Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan 
people are known as people with heart and compassion, people 
who care about other people, and if we can further assist those 
who have been injured we want to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amount of the increase will be from the current 
rate of $251.45 per week to a new amount of $430.46 per week. 
Mr. Speaker, what’s encouraging is that these benefits will be 
indexed — indexed to the consumer price index, I understand, 
which is different than the current food allowance. 
 
You know on one hand we see an NDP government being very 
tight-fisted with vulnerable people, not indexing the food 
allowance, but at least in the case of this particular provision we 
do see that there is indexing involved. These adjustments will 
occur annually. And, Mr. Speaker, we speak in favour of that 
kind of legislation as opposed to the very tight-fisted and 
unbelievably frugal, almost mean-spirited approach to people 
on social assistance who aren’t receiving adequate increases in 



2930 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

their food allowance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the new provision will increase the income 
replacement benefit payable to individuals who were 
catastrophically injured between January 1995 and July 2002. 
So this Bill is looking back at people who haven’t been treated 
properly between those years and is making adjustment to see 
that they receive the adequate compensation that they should 
have. The amount will be the greater of the individual’s income 
replacement benefit or the industrial average wage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also some housekeeping changes in this 
Bill. And we always take that word housekeeping with a grain 
of salt. We want to have a little closer look and make sure that 
they are merely housekeeping and don’t have any negative 
impacts on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We will be again consulting with the stakeholders. We will be 
reflecting on changes to the new traffic safety Act. And once we 
are assured and feel confident that this is in fact a good piece of 
legislation — as it appears to be at first blush, Mr. Speaker — 
we will allow it to move on. But until we can do that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that debate on second reading of Bill 124 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for this Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The first item of business is estimates 
for the Department of Health found on page 76 of the 
Saskatchewan Estimates book. Mr. Minister, could you 
introduce your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. This afternoon I’m 
pleased to have with me John Wright, the deputy minister; 
Duncan Fisher, the assistant deputy minister; Max Hendricks, 
the executive director of finance and administration branch; and 
Lawrence Krahn, the assistant deputy minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Vote no. 32, subvote (HE01), central 
management and services. Is the subvote agreed? I recognize 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister and your 
officials, I look forward to asking some questions this afternoon 

and I’m sure you look forward to answering them as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to start with the whole area of addictions. 
And I know that a few years ago SADAC [Saskatchewan 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission], one of the CBOs 
[community-based organization] that was working with 
addictions, was disbanded — I think that could be the word that 
was used — and everything was put under mental health. 
 
I know that not all the provinces have done that and I imagine 
there must have been a reason for it, but I’m wondering if your 
department has actually had some benchmarking at the time, if 
you’ve measured the effectiveness of the decision to remove 
mental health from under the CBO and put it under . . . 
addictions under mental health and putting it under your 
department now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much. I think your 
question revolves around the presence of SADAC, the 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug and Addictions Commission 
in Saskatchewan and what the present services are. 
 
Probably about just over 10 years ago, the decision was made to 
remove that province-wide agency and have the services 
provided through the regions. And the present system now is 
the regional health authorities provide both addictions and 
mental health services. And they still have addictions 
counsellors; there’s people specialize in addictions and 
specialize in mental health services. But the coordination 
through one management or administration allows for the 
response, especially to dual diagnosis and multiple diagnosis 
issues, in a much more coordinated way. 
 
It also has allowed for services to be provided right across the 
province and so that the various regions of the province will 
provide the services as part of the regional health authority. 
Some areas continue to have more expertise than others, and 
they become provincial resources. And that reflects the fact that 
they have a significant number of specialists in that area or that 
they may have a facility in that area. 
 
But we made that decision consciously as a government and as 
Saskatchewan Health, and we’re continuing to work with that 
system which provides services across the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I guess my question was 
determining the effectiveness of what you’re doing now by 
putting addictions under mental health, as opposed to having an 
organization that was just looking after addictions itself. The 
important aspect of this is ensuring the people who have 
addictions, whether they’re living in a small area, a rural area in 
Saskatchewan, or living in downtown Regina, would have the 
same opportunity to have the counselling and have help for 
their addictions. 
 
And my question to you is, how can we be sure, or how are you 
sure that this is working better than the old system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the question is, are the services 
provided in a better way now than they were before and what 
kind of information do your have . . . or do I have here that will 
support that? 
 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2931 

Now practically the kind of information that I do have relates to 
the total number of people that are served. And the numbers as 
of, I guess it would be as of last year, the period ended March 
31, 2004, was that there were about just over 21,000 
admissions. And 10 years earlier that number would have been 
just over 15,000. So there’s a broader service provided and I 
know we’ve put more resources in over these years. And so 
that’s one measure. 
 
Also we provide services right across the whole province 
through the regional health authorities. And the access points 
are still fairly substantial right across the province. There’s not 
just one access point. 
 
For example for each RHA [regional health authority] there are 
access points in many communities and then the services are 
provided in that particular area. But if there isn’t a resource 
that’s available in one regional health authority, then they 
would go to another regional health authority, whether it’s 
Saskatoon or Prairie North or some other area. So the services 
continue to be provided. 
 
One of the challenges in this whole area — and it’s not just a 
challenge in Saskatchewan; I’d say it’s a challenge right across 
North America — is dealing with the dual and multiple 
diagnosis where people have mental health issues and 
addictions issues that are intertwined. And I think the new 
system that we have has enabled us to be better prepared to deal 
with that particular problem. But as we know, and that’s why 
one of our members has been reviewing the whole addictions 
area, is that we have to do some things better and so we’re 
trying to figure out what those things are and where we can put 
our resources if that’s what’s required, or how we’re organizing 
things if we need to change that. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the number of 21,000, I believe, 
would be the number of people or cases that have been brought 
forward that have an addiction. Is that what the numbers 
represented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, this is probably a mixture of all 
addictions that there are from gambling to drug and alcohol 
concerns. Now that addictions is under mental health, can you 
give me an idea of what percentage of the mental health budget 
is dealing with addictions? And I understand that’s a 
complicated question because of the multi-faceted approach of 
addictions. But I know that there would’ve been a number that 
was used when you were talking about it through SADAC, so 
can you give us an idea of the percentage of that budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the budget that we are now discussing 
we’ve added 1.75 million on top of 23 million, so the total 
would be $24.75 million for addictions — that’s specifically 
directed to addictions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So is it up to the regional health authorities to 
determine if that extra money is spent on personnel or treatment 
centres, or how is that determined? 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the response to your question I think 
the best way to describe it is that the $23 million that are there 
in the existing, ongoing programs are primarily decided by the 
regional health authorities as they organize their costs. The 
additional 1.75 million, which is in this budget, will go to meet 
some of the specific needs and probably in response to the 
report from the member who is studying this particular issue. 
 
What I would remind the member though is that the biggest 
costs and almost all the money relates to staffing costs, because 
often the facilities are located in another health facility. And so, 
there’s not very much money that would be allocated toward 
buildings and other things like that. It’s actually related to the 
staff that are involved. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You had indicated 
earlier that the number of cases of people who have addictions 
have gone up from 10,000 to 21,000 in the past 10 years. So I 
imagine that, I would think that that probably means the number 
of addiction counsellors has increased in the same percentage 
— I would hope. And also the number of training seats that are 
available for people working in that area has also increased. 
 
Can you give me an idea of how many addiction counsellors 
there are in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d just like to correct the member’s 
interpretation of my previous information. The move was from 
15,000 cases approximately to 21,000 cases — not 10,000. 
 
But the budget over that same time period has gone from 12.9 
million in ’96-97 to the proposed budget now for ’05-06 which 
would be 24.75. So it’s almost doubled even though the number 
of cases have gone up by 50 per cent. 
 
But practically, across the system, there are probably 
approximately 250 people who work in addictions throughout 
the health system. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, has that number doubled? 
Was it 125 in ’95-96? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s not information that I have right 
here but, if you wish, I could get that. I don’t think it would 
double necessarily, in that the costs per worker have gone up. 
But I think that we have been steadily increasing the supply of 
people working in the addictions area and we’ve been 
responding to the needs and requests as identified by the 
managers in the regional health authorities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Has the number of training seats in the 
province gone up as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Whether the number of training seats has 
increased is not information that we have here. That would 
relate to the Department of Learning and SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology] and some of the 
. . . of university courses, if they’re related. So we don’t have 
that information readily available, but we could obtain that I 
assume if you wished. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is the minister aware if there has been a 
request or an idea that there’s a need for more people that are 



2932 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

trained in this area of chemical addictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We continually monitor within the health 
system what kinds of workers are required, and clearly the issue 
around nursing numbers and others take the top spot. 
 
But one of the things that we did identify in our Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care is having a clear health human 
resources plan. That plan will be completed by December of 
this year. It will take into account information right across the 
whole gamut of the occupations within health care. It will 
respond to things that have been identified by the member 
who’s looking at addictions issues. It will respond to concerns 
that are raised by regional health authorities around what some 
of their needs are. 
 
I think we as far as . . . We have bursary programs that are 
provided. I don’t think there are any bursaries directly related to 
chemical dependency workers in that particular course, but 
there are bursaries related to clinical psychologists which often 
. . . and they’re often people who work in this field. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s two or three 
other areas that I want to go through and I know time slips by 
quickly. So I want to start by asking about the beds for 
addictions. I know at Larson House we’ve been told that there’s 
20 social detox beds and 12 brief detox beds. 
 
Can you give us, give me an explanation of what you mean, the 
difference between these? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The difference between the brief detox 
beds and social detox relates to primarily the length of time. 
Brief detox would be a situation where somebody is brought 
into a facility for, oh 36, 48 hours, maybe three, four days, just 
to basically settle a particular episode that may be there. So 
often they’re brought in by social workers or police. 
 
The social detox is a little bit longer and it would depend on the 
particular situation. But the role of the social detox is to have a 
person detox so that they can go into a treatment program so 
that one may be you know weeks or even a month or two in that 
particular point. But the point is when they go into their 
treatment program they need to be off of whatever particular 
chemical dependency they’re involved with. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I have no doubt that you’re very 
concerned about the fact that we don’t have youth treatment 
beds in this province. And I’m aware that you’re saying that we 
shall have. In July I believe there’s supposed to be 12 beds 
available. 
 
I also know that just from the discussion you had a moment ago 
that there is a knowledge that the length of treatment, depending 
on the addiction, has to differ. When we are talking about 
crystal meth, I know that all experts are saying that the amount 
of time required for treatment has to be far longer than the 28 
days that’s being used now for most treatment centres. Has 
there been discussion on the amount of time that these beds will 
be available per patient when they are dealing with drug 
addictions, especially drugs like crystal meth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the present time at Calder Centre there 

are 12 youth beds, and so there are 12 youth treatment beds at 
Calder Centre. But what we have identified is that there are 
some other needs for youth stabilization beds. And so we’re 
looking at that and that’s the kind of information once again 
that the member who’s looking at this is going to be presenting 
in his report. 
 
As far as the length of stay for treatment, basically that’s 
tailored around the needs that are there. And as the member 
knows, there are different lengths of time depending on what 
kinds of substances are involved, and it’s fairly clear involving 
crystal meth that we need longer times of period in the initial 
detox. And as that particular treatment protocols are developed, 
then they will end up making sure that there’s more time if 
that’s what’s required. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the youth program that’s in place 
right now I believe has . . . There are youth beds there. But from 
my understanding there isn’t a different program for youth than 
there is for the adult people that are in the centre. I’m sure the 
minister is well aware that a treatment that works for an 
18-year-old is not the same type of treatment that’s required for 
somebody who’s 38 years old. 
 
And that’s one of the real frustrations that the workers find is 
that they aren’t able to provide a program to the young people 
that are in the centre that will actually meet their needs. And 
also I’m concerned that the training that’ll be required for the 
personnel that’ll be dealing with the youth is being taken right 
now. If we’re going to have some beds open this summer for 
people that are dealing with an addiction like meth, those 
people should be trained at this time. Are they being trained? 
Where are they being trained? How many have you got ready to 
go, so when we do have the centre open, treatment centre open, 
we’ll have the personnel ready to fully work within the 
program? 
 
[16:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think what we have to recognize is that 
we do have many capable people within our overall addiction 
services who are specialists in youth addictions, and those 
particular people will be the ones that will be staffing what we 
do plus new people that may be available. 
 
But clearly the goal is to have people who have knowledge 
about some of the traditional problems that relate to drug 
addiction, but then also make sure that they are aware and have 
the latest information around crystal meth. And this is clearly an 
expanding field. We know that there isn’t even an international 
protocol yet around youth addiction to crystal meth. There are 
some very, very good ideas, and we will be making sure that 
that’s all part of what we do here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I take some heart when you say 
that it’s an expanding field because we’re well aware it is, and 
we also know that it’s not going away. We’d like to think that it 
would be something that would be a flash in the pan like some 
of the other drugs, like ecstasy a few years ago. But it’s not 
going to be. All the centres in the world that have talked about 
it know that this drug not only doesn’t go away, it increases. So 
my concern is that we are not just ready for what we have right 
now but for what is going to happen in the future. 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2933 

In question period a while ago, Mr. Minister, you’d indicated 
that there was going to be 12 beds open this summer — I think 
you said during the summer — the youth beds in Saskatoon. 
And I’m hoping that these are going to be open regardless of 
whether the Legislative Secretary to the Premier has filed his 
report and made his recommendations yet. You’d indicated that 
they would be. And they are a glimmer of hope for parents who 
have concerns right now. 
 
So I guess I’ll stop and ask you if indeed those beds are going 
to be open this summer and when this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think my response around what we’re 
going to do is, this year’s budget has that money available to 
build these particular beds, and so that’s what we’re doing, the 
planning now. And one of the challenges is, where do we put 
them? Do we put them with . . . just expand in Calder? Do we 
end up with some places in other parts of the province which 
we think is important? And also the whole issue that’s been 
raised around secure care means that we end up asking some of 
the questions about whether we actually need to build some 
brand new spaces, in other words in a completely separate kind 
of a building. 
 
And so all of these things, those we have the budget dollars. We 
have the people planning and working about what the different 
options are, and that’s what’s happening right now. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’ll do some checking, but I’m 
confident that you’d indicated that the 12 beds are going to be 
in the Hantelman centre, I believe, this summer. And that was 
the information that we are basing our decisions on. 
 
And we also know that as you are well aware, that the treatment 
is not the regular 28 days. The AARC [Alberta Adolescent 
Recovery Centre] centre in Calgary is one of the most effective 
places in Western Canada, and they’re saying 90, 180 days, 360 
days depending on the patient, on the client. 
 
If the information that you’ve given us is what is actually going 
to happen, we’re going to have 12 beds that could be tied up at 
least half a year. So I guess I’m concerned that we’re not going 
to have, even with these 12 beds, the spaces that we’re going to 
need, we need at this moment. I’m wondering if you’re . . .what 
the plans are for the speed at which you’re going to be looking 
at other centres and if you’re working with other jurisdictions to 
ensure that we do have youth facilities for everyone that has an 
addiction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the member has identified an 
important factor which is what we are doing, which is working 
together with Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, and the 
territories around what everybody is doing in response to this 
particular issue. And we will be getting more information about 
that at . . . meeting that we have as well as what we’ve gathered 
so far. We know some of the kinds of things that have happened 
in other provinces. 
 
As it relates to the care and the fact that sometimes they might 
need a whole year in treatment, one of the other factors that is 
involved, especially with crystal meth, is that it might take 
three, four, five, six re-entries back into the system. And so we 
already anticipate that. And that’s why I’ve said previously it 

would be protocols designed around individual patients. 
 
The other factor is that much of this treatment does take place 
in a community base and that they work together out of an 
office and remain either in their family home or somewhere 
else. And so that is often a very normal course of way of 
dealing with this. And so what we need is all of the different 
tools that spread the whole gamut. And I very much appreciate 
the questions that relate to some of that most intensive, longer-
term kind of treatment which is what I think the questions have 
related to. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the importance of outpatient 
treatment can’t be discounted because for some patients it does 
work very well. But there are a large number of them — and 
probably the ones that contact my office and your office — that 
know that more intensive treatments are going to be needed 
before they can even start taking outpatient treatment. 
 
Mr. Minister, dealing with the conference that the Premier is 
going to be holding dealing with meth, I’m hoping that your 
department has some input on the agenda. And can you give me 
an idea of what is going to be discussed? And if you’re going to 
in fact have people that are . . . have witnesses come to meet 
with the Premier so the decisions that are made are based on 
actual front-line people, not just coming up through the system. 
 
Too often it gets watered down or said in a way that we learn to 
understand as the jargon that takes place in this building, but 
it’s not necessarily the real life. I think it becomes too watered 
down unless we’re talking to the people who are dealing with 
addictions on a day-to-day basis, not just the workers in the area 
but the people who are actually using or the parents that are 
involved in it. So could you just briefly outline the agenda of 
this conference for us please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have the information about the 
agenda yet other than that officials have been working from the 
Health department in conjunction with a couple of other 
departments around what the agenda will be. And I know the 
goal is to get that information out very clearly. 
 
I understand your point about making sure you have everything 
from the individual story right through to the big policy issues 
as part of what’s discussed, because one of the challenges is 
you get so caught up on the policy side that you miss the 
individual’s stories and what their actual needs are. And clearly 
that’s one of the challenges in the legislature always is how to 
make sure that the right personal story and concern leads to the 
appropriate policy that will help many, many people. And that’s 
clearly the goal that we have in what’s happening here and I 
know that’s what the Premier’s concern is as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, even at this moment we have to 
say that it’s not even a challenge, it’s a problem. It’s a great big 
problem we have and we have to admit it and we have to deal 
with it. We can’t solve a problem until we first admit there is 
one. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering . . . The budget indicated that 
there was going to be considerable money spent on addictions 
and I believe the budget actually talked about crystal meth. But 
I’m wondering of the, I think it was about $3 million that was 



2934 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

going to be spent in the various aspects of treating addictions, if 
you actually can identify where the money is being spent. It’s 
nice to say that there is a sum of money out there and that the 
number, the dollars regardless of the exact amount is great, but 
there is the three areas that have to be, we have to look at. And 
can you identify where exactly we will be spending the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate that question because the 1.75 
that we have available in this budget year is for a part of the 
year that takes a while to actually get some of the services 
going. And so in next year’s budget the same services will cost 
$4.7 million. So on an annualized basis the increases that we’re 
announcing now are $4.7 million. 
 
Where does it go? Well it goes to additional youth stabilization 
services to provide that short-term detox place where young 
people can go and withdraw from alcohol or drugs. And also 
there’s looking at more brief detox centres; that’s the one with 
the short-term response. In the North we need to have services 
that are available across a number of communities that would 
be able to travel into some of those communities. Also we’re 
looking at some community outreach centres for street youth 
and family. And also there’s the information media campaign 
around education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I really appreciate all the 
different aspects that you’re looking at, but it still doesn’t . . . I 
don’t know if you’ve actually looked at the actual costs. What’s 
it going to cost for those mobile treatment centres in the North? 
Do you have a figure on that? Where are they going to be 
stationed? Where are you going to be getting them from? 
Who’s going to be staffing them? When are they going to be in 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I guess first off I would encourage the 
member to vote for the budget because you can’t end up 
finalizing the budget till you actually have it passed. That’s one 
of the challenges. What we are right now working at, how and 
where this money will be spent. But practically the actual 
expenditure of that money can’t start until we’re passed the 
budget process. 
 
One of the reasons that we have this amount announced as 
starting sort of in the summer and in the fall is that that then 
allows us to do that particular planning. So if you have specific 
concerns from specific communities around different kinds of 
things, make sure that that can be fed into the whole process as 
well. 
 
But we are . . . These are our goals and it’s based on what we 
hear from the workers in this system throughout the province. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 
a just a few questions I’d like to direct to you and your officials 
this afternoon. 
 
If you’ll recall about a year ago, the number one issue facing 
the Cypress Regional Health Authority and the constituents of 

Cypress Hills was the possible closure — certainly the 
drastically reduced service potential of health services in the 
community of Climax. The community hospital there — or 
health centre, I guess as it’s referred to now — serves a very 
large geographical area but a rather sparsely populated area. 
And at the time, Mr. Minister, there were a number of people 
from the communities of Climax, Frontier, even as far east as 
Val Marie, Bracken, Orkney and also from the communities of 
Claydon and Divide that came to this legislature and made an 
impassioned plea for the continuance of service in the facility at 
Climax. 
 
At that time, Mr. Minister, I think I could characterize it fairly 
you expressed a concern for the service that was available to the 
people there. You recognized the unique nature of the location, 
the geographic limitations that prevent transportation of patients 
on an emergency basis. And you indicated at that time, Mr. 
Minister, that because of the uniqueness there, you would like 
to see a satisfactory resolution to the difficulties that faced that 
particular community if the hospital was either closed down or 
service was severely curtailed. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you please give us an update as to the 
progress that’s been made in finding adequate solutions for that 
facility to date, if any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Last 
Thursday, the people from Climax, Frontier and all of the 
committees there south, in the southwest part of the province, 
came forward and presented their proposal to the Cypress 
Regional Health Authority board. And my understanding is that 
it was a very well-thought-out proposal around a whole of 
number of issues. 
 
My sense is that — from the reports that I’ve been receiving 
from that area — is that they have been talking and talking and 
talking since I was down there last year. And they’re not totally 
in agreement I think on how to sort this out. But I guess the 
report is that a very reasonable proposal was put forward on 
Thursday and now the regional health authority officials who 
were responsible for that are looking to see how it can fit with 
some of the ways that they say make sense to provide service in 
that area. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If I understand it 
correctly from people in the community, one of the issues that 
they need addressed in any solution is a certain element of 
flexibility. You know we ordinarily look at health facilities as 
the kind of place you can receive certain types of services for so 
many hours a day. They’re sort of fixed. They’re kind of rigid, 
and everybody knows when their shift is and how long the 
doors are going to be open and so forth. But — and you might 
correct me if I’m wrong — but I understand that one of the 
issues that they feel would help address the needs of the 
community, especially as it relates to emergency service after 
normal operating hours, is a flexibility that probably isn’t 
common practice in the area of health care delivery. 
 
It’s been suggested to me — and I think this probably made up 
part of the proposal at the Thursday meeting — is that the 
facility be open from 9 to 5, seven days a week, but that there 
be a consistent on-call capability available for after-hours 
emergencies, that limitations that are now imposed because of 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2935 

maybe union provisions or staffing issues or those types of 
things only allow for on-call service in the community three 
maybe four days a week at best. 
 
And what has brought this to the sort of a point of concern is 
that some of the most difficult tragedies and problems have 
occurred in the community after the normal operating hours of 
the hospital. And I guess, without going into all the details of 
the most recent one, I guess I’d like to know from the minister 
and his officials whether or not they can envision building the 
kind of flexibility into that particular facility that would allow 
them to have an on-call nurse for emergency purposes only after 
the hour of 5 o’clock, seven days a week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank the member for that question. I 
think that you’ve hit the nub of the issue and the discussion, and 
it’s the interplay between the EMS [emergency medical 
services] service that’s there 7 days a week, 24 hours a day, and 
the role of the local clinic as it relates to then the Shaunavon 
Hospital which provides a broader base. And I think that’s 
where the fairly reasonable proposal that came forward last 
week is being reviewed in light of how these things can fit 
together. 
 
And my sense is that they are looking at, well what kinds of 
staff do you need, what kinds of staff are available, how could 
some of these things fit together. And I’m not sure if contract 
issues are a part of it, but they may be. And that would be 
needed to look at as well. 
 
But I’m not right in the middle of that particular negotiation. 
I’m hearing reports that the discussions are continuing in a 
constructive way, and that the community is hoping to have it 
resolved shortly. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I don’t want to put words into the mouth of the 
local people, but it would seem to me that it’s not going to take 
a lot to satisfy them. It will take some creative thinking and 
some flexibility on, you know, who can work there and who’s 
available and what kind of backup they would be able to 
provide in terms of emergency services. 
 
You know, there’s nothing more tragic than having — well as I 
alluded to a few moments ago — a 16-month-old child suffer a 
serious accident, be taken to the Climax facility, and the door’s 
locked. And, you know, it’s difficult enough to face that kind of 
a circumstance, but if the EMS which is based in another 
community is understaffed or is serving a backup in Shaunavon 
which is 40 miles away, you know, if those kind of 
circumstances happen to be in place when the emergency 
happens in Climax, there’s no consolation for the people who 
are in that situation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess what we need to ascertain is will your 
department, your ministry, encourage the Cypress Regional 
Health Authority to show that kind of flexibility? Will you 
encourage them to provide the resources necessary to provide a 
kind of service that can be counted on by the community? It 
doesn’t have to be a doctor on staff 24 hours a day. It doesn’t 
have to be, you know, a nurse on staff and in the facility and the 
doors unlocked 24 hours a day. It might require a nurse 
practitioner. It might require just a nurse that can provide 
service in a palliative care circumstance or situation. But it isn’t 

going to be something that is going to be necessarily written in 
stone and hard and fast. It sounds to me like the community is 
willing to be very reasonable about how they achieve these 
particular goals for their community. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, I do recall that there was going 
to be an effort by the department and by the regional health 
authority to try and recruit a nurse practitioner for that facility. 
Can you report on the success of that particular search? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The provision of services through the 
doctor that provides services I think both in Shaunavon and 
Climax, and the fact that this whole issue hasn’t been sorted out 
has meant that the ability to recruit a nurse practitioner hasn’t 
been successful at this point. But my understanding would be 
that once they’ve figured out the configuration and the 
description of the reasonable solution that’s worked there, that 
will make it much clearer what the nurse practitioner’s job will 
be, working together with the physicians in that area. 
 
And I know that everybody’s ready to get to that point where 
they can have a model that may be similar to what’s available in 
the Kyle, Beechy area. And I know some of them have been 
thinking about that because that’s where we have a 
long-standing experience of positive solution to some of the 
problems that were there. So thank you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I think the, you know, the people 
of the south line there — the Climax, Frontier, Val Marie, 
Bracken, Orkney, Claydon communities — would feel a great 
sense of relief if they could see this effort coming to fruition 
quickly. The problem for them is they don’t see an end in sight. 
And they’ve been negotiating with the Cypress Health Region 
for the best part of the last year. 
 
There’s been a little progress made especially as it relates to 
weekend service. But there hasn’t been the substantive solution 
put in place as it relates to after-hours emergency issues and 
coverage for those sets of circumstances. And of course, being 
that we’re into spring right now and we have the advantage of 
summer travelling, you know, some of the difficulties are 
naturally going to be covered off by the ability to move people 
quickly and readily to Shaunavon. 
 
But as you are probably well aware, this past winter we had 
some very difficult circumstances down there. We had . . . You 
know, the roads, the brand new road through the river valley 
was shut right down for a couple of days because of bad 
weather. And if you can’t transport people that makes it even 
more essential that that facility be operational and able to 
provide services in the community of Climax. So, you know, 
that’s a concern to these people. And so if we could have 
something in place that would address those concerns sooner 
than later, I think we would all be considerably relieved by that 
prospect. 
 
And I know that it doesn’t, it doesn’t sound like a real problem 
when you’re in urban Saskatchewan and only a few blocks from 
a hospital. But when the power goes out like it did twice in 
successive weekends last month in those communities down 
there — the power was gone for upwards of 48 hours — it’s 
absolutely critical that those people have access to emergency 
facilities in case of mishap or illness. 



2936 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

Mr. Minister, I will take your responses and with your . . . well 
not even with your permission — just because you gave the 
responses, I’m going to make them available to the people of 
Climax and Frontier. And I think they’ll be somewhat 
encouraged by what you have to say. The proof will be in the 
realization of these endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, I have one question regarding a 
case file that came into my office just over the last day, I guess 
24 hours. I wanted to ask a few questions on it just to make sure 
that the numbers that I was given are correct. 
 
It’s about a . . . Well I’ll just read the information that I have. It 
was a lady that sent us some information on a husband who has 
been in coronary care at Saskatoon City Hospital for a week. He 
was experiencing chest pain and is waiting for an angiogram. 
Although he has not had a heart attack, apparently patients are 
put into coronary care unit while waiting for an angiogram. 
 
This gentleman was told that there are 400 people ahead of him 
and only one machine in that hospital to do angiograms. He was 
also then told that there’s 10 to 12 people that go through that 
machine a day. So when you extrapolate that out he’s going to 
be waiting an awful long time for this angiogram. He hasn’t had 
a heart attack so I don’t know if that puts him at the back of the 
list as opposed to being moved ahead. And he was also told that 
there is a second machine but it’s broke down and they’re not 
going to fix it because it’s outdated. 
 
So could I have somebody comment on those numbers? Four 
hundred people ahead of him waiting for angiogram in 
Saskatoon. Only 10 to 12 done a day. And so what is this fellow 
supposed to do? 
 
[16:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have specific information about 
the particular case and we’ll . . . by providing that information 
here we’ll have people look into that particular one. But I do 
have information about a few things that are happening around 
the cardiac care in Saskatoon. One of the angiogram units, the 
one that they use, is no longer functional and they’re in the 
process of buying a new one. We’ve provided $1.7 million to 
the Saskatoon Health Authority to purchase a new one and so 
they’re in the process of doing that. 
 
As it relates to the procedure, people who require angiograms 
are triaged. They take the people that are the most serious first 
and people who are in the CCU, the coronary care unit, usually 
have the first go at getting the machine. There are also some 
patients who are able to travel to Regina, are coming down to 
Regina to have that particular assessment done. And that’s part 
of how we’re responding to this. But the particular equipment is 
very expensive and they are buying a new one to replace what’s 
there. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So there certainly 
is a large backlog then apparently in Saskatoon because they are 
only operating with one machine and they’re looking at funding 
for a second machine. Would that be true that there would be 

400 people waiting in the Saskatoon Health Region to receive 
an angiogram and is there only 10 done per day in that one 
particular hospital? Because if that’s the case, number 399 has 
got an awful long wait. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This issue around the coronary care in 
Saskatoon and the fact that one of the machines is no longer 
operable is something that’s been identified. And we’ve asked 
for a plan already around how they’re going to manage to take 
care of those people in Saskatoon, working together with 
Regina. There’s virtually no wait lists in Regina. 
 
And so practically what happens is that if they can work 
together, they can provide that coverage on three machines 
while we’re getting the fourth one up and ready in Saskatoon. 
Clearly the goal is to make sure that people get the service as 
quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last question regarding the angiograms. 
Then would the second option . . . I see that . . . I guess maybe 
the third option . . . The second option would be coming down 
to Regina. Is the third option covering out-of-province for a 
person that has been waiting? And this particular person is a . . . 
I mean, his work season is through the summer and he’s waiting 
for a couple of weeks already. And he’s afraid that he’s going to 
lose most of his work season waiting for an angiogram so that 
he can move on to the next step. So in that case would 
out-of-province be covered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As indicated earlier, the specific case that 
you raised, we’ll be following up with that one. But as I pointed 
out before, if he’s actually in the CCU, in the coronary care unit 
now, he would not be part of that larger number of patients that 
are waiting. He’d be in the top category. And so we’d anticipate 
that it would be handled fairly quickly. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials today. Mr. Minister, I was just home 
on the weekend and I had a scenario brought to my attention 
and that’s in regards to the Spiritwood hospital or health care 
unit. As you know, we lost two of our three doctors in February 
— I believe it was actually January — and right now we’re 
trying to find doctors. 
 
There was a meeting held last week and the CEO of the Prince 
Albert Parkland Health District came out to that meeting and — 
Mr. Gren Smith-Windsor — and advised the group of people 
there that May 21 will be the deadline for acute care in the 
Spiritwood hospital. Now of course as you know and as many 
people know in Saskatchewan, doctors are hard to find and hard 
to come by. Interim doctors or locums are also getting harder 
and harder to find to keep hospitals open. 
 
The community and the doctor in Spiritwood are working very, 
very hard to try and find locums and doctors to facilitate the 
region around Spiritwood. What role can the minister play in 
regards to this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you very much for the questions 
around this. This is a particular concern that I’ve been aware of, 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2937 

and I know that Prince Albert Parkland Health Region has been 
recruiting doctors. And one of the challenges is that some of the 
doctors that they’ve got that are willing to come won’t be 
available until the end of June or early July. And so we have a 
period of time between now and the end of June where there 
may not be as robust a coverage for the hospital and the 
emergency room. And I think one of the concerns was that if in 
fact they’re not able to get somebody, they’re going to make 
sure that the community knows that for certain numbers of 
hours there aren’t people available. 
 
And I’m not totally aware of the meeting that you refer to, but I 
am aware that this is a concern that they’ve got, and they’re 
trying to manage it in the most appropriate way possible. 
 
One of the goals obviously is to see if they can get some locums 
in, some people who would come in on a temporary basis to 
make sure this doesn’t happen. But at this stage I don’t think 
they have a complete solution to the problem which is then they 
want to make sure that the public knows what services are 
available when. And as you’ve indicated, it appears the problem 
comes to a head for at least a few days around May 21. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I wasn’t at 
the meeting either because I was down here, but I was told on 
the weekend this meeting took place and the CEO of the Prince 
Albert Health District, Mr. Gren Smith-Windsor, was quite 
adamant in saying that May 21 the acute care will close down. 
And I think reasoning for that is because the locum that’s in 
there right now is leaving on the 21st which only leaves one 
doctor in Spiritwood at the time. And it’s actually a three-doctor 
facility. So if you’re trying to run the operation with one doctor, 
there is some problems. 
 
The doctor and the community are trying to work, as I said, 
looking for doctors or locums to fill in. That is a great difficulty 
also because it’s summertime. But what the community of 
Spiritwood and the doctor is hoping is that the minister can give 
some assurance that this will not close down their acute care 
system. If it closes down for maybe some hours during the 
daytime okay, but to close down acute care system means the 
viability of the hospital is gone. And the citizens of Spiritwood 
and community are quite anxious to hear from the minister in 
this regards to give some assurance that it will not close down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The services provided in that area are very 
important, and this challenge around providing some 
emergency room coverage in the facility is that . . . a particular 
problem that we’re going to deal with. But as far as the 
long-term acute care services in that community, that’s not an 
issue. The goal is to get a full complement of physicians — and 
as we move forward with the primary care operations, nurse 
practitioners and others — so that we won’t have these gaps in 
service around emergency coverage. 
 
But I don’t think there should be any concern around the 
long-term acute care coverage at that particular facility. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Those words 
are reassuring I’m sure to all the people in the community of 
Spiritwood. They worked hard to raise money to facilitate this 
facility. I know, Mr. Minister, you were out there at the grand 
opening and in fact you have some ties to that community. 

So that community, being that it’s well over an hour from 
Prince Albert or North Battleford or Meadow Lake, is an area 
where we need health services and Spiritwood provides that. 
The unfortunate thing right now is both doctors left at an 
inopportune time which puts a heavy load on the doctor at 
present. So those comments are reassuring that the acute care 
will not close down. 
 
Another aspect of this — there are many doctors from South 
Africa that would like to come here to doctor. I know the doctor 
present at Spiritwood now recruits probably 90 per cent of his 
doctors from South Africa. The problem that lies with that is the 
fact that immigration stands in the way of getting these doctors 
here. 
 
Is there any way that you can help with the doctor and the 
community of Spiritwood to speed up the process of 
immigration to bring some of the local doctors into facilities in 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Our policy as it relates to these 
immigration matters is to respond to what kinds of requests for 
information or support or others from the Department of Health 
as soon as possible because immigration is a federal 
responsibility. 
 
But I know over the years that I’ve been the Health minister, 
when a particular issue comes up, for example around a family 
member who maybe requires medical care once they come to 
Saskatchewan from South Africa, we’ve been able to provide 
the appropriate documents that will allow for the immigration 
process to go ahead very quickly. If there are other kinds of 
issues around how they would fit into the Saskatchewan system, 
I know that the College of Physicians and Surgeons and 
Saskatchewan Health work very carefully. 
 
[16:45] 
 
There’s a real advantage in having our present Minister of 
Immigration being a former Health minister so she’s very 
attuned to these issues. And I know that she, when anything 
comes up that she hears about it in her role as Minister of 
Immigration, it moves right to the top of the list. So if there are 
any issues that arise in the local community where 
Saskatchewan Health or for that matter the Government of 
Saskatchewan can help, we will be there with the community. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I know I’ve 
taken opportunity to write letters on behalf of the doctors before 
with regards to immigration to help speed up the process, and I 
know that the minister has also been in the Health portfolio so 
she understands this. With that, Mr. Minister, thank you. I want 
to take the comment you have made back to the citizens of 
Spiritwood and area. I know they’ll be glad to hear your 
comments, so thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I just 
want to follow up a little bit on the doctor recruitment situation. 
And I follow it up because one of the communities that I’m 
quite involved in — in fact my home community of Kipling — 
has been a community that’s had a number of doctors over the 



2938 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2005 

past number of years. In fact as recently as two years ago we 
had three physicians in the community and they were actively 
working to recruit a fourth. Unfortunately today we’re in the 
situation where we have one physician and we’re covering a 
fairly large area. I think you’re quite well aware of the area. 
 
And I would like to know, Mr. Minister, what the department is 
actually doing to try and address the concerns that local 
communities and regional health districts are having in 
recruiting physicians. And while part of the issue might be 
immigration, do we have a problem in this province as far as the 
guidelines that we have and restricting doctors in coming to the 
province, in filling out the forms that are necessary? And what 
is your department doing as we look at the broader picture of 
how we recruit doctors to this province? 
 
And secondly what are the numbers of young people looking at 
entering the College of Medicine in the province of 
Saskatchewan as we look into the future of addressing the needs 
of the ongoing shortages of physicians in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I thank you for that question. And 
clearly this was identified in our action plan in December 2001 
around recruiting. And I guess I’ll give a little bit of positive 
information around some of the things that are actually 
happening and then provide some further information about 
what we’re actually being able to do. 
 
I think the good news — and this is information that I provided 
to the Saskatchewan Medical Association meeting in Saskatoon 
on Friday — is that the numbers of doctors in the province who 
are practicing, right as of March 2005, is 1,680. And this is up 
from five years ago where the number was 1,626. So it’s not up 
dramatically, but it is higher. 
 
And as it relates to rural family practitioners, in March 2000 we 
had 210 rural family practitioners. As of March 2005, the 
number is 235. So we have more practitioners. 
 
Now as you’ve identified, it’s different communities that end up 
with the problem at different times, and so it moves around. We 
are able to do a number of different things around recruitment 
of rural physicians. 
 
And the numbers of different programs that we have that are 
operated, together with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 
include the rural practice establishment grant. So a certain 
amount of money . . . if you actually set up your rural practice, 
regional practice establishment grant that helps there. Rural 
practice enhancement training if you identify . . . after you’re 
into your rural practice, you need some other skills to 
complement the other doctors in that area. There’s funding to 
allow them to go back for that kind of training. 
 
We have rural emergency care which is a continuing medical 
education fund, so it allows for funding to have people go and 
get that extra education they might need to cover for 
emergencies. We have a locum service which provides rural 
relief and weekend relief across the province. We also have 
rural travel assistance program and rural extended leave 
program. So these are things that we’ve worked together with 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and most of them are 
managed together with them. 

Our recruitment and retention funding in this last year’s budget 
was $11.8 million that goes into these various kinds of things. 
 
So we know that when a particular problem arises in one 
community like Kipling . . . it becomes a big problem there. But 
what we do is we bring the provincial resources as well as the 
local regional health authority resources together and attempt to 
deal with that. 
 
We also very much appreciate the work that’s done by the 
existing physicians and the local mayors and reeves who often 
work together around providing assistance in recruiting new 
people as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
the frustration that people sense is over the past number of years 
. . . as I indicated, there seem to be no lack of opportunity. If a 
physician was leaving the community, they seemed to be able to 
recruit and have someone by the time they had moved on to a 
different location. And in most cases, the physicians that have 
left have moved on as they’ve advanced in their field of 
specialty and realizing that they really wouldn’t have the 
opportunity to practise in the smaller location. They’d have to 
look at a larger location. There didn’t seem to be difficulty in 
recruiting someone to come in and fill the position that they 
were leaving. 
 
And the numbers you’re indicating seem to indicate that we’re 
up a little bit, but I’m not exactly sure why a community like 
Kipling would be all of a sudden facing going from where we 
were looking at recruiting a fourth position down to a situation 
where we’re facing, where we basically have one physician as 
my colleague had just indicated in the community of 
Spiritwood. 
 
And I would just like to know, Mr. Minister, you’ve given a 
number of initiatives that the Department of Health has in place 
in recruiting physicians into Saskatchewan and into rural areas. 
I would like to know how aggressively the department moves in 
attempting to address some of the needs that the specific 
communities have, or whether or not the department has even 
contacted . . . do regional health districts or local communities 
seek assistance from the department when they fail in their own 
efforts to recruit the . . . need for the physicians and family 
physicians in those communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to the first part of the question 
is we are made aware of the issues around recruitment in 
various communities across the province. The department 
doesn’t actively recruit for a specific area. The regional health 
authority and the local community work together around that, 
working closely with the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
And they provide that kind of work. 
 
The difficulty is, as you’ve identified, when a change as 
dramatic as what’s happened in Kipling hits and then they feel 
like they’re behind the eight ball trying to get things sorted out. 
That also is a challenge for all of the different programs that we 
have. 
 
The other side of that though is we do have good news, like 
what happened last week or so in Yorkton where they were able 
to recruit a new general surgeon to come to Yorkton from New 



May 9, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2939 

Zealand, and he . . . originally from South Africa to New 
Zealand. So that’s able to provide a service there. And you have 
many of those positive stories. 
 
One of the challenges is that people come to Saskatchewan and 
provide services and then end up looking at . . . well is this 
where they want to be for the long term or for the short term? 
Quite a number of them do stay in communities because it’s just 
a very good place to live, in our communities across 
Saskatchewan. But others do go to other provinces or to the 
States. And we just have to continue working to make sure our 
compensation packages are appropriate, our facilities are 
appropriate, and all those things. And that’s what we’re 
working at — on a province-wide basis to make sure that that 
happens. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One follow-up to this, 
and it goes back to a comment earlier that I think you may not 
have caught the answer . . . or the question, Mr. Minister. And 
that is, what is the province doing in regards to the medical 
college in expanding the college? And, Mr. Minister, are we at 
a place where there are more people really trying to gain 
entrance to the college? 
 
Because I think at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, we’ve been 
relying on people outside of the province, certainly outside of 
the country, to try and meet the needs of family physicians in, 
not only in our province but across our country. 
 
But it would seem to me that we need to — as well as we look 
into the future — look at ways in which we can open up more 
doors for individuals who would like to get into the field of 
medicine, with the idea that if we have more seats available in 
the province of Saskatchewan, we would open up the door for 
more people being then available to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan residents and communities as they try, attempt to 
fill the positions of physicians in the province. So, Mr. Minister, 
I await your reply to that comment please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I’d like to 
answer it in a couple of different ways. As you may know, a 
few years ago we increased the number of seats at the College 
of Medicine from 55 to 60. And so therefore in this year’s 
budget, what we planned is to have five new residency spots 
because that extra number will be coming through their full 
year of the undergraduate medical part. We also added four 
residency positions that are for international medical graduates 
who would wish to study. 
 
I think the more . . . or broader part of your question relates to 
what we’re doing in the longer term around the academic health 
sciences building and education in general. And our goal is 
right now with the academic health sciences committee — with 
medicine clearly in the middle but also nursing and physio and 
pharmacy and all these others — around how we provide health 
education in the province. And clearly the goal is to provide 
some more spaces for medical students and other places, but 
we’re going to do that in that broader context as we expand the 
whole academic health sciences field. 
 
So I think we’re getting close to the end of the time. I know that 
one of the members had a question from a previous time about 
lab technical fees, and I’d just like to respond to that on the 

record now. 
 
Basically the issue was a question from a technologist who’s 
employed in Saskatoon. And there are technical fees that are 
paid to physicians on a fee-for-service basis when they employ 
their own staff and use their own equipment to provide a 
service. So they may have their own clinic somewhere. When 
services are provided in a hospital using hospital equipment and 
the regional health authority staff, then the physician’s only 
allowed to bill for their professional service and not for some of 
these technical fees. 
 
The Saskatchewan Medical Association represents physicians 
in bargaining around fee-for-service billings. And this is an 
ongoing process. So if there is a particular problem around this, 
physicians can go to the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 
Association] to include it in the bargaining discussion as it 
moves forward. So practically I think that’s the kind of answer 
around the fairly complicated question that was asked before, 
and so I’m pleased to provide that information on the record. 
 
And so I’d like to thank all of the staff who are here with me 
. . . Oh one more question. Oh sure. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I just would hope that the minister would be able to 
define the word soon for me. I had asked a number of written 
questions regarding the Heartland Regional Health Authority. 
The community of Kindersley has been short in representation 
on this board as there has been a vacancy for some time. It’s, I 
believe, exceeding nine months now. And I have asked the 
question to the minister, and I would just hope that he could 
possibly provide a date for that community of when they will 
have a representative on the board. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — All of the boards in Saskatchewan have 
terms where on the regional health authority boards will be 
renewed at the end of June and early July, so there will be 
appointments that will cover everybody at that time. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I move we report 
progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
reported progress. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It now being 5 o’clock, this committee 
stands recessed till 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2909 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2909 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2909 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2909 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2909 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2909 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2910 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2910 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2910 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2910 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2910 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2910 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2910 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2910 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2911 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2911 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2918 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2925 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Rendez-vous Canada 2005 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2911 
 National Nursing Week 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2911 
 Prince Albert Raiders Have Great Season 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2912 
 Holocaust Remembrance 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2912 
 Saskatchewan Employment Statistics 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2912 
 Saskatoon Hosts International Travel Trade Event 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2912 
 Prince Albert Potters Win International Prize 
  Borgerson ................................................................................................................................................................................2913 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Negotiations with Federal Government Regarding an Energy Accord and Equalization 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2913 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2913 
 Food Allowance 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2914 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2914 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug-Addicted Youth 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2915 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2915 
 Funding for Centennial Projects 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2916 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................2916 
 Immigrant Nominee Program 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2917 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................2917 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution on Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2919 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2919 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2919 
 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 100 — The Police Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2919 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2920 
 Bill No. 119 — The Election Amendment Act, 2005 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................2921 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2921 
 Bill No. 120 — The Fuel Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2922 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2923 
 Bill No. 125 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2005 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2923 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2924 
 Bill No. 121 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2005 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2924 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2925 
 Bill No. 122 — The Miscellaneous Labour Statutes Amendment Act, 2005 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................2926 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2927 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2927 
 Bill No. 123 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2927 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2928 
 Bill No. 124 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2005 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2929 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2929 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2930 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2930 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2934 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2937 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................2939 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




