















































Hansard: March 24, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 80A  THURSDAY, MARCH 24, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2205 
 March 24, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition again today on 
behalf of the constituents of Cypress Hills concerned about the 
consequences of forced amalgamation for school divisions. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue to reorganize school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by constituents from the 
communities of Frontier and Climax. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for me 
again to rise on behalf of constituents who are concerned about 
the deficiency in the residential support offered to people with 
long-term disabilities in my hometown of Swift Current. The 
prayer of their petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
facing lifelong disabilities. 

 
All the petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the growing concern over crystal meth: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine, the education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Porcupine 
Plain, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve yet another 
petition from people in Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the fact that the Boughen Commission, which recommended 
sweeping changes to the education system, will not be endorsed 
entirely, but the report will be picked at by the government. The 
prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, all of the signatures on this petition are from the 
fine community of Kyle, and I’m pleased to present this petition 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition dealing with forced amalgamation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on strictly a 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 
amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Craik. I so present. 
 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again I have petitions to present regarding the Claybank Brick 
Plant. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Wynyard, 
Moose Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon, Gravelbourg, and Calgary. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today with a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
who would like to see the halt of the forced amalgamation of 
school divisions. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Assiniboia 
and Limerick. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional paper nos. 180, 637, 640, 715, 716, 718, and 720. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 85 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SLGA: how much did 
SLGA pay for veterinary services at Marquis Downs 
racetrack in Saskatoon in 2003, and to whom? Please 
provide the details of all veterinary services provided at 
Marquis Downs racetrack during 2003. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also have the same question for the year 
2004. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 85 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: is there a minimal standard of 
professional training that is required of any person 
employed within the K to 12 school system in the capacity 
of a counsellor? 
 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, I have a question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: in view that personal 
counselling could be considered a mental health treatment, 
are policies in place by the department that determines (a) 
the minimum age for which a child can receive 
counselling without parental permission or awareness; and 
(b) a minimum number of sessions for which a child may 
consult with a counsellor before parental consent and/or 
awareness is required? 
 

In addition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: if it has been determined by a 
professional worker within the K to 12 system that a child 
may harm him or herself or another student, what protocol 
does the department have in place for that professional to 
follow (a) to inform the parents of the child; and (b) to 
seek professional help for the child? 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Better Business Bureau 2005 Torch Awards 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the Minister 
of Industry and Resources and myself, along with several of our 
colleagues from the opposition, attended the first annual Torch 
Awards, sponsored by the Better Business Bureau of 
Saskatchewan. These awards are to recognize businesses that 
consistently conduct their business practices in an ethical 
fashion. The 2005 Torch Awards honoured businesses of 
various sizes whose efforts have ensured that the marketplace 
remains fair and honourable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the keynote address was given by the Lieutenant 
Governor, Dr. Lynda Haverstock. She spoke about our 
centennial being a chance to celebrate what a great place 
Saskatchewan is, how great our people are, and what a 
significant contribution we have made to the world. Her 
remarks were inspiring and garnered a standing ovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winners in the six categories were: for finance, 
insurance, real estate, Meyers Norris Penny of Prince Albert; 
for food and personal services, Northgate Optical-New Vision 
Centre of Regina; for industrial products and services, JNE 
Welding of Saskatoon; for professional services, Hillsdale Shell 
of Regina; for retail wholesale, Re-Appliable Parts Inc. of 
Regina; and finally the winner for trades and contractor, Polar 
Refrigeration Services Ltd. of Saskatoon. 
 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

Mr. Speaker, it was refreshing to hear the winners speak about 
how much they like doing business in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to congratulate all of the nominees and the winners in the 
2005 Torch Awards and commend the Better Business Bureau 
for this new initiative which raises the profile of business ethics 
in our province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the members 
opposite in congratulating the Better Business Bureau on their 
Torch Awards. I too had the privilege of attending the awards. I 
thoroughly enjoyed the evening. I know that these were the first 
awards given, and that the purpose of the awards was to 
promote business excellence and ethical conduct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was somewhat troubled to note that among the 
nominees and winners there was not any lawyers among the 
bunch, which perhaps says something about the profession that 
some of us engage in. But it was a thoroughly enjoyable 
evening, and I would like to join with the members opposite in 
congratulating not just the nominees and the winners but also 
the Better Business Bureau for the hard work that they do, and 
the position that they play in ensuring that consumers receive 
value for their money and good services when they deal with 
businesses in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Easter Greetings 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, one of the most sacred times 
of the year for two of the world’s religions, Christianity and 
Judaism, comes with spring during the celebration of Easter and 
Passover. For Christians, the desolation of death leading to the 
promise of rebirth and rejuvenation reminds us that no defeat is 
final and that hope springs eternal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while many people will be spending the holiday 
with their family and loved ones, whether it be in a religious or 
secular manner, Easter provides us with an opportunity to 
reflect upon a number of themes that are relevant to all people. 
 
Suffering, wisdom, sorrow, joy, death, and rejuvenation are part 
of every person’s life, and no matter what one’s faith might be, 
we can all take comfort in the lessons of Easter. 
 
Out of death comes life. Out of anguish and suffering comes 
wisdom. Out of sorrow springs joy. But the essential message, 
Mr. Speaker, is one of hope. 
 
It is on this note that I wish all the members of this Assembly, 
the staff of the legislature, and all citizens of Saskatchewan a 
very relaxing weekend. But above all, Mr. Speaker, let us take 
this opportunity to consider how fortunate we are to live in such 
a plentiful and peaceful province where we are free to enjoy a 

holiday with our loved ones in relative safety and security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Happy Easter to you and to all members of this 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

New Store Opening in Batoche Constituency 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Monday 
evening I attended the grand opening of Saskatchewan’s newest 
Flaman store. The store is located in the Batoche constituency 
on the edge of the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Flaman stores has a very large selection of merchandise that is 
farm related, and with the weakness of the farm economy at this 
time it’s a very brave move for the company to set up a brand 
new store and building. 
 
Flaman is spread out across the province of Saskatchewan and 
now even spread out across Western Canada, and the original 
store is still open and operating on the edge of the town of 
Southey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Flaman on their efforts on 
expanding their business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 

2005-2006 Budget 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
budget for 2005 and 2006 that was tabled in this Assembly 
yesterday is a budget to build Saskatchewan for the next 
century. 
 
Based on a strong economy that is setting job records in 
Saskatchewan, the centennial budget has record levels of 
funding to health and education, Mr. Speaker. It includes a 
centennial university tuition grant that will allow our two 
universities to hold the line on university tuition in this, our 
centennial year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, coming in at just over $7 billion, this is the largest 
budget in Saskatchewan’s history, yet it is prudent and fiscally 
responsible, Mr. Speaker. It is a balanced budget and has no tax 
increases. 
 
It expands the key social programs of health and education and 
provides support to low-income people and to people with 
disabilities. It establishes an independent business tax review 
committee to help make Saskatchewan an even better place to 
do business and create even more jobs in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with a significant capital budget of almost $327 
million, we’re literally building for future generations. 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

Mr. Speaker, this budget marks year two of our four-year plan 
— a plan that continues on the path of sound and responsible 
fiscal management that makes Saskatchewan an even better 
place to live, work, invest, and raise your family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Rose Valley Dance Competition 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Rose Valley School of Dance 
once again put on a top-quality dance competition on the 
weekend of March 18 to 20. Rose Valley’s dance competition 
started 25 years ago. It presently has 47 dancers, aged 3 to 18 
years old. 
 
Dance Mania 2005 entertained over 1,000 people from 
northeast and central Saskatchewan. There were 425 dancers 
from 18 dance studios showing their skills in ballet, jazz, and 
tap. 
 
Crystal Anderson has been the artistic director of Rose Valley 
School of Dance for 12 years. Her students excel at exams and 
competitions. Dance competition rarely makes the kind of 
headlines as do sports activities. But for the students, the 
parents, and friends the excitement of this competition rivals 
any other event. 
 
Students are not just learning dance steps. They are learning to 
express themselves and to show the world they are unique. 
They are learning to hold themselves with grace and to 
appreciate how others interpret each piece of music. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate parents and volunteers 
who puts in hundreds of hours to ensure students in rural 
Saskatchewan are afforded the same opportunities as those in 
larger centres. There’s nothing small about our small towns in 
Saskatchewan, specifically Rose Valley, when it comes to 
providing cultural activities for the children. I’d like to 
congratulate Rose Valley School of Dance for another 
successful dance competition event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 

Outstanding Principal from North Battleford 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate an 
outstanding elementary school administrator from the 
Battlefords who was chosen from nation-wide nominations as 
one of Canada’s outstanding principals. 
 
Mr. Glen Leask is the principal of Lawrence Elementary School 
in North Battleford where I was once a student. Under the 
direction of Mr. Leask, Lawrence School has become a leader 
in developing and implementing the concept of a behavioural 

classroom, a model now used in three division schools. 
 
Twenty-eight principals from across Canada were honoured in 
February for their exemplary contributions to education at The 
Learning Partnership’s first annual Canada’s Outstanding 
Principals Awards in Toronto. 
 
The Learning Partnership is a not-for-profit organization 
dedicated to bringing together business, education, government, 
labour, policy makers, and the community to develop 
partnerships that strengthen education in Canada. 
 
The nomination and consequential national award presented to 
Mr. Leask is a testament to both his work and the respect he has 
garnered from those who work with him. The nominators for 
Mr. Leask said, and I quote: 
 

Everyone in our organization who saw the materials about 
Outstanding Principals had the same spontaneous one 
word response, ‘Leask’. It’s very difficult to sum up the 
respect everyone has for his work. 

 
I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join with me 
in congratulating Mr. Glen Leask for being nominated as one of 
Canada’s Outstanding Principals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Easter Greetings 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today the 
House will rise and members will leave for their constituencies 
to celebrate the Easter weekend. Mr. Speaker, as we all know, 
Easter is the most important celebration of the Christian faith, a 
time when Christians remember and celebrate the death and 
burial and resurrection of the Son of God. 
 
It’s also a time when we think about new life here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Our province, more than many parts 
of the world, comes out of the deep-freeze and we see the 
ground thaw, we see the lakes reappear with water, we see the 
green come out and new life, both in wildlife and in livestock 
and the plant life of the province. 
 
It’s a time of excitement and rejuvenation for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and therefore on behalf of the official opposition 
I want to wish all members of this Legislative Assembly, the 
staff that work here, you, Mr. Speaker, a very blessed and 
happy Easter weekend. May it be a time of getting together with 
family and enjoying a well-deserved break and time with the 
people that we love so much. 
 
Happy Easter, everyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

Budget Commitments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now we know why the member for P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote has sold his home and why he’s looking for 
another job. He did see the budget before it was released, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This budget, just quite simply, this budget lets down 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There was nothing in this budget 
to give back any of the $140 million that that Premier took from 
Saskatchewan families last year after campaigning on lower 
taxes. There is nothing in this budget for rural Saskatchewan, 
for farm families when they need it the most, Mr. Speaker. 
There is nothing in this budget for municipal governments who 
want to try to keep property taxes low, Mr. Speaker. And worst 
of all, there is no long-term vision for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This was a centennial budget, a chance for the Premier and the 
Minister of Finance to highlight a long-term and bold vision for 
Saskatchewan. It failed to do it, Mr. Speaker. After $1 billion 
more in revenue than they budgeted last year, 400 million more 
this year, how could the Premier blow it so badly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the budget delivered by 
the Minister of Finance in this House yesterday, this budget 
took a grip on the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This budget, Mr. Speaker, takes the 
momentum of the economy that is available today and pushes 
that momentum. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget, like none other 
in the history of the province, invests in the true future of 
Saskatchewan by investing in the young people of 
Saskatchewan in an unprecedented way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what this budget does not do is put us on the 
track of deficit and debt that would come from a party like that 
in office. Now, Mr. Speaker, I happened to be in the car for a 
few blocks. While I was in the car for those few blocks, I 
listened to the Finance critic over there, who wants to be the 
leader. I listened to the Finance critic over there. In a matter of 
three blocks, that man spent — I would estimate — over four 
years, $1 billion. I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad we got to the 
hotel where I could shut the car off because the province was 
going bankrupt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how the Tommy 
Douglas movie is going to turn out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order, please, 
members. Order. Order, please. Thank you. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wall: — I don’t know how the Tommy Douglas movie is 
going to turn out, Mr. Speaker, but the sequel is getting pretty 
bad reviews, Mr. Speaker. The sequel is getting terrible 
reviews. 
 
Pat Fiacco, mayor of Regina, says the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] has ignored the city of Regina. SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association] says the NDP budget 
shortchanges future prosperity. SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] says the budget has 
nothing for rural Saskatchewan. The teachers’ federation call it 
a non-event. School board associations say the budget will lead 
to service cuts and property tax increases. The CFIB [Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business] says the NDP is stalling on 
tax cuts. APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan] says agriculture is not a priority for this 
government. The SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] 
calls the NDP budget underwhelming. And the member from 
P.A. Northcote is leaving the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the Premier is simple. The question is simple. If 
he is so strongly encouraged by this budget, why doesn’t he 
give his members a free vote? Why doesn’t he give his 
members a free vote? And then we can find out if the member 
for Saskatchewan Rivers will vote for farmers or for this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
challenge, therefore, the Leader of the Opposition to let his 
caucus have a free vote in this House. 
 
Will members in that caucus stand in this House and vote for a 
budget that increases the basic allowance for citizens on social 
assistance? Will they vote for that, or will they vote against it? 
Will members of that caucus stand in this House and vote for 
$192 million in additional funding to the Department of Health 
for the health care of Saskatchewan people? Will they stand up 
and vote for that? 
 
Will they stand up and support the young people of 
Saskatchewan as this budget does? Will they vote for the young 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, or will they, for their 
partisan political endeavours, vote against this budget? Will 
they stand up and vote for what they have called for, or will 
they sit on their hands or vote negatively against the very things 
that they’ve called for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what this Saskatchewan 
Party, this official opposition will not be voting for — a budget 
that betrays farm families in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
won’t be voting for a budget, Mr. Speaker, that betrays 
municipalities trying to keep property taxes low. We will not be 
voting for a budget or a government or a Premier that has 
absolutely no vision for the future of this province. He can have 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

blessed assurance of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year they raised the PST [provincial sales tax] 
you’ll know by . . . [inaudible] . . . $140 million. They’re 
putting $55 million towards education tax; that’s still a tax 
increase of $85 million. They’ve froze urban revenue sharing. 
They’ve froze foundation grants to school boards. It’s going to 
result in more tax hikes. How can the Premier justify that? He 
campaigned on the promise of lower taxes, and he’s raising 
them for Saskatchewan families. How will he justify that to the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition ought to consult with his Finance critic who this 
morning on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Radio 
said that a Sask Party in government would start by doing these 
things . . . I tell you, they’re going to cut the sales taxes; that’s 
the first thing they’re going to do. They’re going to cut all the 
sales taxes. Then they’re going to cut the income taxes. And 
then they’re going to increase the funding to the universities — 
get this, Mr. Speaker — by 5 per cent per year. Then they’re 
going to increase all of the wage settlements. Then they’re 
going to reduce the small business taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a prescription for disaster, financial 
disaster. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s taken this province, it’s 
taken this province years to re-establish our GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratio to debt to be an acceptable level. It’s 
taken us years, Mr. Speaker, to get back our credit rating. We 
are not going to take the sequel to that leader and that party; we 
don’t want that sequel. That’s a nightmare, as the Minister of 
Health described it a few days ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the NDP froze funding 
for education and froze funding for municipalities. They’re 
giving nothing to farm families. But you know what, Mr. 
Speaker, they had a 50 per cent increase for that Premier’s 
communications budget, Mr. Speaker. And you know what, if 
this is all he has to offer the province of Saskatchewan, he 
might . . . I don’t think even a 50 per cent increase in his spin 
budget will help this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the issue of vision, Mr. Speaker, here is what the people of 
the province are saying today, Mr. Speaker. A public policy 
analyst from the U of R [University of Regina] summed it up 
pretty well in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Members that . . . getting very difficult to be able 
to pick out the words and I want to be able to hear what’s going 
on in the Assembly, so I ask members to just tone it down a bit, 
please. And I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The U of R professor summed it out pretty 

clearly. He said this government lacks imagination. It lacks 
vision. He said, and I quote: 
 

. . . [this] government has been at it for 12 years now and 
they may be running out of ideas. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they are running out of ideas. This Premier has no 
long-term vision for the province — rural, urban, or Northern 
Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, if he feels strongly 
about it, will he give his members a free vote? Find out if the 
member for Sask Rivers will vote for farmers or for this budget. 
Or the member for Regina Northeast, will he vote for families 
in his constituency or for this budget? Does he have the courage 
to do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — There is, let me just pause to say, there is 
a little confusion in Saskatchewan this morning about who 
exactly is the Leader of the Opposition over there. I’m told that 
the Finance critic last night volunteered this following quote, “I 
would be very comfortable as an opposition leader.” 
 
I’m not sure, I’m not sure who the leader is over there. What I 
am sure of, Mr. Speaker, what I am sure of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please, members. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So there is confusion this morning in the 
legislature and across the province about who the leader is over 
there, but there’s no confusion in my mind about this 
government caucus. To a one, Mr. Speaker, this government 
caucus has made the decisions of this budget because they are 
the right decisions for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are fiscally responsible choices. They are choices that 
build to the vision of a green and prosperous economy, a future 
for Saskatchewan young people here. There is no confusion on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and every member will 
stand and vote for this budget. 
 
Again, I challenge the Leader of the Opposition. Will that 
Leader of the Opposition in this budget debate stand and 
support an increase to the basic allowance for social services? 
Will he stand and support $192 million in new health care 
funding? Will he stand and support the students of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Taxation Policy 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — One thing, there’s one leader in this 
Assembly and it’s the member from Swift Current. He’s the 
leader and the next premier of this province. 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP lacks 
imagination. It lacks vision. It lacks new ideas. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, order, order. 
Member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, this budget lacks 
imagination. It lacks vision, and it lacks new ideas. And that’s 
sad, Mr. Speaker, because there are a lot of good ideas out 
there. One of those good ideas is the Saskatchewan Party’s 
proposal to raise the personal tax exemption for low-income 
earners. Everyone earning less than $15,000 a year would pay 
no tax. Everyone earning less than $35,000 a year would pay 
less tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a different approach. It’s a new approach. 
It’s a progressive tax break because the people who benefit 
most are those that earn the least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance: if the NDP can’t afford 
a PST cut for everyone, why don’t they do an income tax cut 
for those who need it the most? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. The member speaks of visions. You 
know this provincial government, the people of Saskatchewan 
are still in very real ways paying for the visions that are left 
over from the 1980s. This budget still includes an item of $588 
million, Mr. Speaker, to pay off debts that were incurred in the 
1980s when we had the precursors to the members opposite 
sitting in government and with their visions rolling up the debt 
of the province. Mr. Speaker, we feel very good about the 
direction that we’re taking in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Last year this NDP government had $1.1 
billion in extra revenues. This year they have $400 million in 
extra revenues. That’s $1.5 billion in two years, while at the 
same time Saskatchewan’s small businesses are paying the 
highest tax rates in the country — six times that of Alberta, four 
times that of NDP Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to ask the question that people across the 
province want us to ask. If you can’t cut taxes when you have 
$1.5 billion in new money, what does this place, what does this 
province have to look like before you will consider cutting even 
one tax when . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just to remind the member to make his 
remarks through the Chair. I recognize . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Again, Mr. Speaker, we see here, on the opposition 

benches, the reason why they continue to sit in opposition and 
why it is that the people of Saskatchewan say these members on 
the opposition benches cannot be trusted to run the government. 
 
And the reason that the people of Saskatchewan take that 
position is just because what the member has been saying, 
where you take what are, in a sense, one-time revenues and that 
you should expend these forever. That is to say, to spend 
monies that you can’t count on in the future but on the basis 
nevertheless on one-time expenditures, you should ramp up 
expenditures, you should decrease taxes — exactly the kind of 
situation that got us into big, big trouble in the 1980s. They 
want to go back to that. We’re not going there. We’re sticking 
with our plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Operating Grants for School Boards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP likes to run around 
the province scaring people. And one of their favourite scare 
tactics is to tell voters that the Saskatchewan Party is going to 
freeze educational funding. Well let’s look at K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] funding in yesterday’s budget. 
 
In last year’s budget, the schools’ operating grant was $527.9 
million. And guess how much it was this year? Exactly the 
same, $527.9 million. Zap, you’re frozen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government increased its own operational 
spending by nearly 7 per cent in this year’s budget. How in the 
world do they expect school boards to operate with no increase? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget provides a 
$98 per student increase in the grant to school boards. The 
member should understand that: $98 per student on the base 
grant in terms of the change. That is the commitment that we 
are making to reinvest the money as it becomes available within 
the system, to reinvest that back to the classroom level. And the 
member opposite should know that. 
 
This budget does more for students and youth in this province 
than any budget that this government has introduced in the last 
14 years. This is the positive budget. It’s recognized by the 
student leadership as a positive budget. It is recognized by the 
STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] as an acceptable 
budget. I would encourage the member opposite to support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association says that the NDP does not seem to 
recognize the increased costs of education. They have to 
negotiate a contract with teachers. SaskPower rates have gone 
up. The cost of fuel for buses has gone up. Just about every 
operating cost has gone up. 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

So what does the NDP do with the school operating grant? Zap, 
you’re frozen. Not one new dollar to address any of these costs. 
Mr. Speaker, how in the world can this NDP government expect 
school boards to do all of these issues in front of them with a 
zero, frozen budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I’ve made it pretty clear to school 
boards, and they understand that in the calendar year, there is an 
increase to the grants to school boards. There’s a $98 per pupil 
increase in the basic rates. There’s an additional $36 for school 
divisions in Regina and Saskatoon to narrow the differential 
that’s there. 
 
The member opposite, I think, owes all of the members of this 
Assembly a duty to be truthful and honest in his representation 
of this budget. He should know better about how education 
funding works, and he should not attempt to fear monger on 
this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Opportunities for Nursing Students 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
amazing. We have the government here saying one thing and 
every interest group in the province saying something totally 
opposite to what the government is saying. 
 
Marlene Brown from the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses said 
yesterday: 
 

We’re very concerned. Student nurses are telling us that 
they’re unable to access full-time jobs in this province. 
We’re training nurses for export. 

 
To the Minister of Health: is that his plan, to increase seats for 
other provinces — train nurses in this province only to export 
them to other provinces? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, the 
Premier, all of our caucus on this side of the House are very 
proud of the fact that we’ve come forward with a budget for 
health of $2.9 billion. Of that amount, 1.8 billion goes to the 
regional health authorities. And of that 1.8 billion or 
approximately $1.45 billion goes to the workers in the health 
system. That includes the nurses. That includes doctors. That 
includes the OTs [occupational therapists], physios, everybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done a very good job in this budget of 
providing stability in the health care system. That means that 
we can do the transition from people who are retiring, including 
the nurses, to the new generation of young people. And that’s a 
key part of this budget — train them. Make sure they’ve got 

good opportunities for careers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Neal Hardy, president of SARM wanted about three 
things out of yesterday’s budget: an increase to municipal 
funding, an increase to agriculture funding, and far more 
property education tax relief than was announced. How did 
APAS think the budget went yesterday? Well I quote: 
agriculture — and this is coming from APAS — agriculture is 
not a priority for the NDP government. The Association is 
extremely concerned: 

 
“This budget does not reflect a commitment to agriculture 
or the challenges that Saskatchewan producers are facing 
. . . ” 

 
How does the Agriculture minister respond to those farm 
leaders in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite and the Conservative Saskatchewan Party 
speaks about commitment. I want to talk about the commitment 
that this government has shown, is showing, and will show to 
agriculture in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
been there completely on every issue, making sure that we have 
been providing funding. Mr. Speaker, on a per capita basis this 
province is far above any other province in this country in terms 
of the commitment, the dollars that we put in. 
 
Let’s just talk about a few of those, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk 
about the money that went in to deal with the BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] crisis. In the last couple of years, 
$85 million over budget, Mr. Speaker, special warrant funding 
gone into supporting farmers on the BSE. Mr. Speaker, on 
CAIS, we’ve shown our commitment last year — $210 million. 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that government had over $1 billion windfall last year. 
This year they got in excess of $400 million to spend, and how 
do they do, how do they deal with rural Saskatchewan? They 
don’t fully fund the CAIS program, come away short there. 
They freeze rural revenue sharing, come away short there. 
Foundation grant froze, so we know education tax in rural 
Saskatchewan is going to increase, for that matter probably all 
over the province. 
 
How can that Ag minister talk with a straight face to rural 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

leaders when they’re downloading on rural Saskatchewan to the 
extent that they are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite has an odd view of downloading when 
you consider the amount of money that we have been uploading 
into agriculture in these last few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at the numbers, and I see the money that we 
have put into agriculture — not only directly through our 
budget, Mr. Speaker, but through the other budgets that support 
agriculture and the rural community. The budget for health puts 
money into the rural community, provides jobs out there in rural 
community. The money into education provides funding for 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the offsets that have gone in for the education 
property tax, 8 per cent, that’s $15 million off the agriculture, 
off every . . . the total of the farmer’s budget, Mr. Speaker — 
$15 million. This government has been there, is there, and will 
be there to support our farmers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a message for 
that Ag minister. What he should do is take his own Estimates 
book, look at what the estimate said for agriculture last year, 
look what they say for this year, and there is no increase. In fact 
there’s a dramatic cut for agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
How on earth does he consider that standing behind farm 
families in Saskatchewan? Every call we’ve got today and last 
night from farmers in Saskatchewan is nothing but utter 
disappointment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Ag minister is a lobbyist for farmers within 
cabinet. He’s the guy that goes to cabinet and tries to get money 
for farmers. And how’s he doing? Mr. Speaker, he’s a complete 
failure when it comes to supporting agriculture. What kind of a 
job is he doing? He’s doing a terrible job. 
 
Easter weekend, Mr. Speaker, let’s go out on one bright note. 
Ask that minister to resign. Ask that minister to make farmers 
feel better about something out of this budget, and it would be 
getting rid of that Ag minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t much 
of a question in that. And I’m afraid I’m not going to thank the 
member opposite for his comments. 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I do want to talk about is the 
commitment of this government to agriculture in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member obviously wasn’t 
listening. The $264 million that we are putting in directly 
through this budget into agriculture is going to be well used to 
support agriculture. Mr. Speaker, we are also putting money 
into agriculture in the rural economy in many other ways. 
About $250 million coming in through the Department of 
Finance for fuel tax, for input cost. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are there far more than any other 
provincial government — Conservative, Liberal, or any other. 
This NDP government is standing up for farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
We are committed to making sure that we support them on 
every front. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
that is standing up for farmers in Saskatchewan, I don’t think 
farmers want to see us have a bad year where they have to cut 
funding worse than they did already. A billion dollars last year, 
in excess of 400 million this year, and what do they do for rural 
Saskatchewan? They cut funding for rural Saskatchewan. They 
don’t fully fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization]. They freeze revenue sharing. They freeze the 
foundation grant. And this is supposed to be helping rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: do the right thing. Look around in 
your caucus; try and find somebody that will speak on behalf of 
farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 
important to note how this government and this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it is important to note that this government and this 
minister has stood up for farmers, has been out there doing 
everything we can in dealing with the federal government to try 
and make sure that we get just and workable programs for this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year the opposition party said, Mr. Speaker — and I want 
to know that these guys stand by their word — last year they 
said, if you fully fund CAIS, we’ll be there to work with you to 
try and make sure that we get a fair and just deal. Where are 
they, Mr. Speaker? Nowhere to be seen on that front — 
nowhere. Do they keep their word? I’m not seeing it, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m not seeing it at all. While we’re out there fighting 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

for farmers, trying to get a fair deal from the federal 
government, where are they? Back here complaining, not 
caring. Mr. Speaker, talk is cheap. They’re not accountable. 
They’d spend the world, but they are not accountable. We are 
and we’re doing it right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order, please. Now just checking back, ministerial statements 
. . . Order, please. I would ask all members to come to order, 
please, so we can proceed with the agenda. Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 94 — The Apiaries Act, 2005 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill 94, The Apiaries Act, 2005 be now read and 
introduced . . . introduced and read the first time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture . . . Order, please, members. Order. Order. 
 
It has been moved by the Minister of Agriculture that the Bill 
No. 94, The Apiaries Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Next sitting of this House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 95, The 
Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment . . . Order, please, members. Order. 
 
It has been moved by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 
95, The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — The next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Environment. 
 

Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2005 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move now that Bill No. 
98, The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 98, The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions nos. 909 through 912 
inclusive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 909 to 912 have been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

approves in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday this 
Assembly was subjected to a budget delivered by the 
government, completely devoid of any vision for our province. 
The NDP budget offered no long-term plan to make 
Saskatchewan more competitive. There’s nothing in this budget 
that’ll convince young people to stay in our province. The NDP 
has promised to monitor surgical waiting lists, but offer no 
credible plan for shortening the longest waiting lists in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday’s NDP budget ignores nurses, teachers, low-income 
earners, property tax payers, farm families, and small-business 
owners, while attempting to buy off the support of university 
students with a one-year tuition hold. Last year the Premier 
broke his election promise of no new taxes by raising the PST 
$140 million, Mr. Speaker. The Premier said times were tight, 
and then he reached into the pockets of every family and 
business in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well times have changed, Mr. Speaker. The NDP budget shows 
the government raked in a whopping $1.1 million in unexpected 
revenue from oil and gas and from equalization last year. And 
the budget also projects $400 million in new government 
revenue this year, Mr. Speaker. That’s 1.5 billion more dollars 
in government revenues than the NDP thought it would collect 
when the Premier raised the PST by $140 million last year. 
 
But that hasn’t convinced the NDP to roll back the PST tax grab 
from last year. The Premier says returning the PST to last year’s 
level isn’t sustainable. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and his 
NDP government wasn’t all that concerned about whether $140 
million tax increase was sustainable for Saskatchewan families 
last year. But now the Premier says his NDP government, 
swimming in 1.5 billion more dollars than he thought he would 
have at this time last year, now that same Premier says any kind 
of tax cut is unsustainable for this NDP government. 
 
And that’s the problem with this government, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier, this Finance minister, and the rest of his tax-and-spend 
government has lost sight of the people who actually pay the 
bills and pay the taxes in this province. And the Premier has 
also lost track of those in our province who are in the greatest 
need. The budget reports 1.1 billion in unexpected government 
revenues this year and another $400 million in new revenue 
next year. But the Premier says there just isn’t any money to 
provide tax relief for low-income earners in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are almost 70,000 people in Saskatchewan 
who struggle to make ends meet while earning minimum wage 
in our province. But under this NDP government those low- and 
middle-income wage earners pay the highest tax rates in the 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago the Saskatchewan Party released 
100 ideas to build Saskatchewan for the next 100 years. Idea no. 
1, Mr. Speaker, idea no. 1 was a plan to reduce provincial 
income taxes for 215,000 low-income earners in Saskatchewan 
and take another 70,000 people off the tax rolls altogether. Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party plan would mean that people 
earning $15,000 a year or less would pay no provincial income 
tax at all. The cost of our plan, Mr. Speaker, when fully 
implemented, would be $91 million. Mr. Speaker, we did our 
homework, we costed this out properly, and it’s $91 million. 
 
We offered all 100 ideas to the NDP because it was becoming 
clear that this Premier and this government had absolutely no 
ideas of its own and no vision for Saskatchewan, something 
confirmed by the budget of yesterday. And we called on the 
Premier and the NDP government to get started by 
implementing idea no. 1 from our 100 list of ideas, reduce 
income tax for low-income earners at a total cost of $90 million 
— at a time when the NDP government has collected 1.5 billion 
in unexpected revenue over the past two years. 
 
But yesterday the NDP said no tax relief for the lowest-income 
earners in the province — those on minimum wage; young 
people, Mr. Speaker; single moms trying to pay the bills. Is that 
the vision this NDP government has for the next 100 years? I’m 
afraid it’s so. I’m afraid that’s the vision for the next 100 years. 
Mr. Speaker, never has a government done so little when it has 
so much. 
 
Well how about property tax payers, Mr. Speaker? How did the 
NDP treat Saskatchewan property tax payers? School divisions 
were looking to the government for an increase in the 
foundation operating grants to cover off the rising costs of 
education for our children, our most important resource. The 
response from the NDP — and I can hear them saying it now — 
is zap, you’re frozen. Zap, you’re frozen. Listen closely — we 
can hear the member for Moose Jaw — zap, you’re frozen. Not 
one new dollar for K to 12 foundation grants. Zap, you’re 
frozen. And now school boards across the province are saying 
they will have little choice except to raise property taxes — 
raise property taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what about the teachers? What about the teachers? I said 
yesterday the Saskatchewan’s 12,000 teachers were anxious to 
hear what the NDP was willing to negotiate. Would it be a fair 
and competitive contract? No, Mr. Speaker, there was nothing 
in yesterday’s, in the NDP budget yesterday for teachers. Zero, 
Mr. Speaker; nothing at all. The funds remain the same. 
 
And of course the Learning minister argued there was money in 
the foundation grant to cover the cost of the first year of a new 
teachers’ contract. And you know, Mr. Speaker, he’s right. The 
NDP put zero new money into K to 12 operating grants and the 
minister is offering teachers zero in the first year of their new 
contract. Maybe that’s what teachers mean to this government. 
Maybe that’s why 94 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 94 per cent of 
Saskatchewan teachers voted for strike action this week. If 
that’s something that sits well with this government, I’m not 
sure, Mr. Speaker. It shouldn’t sit well with this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina Mayor Pat Fiacco may have summed it up 
best yesterday. On behalf of municipal property tax payers, he 
said this NDP government just doesn’t get it. Mayor Fiacco said 
this NDP government just doesn’t get it. And he was right. And 
I would venture to guess, Mr. Speaker, that most people in 
Saskatchewan would agree with Mayor Fiacco. 
 
Saskatchewan families and businesses pay some of the highest 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

property taxes in Canada. Now that a short-sighted NDP 
government with no vision and no long-term plan for 
Saskatchewan . . . municipal taxpayers are going to get 
hammered again. Why, Mr. Speaker? Well because this NDP 
government, even though the Premier has raked in $1.5 billion 
in new revenue, this government revenue, he thought . . . he has 
$1.5 billion more than he thought he would have last year. 
 
Even with all the new money, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has sent, 
they have sent a chilling message to Saskatchewan cities, 
towns, villages, and RMs [rural municipality]. A chilling 
message, Mr. Speaker — zap, you’re frozen. The NDP budget 
contains not one cent in new municipal revenue sharing, not one 
new cent. And that means municipal property tax is likely to go 
up in communities and RMs across the province. 
 
[11:00] 
 
The member from Regina is chirping from his seat. The city of 
Regina is looking at a 4 per cent property tax increase. How 
does the member, how does the member from Regina feel about 
a 4 per cent property tax increase for those exact members that 
he represents in this legislature? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll let you know how I feel representing the 
citizens of Saskatoon. Saskatoon is looking at a 7 per cent 
increase, 7 per cent increase in property taxes. Mr. Speaker, 
people in my constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs pay the 
highest education property tax, not only in Saskatchewan, but in 
the country, Mr. Speaker, in the country. A shameful stat — in 
the country, the highest property tax rates in the country. And 
the minister from Regina Northeast knows that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year when revenues were down the NDP 
government, this NDP government, they took your money. This 
year when revenues are up, not only do the NDP not give 
anything back, the Premier decided it’s a good idea to actually 
drive property taxes up again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps nowhere in the NDP government’s 
lack of vision more obvious than in this Premier’s complete and 
total disregard for rural Saskatchewan. According to the NDP’s 
own projections, net farm income was negative $268 million in 
2003. And the NDP estimates net realized farm income will be 
negative 238 million for . . . 204, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the most telling statistic of all: net farm income is 
projected to be negative $319 million in 2005. 
 
And how did the NDP respond to that kind of carnage in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Well the truth is they didn’t 
respond at all. This budget completely ignores rural 
Saskatchewan. Oh the NDP did one thing — they created a new 
government department. But there is no, there is no 
commitment, no commitment to fund, to fully fund the CAIS 
program this year. There is a commitment . . . there is no 
commitment to strengthen crop insurance either, Mr. Speaker. 
There is no plan for addressing the devastation in our livestock 
industry as a result of the BSE crisis and the closure of the US 
[United States] border to Canadian live cattle. There is no 
funding for municipal revenue sharing or K to 12 operating 
costs, so property taxes are going up again. And there is no sign 
in this budget that the Premier or his NDP government either 
understands nor cares about the challenges facing rural 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no recognition in this budget for the hard 
work and dedication of nurses in Saskatchewan. There’s no 
commitment from this NDP government to fund a fair and 
competitive wage settlement with nurses. That, combined with 
the fact that this budget contains no plan for retaining and 
recruiting nurses, and no specific long-term plan to reduce 
waiting lists, this means the NDP will continue to drive nurses 
out of the province. Waiting lists will continue to grow and 
health care services will continue to deteriorate in this, Mr. 
Speaker, the home of medicare. Mr. Speaker, that’s enough to 
even make Tommy Douglas look for an out-of-province 
referral. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP budget ignores the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. It turns its back on Saskatchewan people; 
it turns its back on Saskatchewan communities. It’s a budget 
that disrespects teachers; it’s a budget that disrespects nurses. 
It’s a budget that ignores low-income earners and drives 
property taxes up. 
 
There is little in this budget, Mr. Speaker, to make 
Saskatchewan more competitive. There’s nothing in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, to give young people cause to stay in 
Saskatchewan, to give them the confidence that they need to 
stay in this province. It’s not there in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a budget with no innovation; it’s a budget with no 
leadership; and most sadly of all, Mr. Speaker, it’s a budget 
with no vision from an NDP government that’s devoid, that’s 
devoid of all three. 
 
This NDP government is not . . . the NDP government yes, but 
this NDP budget is not supported by most Saskatchewan 
people, and, Mr. Speaker, it will not get the support of the 
Saskatchewan Party either. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move the following motion, seconded 
by the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the words after “That this Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 
 
disagrees with the general budgetary policy of the 
government because the Premier and the cabinet have 
betrayed low and modest income earners by not increasing 
the basic personal exemption for people who earn less than 
$35,000 a year; have not included indexation to the food 
allowance for people living on social assistance; have 
predetermined the outcome of collective bargaining for 
teachers and nurses; have frozen funding for K to 12 
education; have not committed to fully fund the province’s 
share of the Canadian agriculture income stabilization 
program; have not addressed revenue sharing with 
municipalities; and have not laid out a long-term vision for 
the province for the next 100 years — therefore this 
provincial government does not enjoy the confidence of 
this Assembly. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It has moved by 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs, seconded by the 
member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following be added: 

 
disagrees with the general budgetary policy of the 
government because the Premier and cabinet have 
betrayed low and modest income earners by not increasing 
the basic personal exemption for people who earn less than 
$35,000 a year; have not included indexation to the food 
allowance for people living on social assistance; have 
predetermined the outcome of collective bargaining for 
teachers and nurses; have frozen funding for K-12 
education; have not committed to fully fund the province’s 
share of the Canadian agriculture income stabilization 
program; have not addressed revenue sharing with 
municipalities; and have not laid out a long-term vision for 
the province for the next 100 years — therefore this 
provincial government does not enjoy the confidence of 
this Assembly. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question on the amendment? 
 
I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to take part in the budget debate and to second the 
amendment put forward by the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs that challenges this government, that challenges this 
government to the point where they did not actually recognize 
the possibilities that they had in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take my few minutes that have been 
allotted to me to recognize the components of a budget. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s very difficult for people to analyze a budget, to 
look at all the expenditures, to look at all the revenue, and get a 
full understanding of a budget as large as that of a provincial 
government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start by talking about one word, 
and that word is deficit, Mr. Speaker. You know, I listened to 
comments yesterday of individuals and I looked back at 
comments made in the past. And, you know, the comments of 
2002 or 2003 and yesterday are identical. 
 
And I want to mention a comment of John Gormley of CJME 
radio, made in 2002, Mr. Speaker, in 2002, when he said, 
usually when governments spend more than they take in, it’s 
called a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at yesterday’s budget — and the NDP 
stand in their seats and say a balanced budget — the most 
critical thing that people have to recognize is, take a look at it. 
Take a look at the fact that revenue in this year’s provincial 
budget is $7,006,800,000. Take a look at expenditures. 
Expenditures are $7,151,731,000. Expenditures exceed revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a deficit budget. Let’s make that clear to all 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan that this is not a 
balanced budget, this is a deficit budget. Now, Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government has been very creative, very creative in 
disguising how suddenly a deficit budget becomes a balanced 

budget. And one of their, one of their funds that they use is a 
fund that does not contain any money. That’s the first thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Provincial Auditor Fred Wendel says the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is not a proper accounting practice. It’s not 
following generally accepted accounting practices. It allows you 
to say that you’re not running a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are not my words as the Minister of 
Government Relations chirps from his seat. Those are the words 
of an independent officer of this Legislative Assembly who says 
this is basically a shell game. This is a way for the government 
to disguise a deficit. But he does not understand that, Mr. 
Speaker. He chirps from his seat criticizing the comments of a 
Provincial Auditor who says that if you use a Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund that does not contain any money, in fact it’s 
a disguise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member doesn’t accept the Provincial 
Auditor’s comments, maybe he’ll accept the comments of the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants, for instance. Nola Joorisity, 
the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of that firm says the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, FSF, simply confuses the public. And this is 
her direct quote: 
 

“The use of the fund, although probably within the rules, 
makes it difficult for a lot of people to understand what’s 
going on.” 

 
Joorisity added that transferring funds from the FSF to the 
General Revenue Fund is simply increasing the province’s debt. 
Quote: 
 

“When you draw down the fiscal stabilization fund, you 
are, in fact, incurring debt because there’s no actual money 
in there.” 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question that the people of Saskatchewan 
are going to be asking is, number one, is this a deficit budget? 
Well clearly expenditures exceed revenue; it’s a deficit budget 
all right. 
 
The second question then is, so where does this government get 
its money if it’s going to call it a balanced budget? They borrow 
it, Mr. Speaker. They borrow it against debt. And that’s what 
happens. Take a look at the budget. And I know people will be 
studying this document. 
 
The debt of the province of Saskatchewan in fact is going to go 
up this year. It’s going to go up after a windfall, revenues that 
came into this province last year. And in fact, the debt will go 
up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the fiscal year that we currently 
are still in. We still have another six days of the fiscal year 
2004-2005. Mr. Speaker, I want to share with the members in 
the Legislative Assembly and those watching and especially the 
Deputy Premier from Yorkton who doesn’t seem to understand 
what his own documents are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the revenue for the province of Saskatchewan for 
the year that will end in six days time is $7.713 billion. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s $1.1 billion more than what they estimated just a 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

short year ago — $1.1 billion more. Now on the other side, we 
have to look at expenditures — because I have been one serving 
in this Legislative Assembly for I guess just about 10 years — 
where I want to say to the government that expenditures that 
will end on March 31 are projected to be $7.071 billion. So 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, in this example, the current fiscal year, 
revenues exceed expenditures, not the other way around as has 
been the case for every year that we’ve had an NDP 
government. 
 
Last year was the first year of a balanced budget. It was a 
balanced budget. And you know, Mr. Speaker, across the nation 
we were told that we were a have province. For the first time in 
many, many, many years, Saskatchewan became a have 
province. But you know, Mr. Speaker, it was pretty short-lived. 
It was pretty short-lived because now expenditures exceed 
revenue in the budget for ’05-06. And we’re now a have-not 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other components that we need to look 
at is a little bit of, where does this province get its money from? 
The member for Yorkton . . . I won’t say he chirps from his seat 
but he continues to try to engage in debate. And I know that 
he’ll get his opportunity to talk in this debate. But you know 
what he has to do? He has to take the document and actually 
look at it, actually study it and say, okay, as a provincial 
government, where are we getting our revenues? 
 
[11:15] 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to listen to the 
Finance minister, listen to the Premier talk about $192 million 
more in health expenditures for this year. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
let’s take a look at transfers from the federal government. There 
are two line items in the category called transfers from the 
Government of Canada. One is called the Canada health transfer 
and the other line item is called health reform transfer — two 
items. Well let’s take a look at what was budgeted last year and 
what this government anticipates to receive from the federal 
government. 
 
Well last year the budget for Canada health transfer was $419 
million. This year it’s going to be $552 million, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a difference of $133 million. That’s what we’re getting 
more from the federal government for health transfer. 
 
Now let’s look at the next line, health reform transfer. Well last 
year health reform transfer for the province of Saskatchewan 
was estimated to be 46.7 million. This year we are estimating 
that we will receive $82 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
difference of about $36 million. Add those numbers together, 
Mr. Speaker, and you have nearly $190 million. This is federal 
money. So for the Minister of Health to say, look what I’m 
doing, I’m spending $192 million more in health, he’s receiving 
it all — almost all of it — from the federal government. That’s 
what has to be made clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, and the other point that I do want to recognize this 
government for . . . So I want to talk about some of the 
announcements in health. For a number of years we’ve been 
listening to the members opposite talk about health 
development. And I’ve been very pleased to hear the members 
opposite talk about a potential health care facility improvement 

at Preeceville. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I have a newspaper 
clipping from the Preeceville Progress that I’ve used many 
times in this House, and it says: 
 

Today’s announcement is about moving ahead and 
building a better future for the people of Preeceville and 
surrounding area. 
 

It’s an announcement by the Health minister; that’s the direct 
quote of the Health minister of this province. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, you know when that comment was made? That 
comment was made in the September 25, 2003 edition of this 
paper. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I also want to direct the people to look 
at this comment made by the mayor of Preeceville, who says: 
 

The announcement today brings back to the forefront the 
initiative we started more than five years ago. 

 
Five years ago before the year 2003. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the budget document called the 
performance plan summary and I turn to page 20, and I see that 
it says: 
 

Approval to proceed with four additional health care 
facilities: [which includes the] new integrated health 
facilities in Preeceville and Maidstone . . . 

 
Approval to proceed. Well, Mr. Speaker, what was this in 
2003? Well the mayor and people in the community of 
Preeceville have been very appreciative of the fact that two 
years ago this government said yes, it’s a project. 
 
Last year in fact, the Deputy Premier agreed with the fact that 
they were going to provide $700,000 for the next step. Again, I 
express my appreciation on behalf of the people of Preeceville 
and area to say, that’s good. Let’s move forward. We’re going 
to have a facility. 
 
Now again in the budget it says, approval to proceed. So, Mr. 
Speaker, when will we see some action? When will those 
people in Preeceville see a real hospital being constructed and 
actually earth and masonry and all those things moving. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t guarantee anything. This says, 
approval to proceed. A project that is already now nine years in 
the making — nine years — and we’re still at the stage of 
approval to proceed. 
 
So I want to get it on the record by saying, thank you to the 
Finance minister for including the Preeceville hospital for the 
approval to proceed for probably the ninth consecutive time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health also has indicated, through 
this budget document, that they’re going to address the needs of 
people in the province of Saskatchewan through reducing 
waiting lists, to recognizing the needs of people. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the minister and 
to the Deputy Premier as well how important this is. I’m sure 
the Deputy Premier, because he lives in the Canora-Pelly 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

constituency but represents Yorkton, has indicated many times 
that there’s far better need to increase the use of the dialysis 
machine in Yorkton. Yorkton’s a regional hospital. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t run at capacity. That machine 
should be running at least two shifts a day, which would be 16 
hours, and maybe it even shouldn’t be just running for five days 
of the week, maybe it should be running for seven days of the 
week — the term 16/7, 16 hours a day, 7 days a week. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not. 
 
And we have people that come right out of the east central area, 
people in Pelly, people in Arran, that take an STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] bus or they hire 
somebody to drive them, and they drive them all the way to 
Regina to get dialysis. And that occurs sometimes twice a week, 
sometimes three times a week. They drive right by a machine in 
Yorkton that’s not fully utilized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member from Yorkton says that’s not true, 
then let him supply the hours of usage of the dialysis machine 
in Yorkton. Let him tell us whether or not that machine runs 16 
hours a day, 7 days a week. Well let me you, Mr. Speaker, that 
is not true. That is not true, that that machine runs 16 hours a 
day, 7 days a week. And if the Premier can supply the hours and 
in fact the changes that have occurred in the last few days that 
shows this Assembly that they’re in fact operating at maximum 
capacity, I will be the first one to stand in this House and 
apologize to the Premier. But that’s not going to happen, Mr. 
Speaker — that’s not going to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what we really have to look at is, what is 
the financial health of the province of Saskatchewan? What is 
happening to people in the province of Saskatchewan as a result 
of this budget? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to share a couple of letters with 
this Assembly. First one is from the RM of St. Philips No. 301, 
based out of Pelly, Saskatchewan. It says: 
 

Re: [the] Declaration of the Rural Municipality of St. 
Philips No. 301, a Disaster Area. 
 

Resolution was moved at their council meeting on November 
18, 2004, that says: 
 

. . . due to the frost and the BSE problem, the Rural 
Municipality of St. Philips No. 301, be declared a disaster 
area . . . [passed] unanimously. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read to you a letter dated December 6 to 
the Hon. Minister of Ag and Food. And it says . . . This one is 
from the RM of Buchanan No. 304. Resolution passed, and I 
read the resolution: 
 

That with the abnormal growing season, the lack of heat 
units, and the untimely frost/s, poor quality grains and 
oilseeds are not in demand or are bringing very low prices, 
and Further That with the continued low returns for 
livestock due to BSE, farmers are facing a most difficult 
situation, Be It Resolved That The Rural Municipality of 
Buchanan No. 304 be declared a disaster area . . . ” 
 

Mr. Speaker, a third letter from the RM of Preeceville No. 334. 

The resolution is moved by councillor Mitchell, and it says: 
 

That as the agricultural producers in this municipality are 
still being affected by the BSE crisis and as an early frost 
devastated crops in the municipality, due to their late 
development because of the cool spring and summer, 
resulting in severe financial loss to the agricultural 
producers, who are still responsible to pay high input 
costs, that the council hereby declares the Rural 
Municipality of Preeceville No. 334 to be a disaster area 
. . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, from my constituency, three rural municipalities 
who for the year 2004 have declared themselves a disaster area. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that those councils, those farmers in 
those three RMs along with all of the other rural municipalities 
in my constituency were anxiously awaiting yesterday’s budget. 
They were looking forward to a budget that would address the 
fact that they are declaring themselves disaster areas. 
 
What did we see in yesterday’s budget for agriculture? Well, I 
think you have to turn to the document and see, as my 
colleague, the member for Melville-Saltcoats said, what’s in it. 
Well when we take a look at assistance to farmers, that falls 
under the category of farm stability and adaptation. Last year, 
Mr. Speaker, the government proposed that the expenditure for 
the CAIS program would be $98.7 million. This year the 
estimated cost for that same line item is $98.7 million, the exact 
same amount as was forecast in last year’s budget. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, after much debate, after much 
pressure, the Minister of Agriculture finally in the month of 
December agreed that there should be full funding of CAIS for 
2003, and in fact agreed that there should be an additional 
expenditure. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we in the Legislative Assembly — and this is 
more for the people that are wondering how government spends 
money — we have something called supplementary estimates 
for the current year that we’re in right now. The supplementary 
estimates for agriculture will include a vote that we’ll be 
dealing with in this Legislative Assembly for Sask Ag and 
Food, and it is for 101.2 million additional dollars. For what? 
To fully fund the CAIS program for 2003. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, while the minister’s waited and waited and 
waited for farmers to be hung out to dry and then finally said in 
December, well, now we’re going to fund it, and we’re going to 
do it through supplementary estimates, which is how we handle 
things like even forest fire fighting. And the member for Wood 
River, who’s been the former Environment critic, has indicated 
many times that we never know what our forest fire fighting 
costs are going to be for a year. But the government puts a 
number in its budget and says, this is what we think it’ll be. But 
at the end of a year after, you know, a huge amount of . . . in 
terms of the number of fires and the cost of firefighting, then 
there may be an additional set of supplementary estimates that 
says the government needs $65 million for forest fire fighting. 
So Mr. Speaker, that’s a practice that this government has 
followed. 
 
So what did the government do today? It looked back at the 
support for farmers, after knowing that there are RMs across 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

this province who have declared themselves disaster areas and 
said, how are we going to be helpful to the farmers? Well, we’re 
not going to do anything; we’re not going to fully fund CAIS 
for 2004. The budget is the exact same amount as was forecast 
in March of last year. It does not include the additional 
supplementary estimates that this government knows are going 
to be before it if they decide to fully fund a program that they 
are a signatory to. Mr. Speaker, that’s ridiculous. You signed a 
program with the federal government. You negotiate with them 
and we understand that there were changes that were made. And 
you signed a document that says, well we agree with the CAIS 
program for 2004 for the province of Saskatchewan but we’re 
not going to fully fund it. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve received a number of calls from 
farmers in my constituency who are trying to put in place lines 
of credit to be able to seed the crop for 2005. They have nothing 
to take to the bank as a collateral or as an asset. They still owe 
the businesses in this province for last year’s fertilizer, last 
year’s chemical, last year’s fuel bills. They have not fully paid 
off their cash advance programs. And now they don’t have the 
ability to extend that line of credit because this government has 
said no, we’re not fully funding CAIS, even though other 
provinces are. 
 
[11:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is something that has to be addressed as 
soon as possible because farmers need that ability. They need 
that ability to go to a financial institution and say, an insurance 
program that was put in place is there for me and I am eligible 
for that type of payout. That’s cash that a financial institution is 
willing to loan or to extend a line of credit against. 
 
But they’re not going to extend against something that’s pie in 
the sky, that says, well maybe this government might do that. 
Farmers can’t wait that long, Mr. Speaker. Farmers can’t wait 
that long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have already indicated that the 
revenue-sharing grant that the municipalities receive on an 
ongoing basis has not been increased. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
it matters whether you talk about urban communities, whether 
you talk about rural municipalities, every one of those 
municipal governments, that level of — third level of 
government — is doing the best it can. And they were 
expecting that revenue sharing would be there for them, that 
there would be an increase. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, for the fiscal year that we’re in . . . 
And we look at the revenue that this government is getting. 
We’re still at over $50 a barrel for oil. At the same time we 
know that people who are filling up their gas tanks are filling up 
a litre of gasoline costing, you know, somewhere in the ’80s 
and maybe even in the low 90s. You know, so there is a direct 
cost to the average person who drives a vehicle, Mr. Speaker, 
because they’re paying 80 or 90 cents. 
 
At the same time, this government is receiving a huge amount 
of money from the oil and gas development. But are they 
willing to pass any of that on through revenue sharing directly 
in municipalities? Not a penny, Mr. Speaker — not a penny. 
They have froze the amounts of revenue sharing to both urban 

and rural. 
 
So I’m sure as municipal councils heard the news yesterday 
they’re probably wondering about their budget. You know 
municipal councils are on a calendar year. Their budgets began 
back on January 1 and they were wondering what amount of 
money is going to come forward. 
 
We’ve heard from the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs 
talk about Saskatoon City Council who’s looking at a budget 
and saying, you know we’re going to need 7 per cent but we’re 
hopeful, we’re hopeful that revenue sharing is going to help 
mitigate that and in fact we won’t have to pass on 7 per cent 
increase to the taxpayers of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s going on in the town of 
Preeceville and the town of Kamsack and the town of Canora 
and all of the communities in my constituency, whether they’re 
urban or rural. They’re looking at saying, how do we balance? 
Well they didn’t get anything from the provincial government, 
not a penny. So they’re going to have to ask their own taxpayers 
to pay again, even at the same time as taxpayers are paying 91 
cents a litre for gasoline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at what this government has said 
about school boards. Let’s take a look at what this government 
has said about school boards. The monies for a school board are 
quite different than the other priority of people in 
Saskatchewan, which is health care. 
 
Health care, basically 100 per cent of the money comes directly 
through the provincial government by way of transfers of funds. 
School divisions don’t work that way. School divisions work on 
a level of governance that produces revenue from two sources. 
One is the taxpayer through direct taxation at the local level, 
and the other is a foundation grant transfer. Mr. Speaker, the 
foundation grant for the fiscal year that’s going to start in a few 
days, versus the current amount, is exactly the same. It’s frozen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at boards of education. 
Boards of education have experienced an increase in power 
costs. They’ve experienced an increase in SaskEnergy, natural 
gas costs. They’ve — especially rural boards who have rural 
transportation and the need to provide bus services — they have 
experienced gasoline at 80-plus cents versus a year ago when 
the cost of a litre of gasoline was in the low 60s, almost a third 
increase. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at a board of education and how 
it’s going to deal with its costs — and I’m just dealing with the, 
you know the physical costs, the facilities maintenance costs — 
there’s not one penny provided by this government, not one 
penny. They’re going to have to pass that on directly to the 
taxpayers because the foundation grant formula isn’t changing. 
The other source is the tax system. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, but there is another choice. And it’s a 
choice I think that this government wants them to make. It’s to 
cut program and cut services. Because if you can’t balance your 
budget by increasing taxes, if that’s just not on because the 
people of the province can’t afford that, you cut services and 
you cut programs. Mr. Speaker, that’s what rural people in this 
province are fearing, that because of the lack of support from 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

this government that they are going to have to reduce programs 
and reduce services. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the minister stands in his place, the 
Minister of Learning stands in his place and talks about the fact 
that they are going to allocate a huge sum of money for 
amalgamations. Well, Mr. Speaker, forced amalgamation has 
not been the answer to solving the problems of delivery of 
service and the governance structure in this province. It never 
has been and it never will be. 
 
What needs to happen is there needs to be a consultation 
process, a consultation process that could have been arrived at. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, there were a lot of school divisions that 
were moving forward with amalgamation. Was there a need to 
address some of the anomalies? Of course. But that could have 
been worked out. 
 
No, the Minister of Learning said, this is the way we will do it 
and I will force it upon you, and now I’m going to provide a 
little over 4 million, $4 million, $4.5 million to have those 12 
new school divisions created. It won’t be just those 12 because I 
understand that there are some separate boards of education that 
are amalgamating. So what he’s done is basically said, well 
here’s a sum of money, it’s less that 400,000 per board, and 
now you must go ahead and proceed with amalgamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity as an official opposition 
caucus to listen to a report out of the province of Manitoba, a 
province that has undergone this very same type of 
amalgamation — forced amalgamation. And we were shocked 
to hear that there were no cost savings, not the kind of cost 
savings that this minister is talking about. In fact, there was a 
huge increase in the costs of operating larger and larger school 
divisions. 
 
That’s what’s going to happen in this situation, Mr. Speaker. 
This is not going to be a cost saving. This will be a loss of local 
autonomy, this will be an additional burden on taxpayers, and in 
fact in many instances those school divisions that have a lower 
tax rate today are going to see a huge tax increase. That’s going 
to be the reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other part of this component of operating 
school divisions is the human resource side — the teachers, the 
non-professional staff, all of the people that are employed. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s very public. I’m sure every person in 
Saskatchewan knows that the Teachers’ Federation conducted a 
vote on Monday and Tuesday and almost 94 per cent of the 
teachers have indicated that some sanctions should be applied. 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s budget said very clearly that the 
direction is zero, zero per cent for this first fiscal year of a 
contract. That’s the value that this government places on 
teachers. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the situation, you know, that teachers 
are facing in Saskatchewan. We’re hearing, we’re hearing that 
in the neighbouring province of Manitoba there are settlements 
of two, three, two and a half per cent over a period of three 
years. We know what Alberta teachers are receiving under new 
contracts. But here in the province of Saskatchewan we’re 
supposed to retain our young people, make sure that we have 
replacement teachers for those that are going to be retiring 

because we know, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure that you as a former 
teacher understand, that there will be the baby boomer group 
that will be moving out. The baby boomer group will be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would . . . Order, please. 
Order, please. The member should not have to raise his or her 
voice in order to be heard in the Assembly, so I ask members to 
refrain from the extraneous debate. Ad I would ask the member 
from Canora-Pelly not to involve the Speaker in the debate. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
apologize for that. But there are other teachers in the Assembly 
who I am sure understand that, that the baby boomer group that 
is currently in the teaching profession will be retiring in the next 
few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how are we going to replace that teaching staff if 
we’re telling teachers, 0, 1, 1 is all you get. Mr. Speaker, 0, 1, 1 
is all you get. Well, Mr. Speaker, the member, the members 
chirp as to what is the number. Well the number should be 
arrived through free and collective bargaining. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — That’s what should happen. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, the answer to the question of course and it always has 
been in all collective bargaining is, what is the amount of 
money that the employer is prepared to spend on a year of 
contract? That’s the question. What is the amount of money that 
the government is prepared, as a partner — and I might say a 
majority partner in the bargaining process — who has complete 
control of that bargaining process? Because they have five 
members out of a nine-member bargaining team. They should 
be the one to say, you know, for the first year of a three-year 
contract, we have X dollars to spend on a contract. And in the 
second year there’s this many dollars, and in a third year there’s 
this many dollars. And then the bargaining team has the ability 
to sit at a table and negotiate. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, what does a mandate that says zero 
in a first year and 1 per cent in a second year do to the 
bargaining process? It destroys it. It’s a government dictating 
and a settlement on wages without negotiations. And I don’t 
know how we’re going to achieve an agreement with the nurses 
in the province of Saskatchewan, with the teachers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. But you know, Mr. Speaker, you 
sure create a lot of animosity when you say, your wages for this 
year are going to be zero, your wages for year two are going to 
be increased by a maximum of 1 per cent, but go ahead and 
negotiate. You know, a dreadful process, one that’s going to 
create a situation in Saskatchewan where other provinces are 
going to be looking at us and saying, wow, what an incredibly 
weak position to take in putting your province forward in the 
year that we celebrate a centennial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more things that I can talk about 
today but I know that there are other people who would like to 
get into discussion on this motion. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s critical in 
yesterday’s budget is the lack of vision, as our amendment 
suggests. There’s no vision to ensure that we will have the 
ability to not lose people from this province. We will continue 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

to lose quality people if we look at the fact that a mandated 0, 1, 
and 1 will be there for every other public sector employee group 
that is going to have a contract that will expire in this fiscal 
year. That’s going to be the reality. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been known 
worldwide as an exporter of people. And if we’re going to grow 
this province, if we’re going to move away from the conditions 
that we are right now . . . And I had a call last night from a 
teacher, Mr. Speaker, who indicated he had heard the minister 
talk about the conditions of the province 100 years ago, the first 
budget. And he said, you know, I was looking at the conditions 
of this province in 1929. You know, Mr. Speaker, we almost 
had 1 million people in 1929. We were a province that was 
looking forward to growing. In fact, take a look at this building. 
Built in the early 1900s for a province that was going to become 
the centre of Western Canada. So he was not very impressed 
with the fact that the minister was comparing 1900 to today and 
saying, oh look at how far we’ve come. 
 
What he was looking at was the fact that in the early 1930s — 
75 years ago — this province had nearly the same number of 
people that it does today. And what do we have to show for it? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, one of the articles that I had — and I 
noticed that the Minister of Finance comments about this — he 
talks about development of oil and gas. Because the members 
opposite must understand that the additional dollars that came 
into the coffers of the General Revenue Fund this current fiscal 
year and will continue to come into the coffers for next year, a 
large amount of the money comes from potash, comes from gas, 
and it comes from oil. 
 
[11:45] 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is an article dated January 26, 
2005, and it’s available on canada.com news and it talks about 
drilling, it talks about development, and it’s an article about the 
Petroleum Services Association of Canada, okay, PSAC for 
short. It says: 
 

PSAC anticipates a record 24,075 wells to be drilled 
across Canada this year with 18,625 in Alberta and 1,300 
in B.C. Last year 22,696 wells were drilled, up four per 
cent from the . . . [previous year] 2003. 

 
So we’re seeing additional wells being drilled in Alberta, in BC 
[British Columbia], and then we take a look at the document 
that the Minister of Finance delivered yesterday, and I quote 
directly from page 40 of his performance plan summary, and it 
says this: 
 

There were 1,743 new oil wells drilled in 2004 compared 
to 1,875 new oil wells drilled in 2003. Oil drilling is 
expected to decrease to 1,700 new wells in . . . [’05] and 
[to] 1,600 new wells in . . . [’06]”. 
 

Mr. Speaker, now as my colleague from Cannington points out, 
this is at a time when we have $57-a-barrel oil. Alberta and 
British Columbia are, the number of oil wells is, according to 
the Petroleum Services Association of Canada, are going 
through the roof. And what are we doing in Saskatchewan? 
We’re going to decline. We’re going to have less wells drilled. 

Mr. Speaker, you know, the potential for Saskatchewan, the 
potential for new potash development in Saskatchewan — and 
we know there are finds that have indicated that there is potash 
ready to be developed underground — we’re not doing any of 
that. In fact, we’re going to decrease the number of oil wells in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, it’s really hard to figure out why we, as a province 
with so much potential, are not moving forward. And you know 
there’s only one answer to that question, Mr. Speaker, and that 
answer is the fact that we have an NDP government that is tired, 
that is out of ideas, that is not moving forward, that does not 
have a vision. And I’m pleased to stand in my place today and 
say I will be seconding the amendment of the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources, the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’ve listened very carefully to what the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, the opposition Finance critic, had to 
say. And then I listened to what the member from Canora-Pelly 
had to say. 
 
And I’m going to demonstrate in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that 
what the member from Canora-Pelly just said in his remarks 
was completely contradictory even to what he said himself. He 
contradicted himself several times and I’m going to talk about 
that. And then I’m going to demonstrate, Mr. Speaker, that what 
the member for Canora-Pelly said contradicts directly what the 
member from Silver Springs said. And then I’m going to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that if these two gentlemen even in the course of 
their own remarks in their own party can’t agree with each 
other, I don’t think there’s much hope that they can present a 
coherent plan to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m going to begin by talking about something the member 
just referred to, Mr. Speaker, which was the number of wells 
being drilled in Saskatchewan for oil and gas. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that contrary to what that member would 
suggest, under this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, the 
production of oil in Saskatchewan — oil and gas — has 
doubled, Mr. Speaker. That is what has happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And that member can get up and he can 
spout his doom and gloom as they always do as much as he 
wants, Mr. Speaker. But here is the reality, Mr. Speaker. If the 
member had been studying what is happening in oil and gas 
sector, Mr. Speaker, he would know that the big push in the oil 
patch in Saskatchewan today is what is known as enhanced oil 
recovery, Mr. Speaker. And I want to tell the member, if he 
doesn’t know — and if he doesn’t know, he should know, Mr. 
Speaker — that in Saskatchewan the problem with the oil patch 
is this, Mr. Speaker. It is that using conventional technology, 
the oil industry can only extract 15 per cent, that’s one five per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, of the oil resource because we tend to have 
heavy oil which is embedded in sedimentary rock. 
 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

And what we have been doing, Mr. Speaker, with, for example 
EnCana Corporation at Weyburn, is to increase the productivity 
of the existing wells. And I want that member to know, Mr. 
Speaker — and many of the public already know this, but I 
don’t think the Saskatchewan Party knows this — that the rate 
of recovery from the existing wells at Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, 
has gone from 22 per cent of getting oil out of the ground to 
about 45 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, in 
addition to seeing large amounts of drilling, is doing what the 
Saskatchewan people know make sense, which is to say we’re 
going to make the existing wells, Mr. Speaker, more productive 
than they were before. Because the Saskatchewan Party may be 
content to leave 85 per cent of the oil in the ground, Mr. 
Speaker, we are not content to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the Premier and I had an 
announcement in Regina last Friday whereby we said that we 
are going to work with the oil industry to make production more 
efficient in Saskatchewan. And we’re going to take the wells we 
have, and we’re going to increase productivity and profitability, 
Mr. Speaker, no thanks to those people over there. 
 
Because all they do as the oil and gas industry grows . . . And 
by the way, the oil and gas sector, contrary to what that member 
from Canora-Pelly said, had this to say, Mr. Speaker. They said 
Saskatchewan is a good place to do oil and gas business, and we 
like doing business here. That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for once it would be nice if this party, instead of just 
spouting doom and gloom and saying everything’s bad in 
Saskatchewan, would recognize the progress that is being made 
in this province. But they never will, so we won’t even bother 
waiting for them to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I said I was going to demonstrate how unreliable and 
contradictory everything that comes from that side of the House 
is and what nonsense it really is, Mr. Speaker. Now we just had 
the member from Canora-Pelly get up. And the people can look 
at the Hansard which is on the website and which is in writing, 
and see what he had to say. 
 
He gets up and what’s the first thing he says to the people of the 
province? He says, oh everything’s bad. You know the NDP 
won’t tell you this, but he says the budget is a deficit budget. 
That’s what he said. They’re spending more money than they’re 
taking in. That’s what he said. 
 
Now let’s think about this for a minute. He starts out saying it’s 
a deficit budget. They’re spending too much money. What does 
he say at the end of his speech? He says they’re not spending 
enough money. He says they should give more money to the 
municipalities. They should give more money to the schools. 
They should give more money to the teachers and the nurses. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my point is . . . not to say it’s not important 
to fund municipalities, schools, nurses, and teachers, because it 
is, and we do that. My point is he starts out saying to people, 

they’re spending too much money. He ends his own speech by 
saying that they should spend more money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Now how, how can that make sense? Well 
of course it doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say also that when he gets up and he tries to tell 
the people of the province that there’s some kind of terrible 
deficit situation, oh well, you know we should all be frightened 
by that, Mr. Speaker. But let me say this. How is it if what he 
says is correct — and there’s still chirping from their seats — 
there’s some great deficit and at the same time they want to 
spend more money, how is it if there’s this big deficit and 
financial problem, Mr. Speaker, that the province of 
Saskatchewan has received 11 consecutive credit rating 
upgrades? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — When these people — and I remind 
everyone that the Leader of the Opposition from Swift Current 
and I believe the member from Silver Springs worked in the 
government of the 1980s — when they left, Mr. Speaker, they 
left the province with the worst credit rating in the nation. I 
won’t even mention the huge debt and the deficit that they left, 
but the worst credit rating. 
 
Now we have a AA credit rating, Mr. Speaker, from the bankers 
and the investment dealers in New York and Toronto; that’s 
what the rest of the world says about Saskatchewan. And we’re 
supposed to believe somebody from that side that gets up and 
says there’s some kind of horrendous financial problem in the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well don’t believe it for a minute because if we’re asked the 
question — what does the Saskatchewan Party know that the 
investment bankers in the world financial community don’t 
know? — and I think the answer is, very, very little, Mr. 
Speaker, very little. Because this is a group of individuals that 
despite their claim to business savvy and everything else . . . 
And we know about some of their forays into business by the 
way, Mr. Speaker. We know about that. I’m not going to get 
personal to talk about some of their business experiences, Mr. 
Speaker, but we know about their real business savvy. 
 
Despite their claims to do that, they will not give the people the 
straight bill of goods about 11 straight credit upgrades. And I 
want to say this, Mr. Speaker. When the New Democratic Party 
came to power in 1991, the amount of interest that we paid on 
the debt was about 20 cents on the dollar — 20 cents on the 
dollar. And it amounted to about $881 million per year, Mr. 
Speaker. Today as a result of the budget delivered by the 
Minister of Finance, the amount of interest that will be paid is 
less than 10 cents on the dollar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it is $588 million, $300 million per 
year less, Mr. Speaker, paid on interest serving the debt, Mr. 
Speaker. And if the members opposite think that that 
demonstrates some kind of fiscal problem, that says more about 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

the way the members opposite think than it does about reality, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So 11 straight credit rating upgrades, Mr. Speaker . . . debt costs 
less than 10 per cent when they used to be 20 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the size of 
government debt, which is the lowest in 14 years — something 
you won’t hear from the members over there — the size of 
government debt relative to the size of our growing economy, 
Mr. Speaker, is less than 20 per cent for government debt. It 
used to be higher than 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. It is half of 
what is used to be when those individuals over there were 
through with their management, so called, of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So if anybody in the province is prepared 
to believe the member from Canora-Pelly when he gets up and 
says that the Minister of Finance has created some kind of 
deficit budget, well if they can believe that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
got a bridge in Saskatoon that I’d be prepared to sell to them. 
 
But I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
are going to buy the kind of doom and gloom nonsense that we 
hear from the members over there because we are well aware of 
their experience, Mr. Speaker, and the experience we suffered 
with them when they had the opportunity to sit over here on this 
side of the House, which I don’t think will happen for a long 
time. 
 
So we have the member from Canora-Pelly who gets up and 
incorrectly says that there’s some kind of a deficit budget at the 
beginning of his speech. But at the end of his speech he’s 
worked himself up into a lather, Mr. Speaker, where he’s going 
to spend more money on health care, education, municipalities, 
you name it. They never met a spending proposal that they 
didn’t like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But now I want to talk about what that member says directly 
contradicts what his colleague, the member from Silver Springs, 
had to say just before he spoke because that colleague said that, 
not that there was a deficit budget, Mr. Speaker. No, he didn’t 
say that. He suggested that there was just all kinds of money 
there that should be spent, which directly contradicts what this 
member said, that there wasn’t enough money there. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Because what does the member from Silver Springs have to say 
to the people of the province in terms of what we should do? 
Well the first thing he says, Mr. Speaker, is that we should 
reduce the sales tax by $140 million. That’s his first 
observation. He’s going to cut everybody’s sales tax. 
 
Then in the next breath he says — oh, guess what — he’s going 
to cut everybody’s income tax as well. He’s going to cut 
income tax by $90 million a year. Now we’re up to $230 
million a year in tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But wait, wait. Oh it doesn’t end there, no it doesn’t end there. 
No, no, no, no. Because let’s not forget that the opposition says 
every day. They’re going to cut the education property taxes, 

Mr. Speaker. Oh yes, oh yes. So we’re going to have lower 
sales taxes, lower income taxes, lower education taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, hard to know how we’re going to do that — if what the 
member from Canora-Pelly says and we’re operating at a deficit 
— but nevertheless, the member from Silver Springs says he’s 
going to cut every tax known to mankind, Mr. Speaker. But 
he’s not going to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, exactly. 
My colleague says, what about the small business tax? He’s not 
going to stop at cutting the sales tax or the income tax or the 
education tax. No, no, no, Mr. Speaker. Because he’s on the 
CBC radio this morning, he’s on the CBC radio and what does 
he say? He says he’s going to cut the small business tax as well. 
Now never mind the fact that since 1991 when this government 
came to power, the small business tax, Mr. Speaker, has been 
cut in half from 10 per cent to 5 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the amount that it applies to has been 
raised from 200,000 to 300,000. He doesn’t say anything about 
that, Mr. Speaker. But somehow, somehow he wants to say to 
the people, we’re going to cut all your taxes. But of course, he 
doesn’t stop there. Oh no, no, no. He’s going to . . . Like the 
member from Canora-Pelly who says we’re at a deficit but I 
want to spend more money, the member from Silver Springs 
says, well we’re going to cut all the taxes, whatever anybody 
wants we’ll agree to. Oh, oh, but as we’re doing that, we’re 
going to spend more money at the same time. We’re going to, 
he says, spend more on education, spend more on the 
municipalities. We’re going to give all the public sector 
workers whatever they want in their wage demands because 
that’s the kind of good people and nice people we are in the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And the problem is, Mr. Speaker, that when you try to be all 
things to all people, you trip yourself up even within your own 
speech. And what we have seen this morning, if anybody wants 
to go back and read the record of what these folks have to say, 
Mr. Speaker, it just doesn’t make any sense because it just 
doesn’t add up. 
 
Because, you know, I was thinking as I was listening to the 
members over there that perhaps they have made a money 
printing machine, because the way they’re going to cut 
everybody’s taxes and spend money on everything known — 
every demand that is out there — I thought, well they must have 
a printing money machine. But then I thought, then I thought, 
no it’s not a money printing machine that they have. I think, Mr. 
Speaker — and I think the member from Silver Springs should 
come clean about this — I think he has invented a time travel 
machine. I really think he has. 
 
Because I think, Mr. Speaker, what the member from Silver 
Springs must have is a time travel machine whereby he can go 
ahead a week and see what the winning lottery numbers are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because it’s the only way that I can make 
any sense out of what they have to say over there. They cut all 
the taxes and spend more money at the same time. But the 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

problem is, when I think about it logically — and even though I 
get a bit confused when I listen to the members opposite over 
there, I do try to think logically, Mr. Speaker — I know that the 
member from Silver Springs probably doesn’t have a time 
travel machine. And so I have to go back, I have to go back to 
the proposition that I think what they’re making just doesn’t 
add . . . what they’re saying doesn’t add up. Mr. Speaker, it 
doesn’t add up. So, so much for all their promises and ideas. 
 
But I do want to before I sit down, answer this question that the 
member from Canora-Pelly asked and I know that he’ll want to 
listen attentively because he asked the question. And I believe a 
question asked deserves an answer, Mr. Speaker. And the 
member from Canora-Pelly — in his usual recitation of doom 
and gloom and the suggestion that nothing was going well in 
the province of Saskatchewan — said, what is the financial 
health of Saskatchewan, he said. 
 
Well, I’m not going to just give him my opinions, Mr. Speaker. 
But I want to say this to the doom and gloom people over there, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m going to talk about what others have to say 
about the financial health of Saskatchewan. 
 
I look at the Leader-Post for March 23, Mr. Speaker; and I 
know by the way that the member from Canora who’s chirping 
from his seat asked a question, so I’m sure he’ll want to know 
the answer, what is the financial health of Saskatchewan? Well 
here’s what the RBC Financial Group has to say. They say, Mr. 
Speaker, quote: “Saskatchewan’s economy appears to be firing 
on all cylinders.” That’s what they say. 
 
And then I look, Mr. Speaker, at what the right wing Fraser 
Institute has to say, Mr. Speaker — their cousins in Vancouver 
who like to be critical of the New Democratic Party — this is 
what the Fraser Institute has to say. They say, quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Saskatchewan has vaulted past Alberta to become one of 
the best places in the world to invest in mining. 

 
That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker. So we have the RBC 
Financial Group, along with the credit rating agencies, we have 
the Fraser Institute and what they have to say. But we can move 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can have a look at what the Leader-Post has to say. They 
say, in their editorial of March 15, “Saskatchewan’s economy is 
performing robustly”. That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or we can look at the . . . We’ll look at the stock market, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a pretty good indication of whether people have 
confidence in an economy. And I see in The StarPhoenix of 
March 12, the headline is, “Sask Stock Index shows strong 
growth,” Mr. Speaker, and then they take the top 25 companies 
from Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, they have this to say. 
They say that of the companies in Saskatchewan, the index has 
gone from 168.99 December 31, ’03 to two seventy-one 
sixty-four December 31, ’04 which, by my calculation, Mr. 
Speaker, and according to this, says return from ’04-05, 37.79 
per cent growth in the 25 companies and their value on the 
stock exchange. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise that when we look at the job 

numbers over the last year, the headline is, Sask job numbers 
jump by 11,400 over the last year. 
 
Now finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to the members 
opposite. According to Statistics Canada, capital investment is 
expected to hit $8.5 billion — that’s billion with a “b” — in 
Saskatchewan this year, an increase of 13 per cent; the highest 
growth rate among the provinces according to Statistics Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want those members over there who 
do nothing but preach doom and gloom to know that the 
average growth rate for investment in Canada in 2005 is going 
to be — according to Statistics Canada — 6 per cent. The 
growth rate in investment in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 
going to be 13 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member from Canora-Pelly says, well we should do 
something for the people of the province. And I want to say to 
the member from Canora-Pelly this. He wants to complain 
about everything in the budget. I see in the budget health and 
education funding is at record levels, Mr. Speaker. Is he against 
that? Is he against that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I see in the budget, Mr. Speaker, a projection of 3 per cent 
growth in the economy. Is he against that? I see in the budget 
debt reduction, Mr. Speaker, and as I said earlier, the lowest 
debt level in 14 years. Maybe that’s what he’s against — I don’t 
know. Or is it the fact that the government is providing funding 
to prevent any increase in tuition fees at our universities. Maybe 
he’s against that, Mr. Speaker — I don’t know. 
 
Could it be the $55 million in education property tax relief in 
the budget, Mr. Speaker? Is he against that? Is he against the 
hospital in Preeceville somebody asks. Well he might be, Mr. 
Speaker. Because the fact of the matter is if he doesn’t vote for 
the budget, which has record health care spending and an 
increase of $192 million for health care, he is against the 
hospital in Preeceville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or is he against the capital spending in the budget, Mr. 
Speaker? I don’t know. I haven’t heard them ask any questions 
about highways. We have, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of 
Finance said, a plan to fix the roads in this province. And we’re 
spending $2.5 billion, with a “b,” over 10 years to fix the roads. 
Maybe he’s against that, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know. 
 
Or he could be against the 27,000 training opportunities for 
young people in the budget, Mr. Speaker. Is he against the 
training opportunities? I don’t know. I don’t think he mentioned 
them. 
 
Maybe he’s against the graduate tax credit for young people 
that stay and work in Saskatchewan. He could be opposed to 
that. I’m not sure. 
 
Or is he against the expansion to the Saskatchewan bursary 
program which, Mr. Speaker, will increase bursary assistance 
for up to 10,000 students. Maybe he’s against that. 
 
Or he could be against the increased training opportunities for 
1,000 additional training spaces. Maybe he’s against that. I 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

don’t know. 
 
But I want to say, I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. There is good 
news in this budget. And there’s good news because it does two 
things that are very significant, Mr. Speaker. It creates 
opportunities for young people to be educated and to pursue 
their jobs and careers in this province. And to that extent it 
looks to the future, Mr. Speaker, not just the complaints of 
today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it says that we’re going to have a look at the 
business taxes in this province. And I want to say that we had a 
review starting in 1999 of personal income taxes. And I went 
back to what those members opposite had to say when that 
review was announced as part of the 1999 budget. What they 
said was, well we don’t have time for reviews. We just want to 
see the taxes cut and increased spending at the same time, as 
they always say. But they were opposed to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there is no one in the province today that would say that the 
tax review committee, the Vicq committee, did a bad job, or 
that the government did a bad job reforming income taxes in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, because we went from the second 
highest personal income taxes in Canada to the fourth lowest. 
And even the opposition, Mr. Speaker, has to admit that we’ve 
made a lot of progress when it comes to personal income taxes. 
 
Now that the Minister of Finance has announced we’re having a 
similar review of business taxes, they kind of pooh-pooh that 
idea as well, Mr. Speaker. And their language is very similar to 
what the then leader of the opposition from Rosetown had to 
say. The same old, same old story — doom and gloom. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding their doom and gloom 
we’re going to continue to move forward. We’re moving 
forward to build this province, and we’re going to do it over the 
wailing wall that comes from over there, Mr. Speaker. We are 
going to do it over that wailing wall. And we’re going to keep 
moving, Mr. Speaker, because someone once said when you’re 
going in the right direction, what do you do? You just keep 
going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:15] 
 
And the people of this province, in this centennial year — with 
a growing economy, growing investment, more jobs, a better 
taxation system — are going to keep growing, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re going to do it notwithstanding the unending 
negativity and doom and gloom that comes from the so-called 
Saskatchewan Party over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say it’s a pleasure to rise 
today to speak to the budget speech, but unfortunately for the 
people in my constituency this budget was a huge 
disappointment. 
 
People had high expectations. They know about the price of oil 
being higher than ever before, Mr. Speaker — $57-a-barrel oil 

— because we live in the middle of the oil patch, Mr. Speaker. 
We know about the price of potash being near record levels, 
Mr. Speaker. We know that the price of uranium is up, that the 
government has huge new resource revenues coming in. And 
yet the people say, but where has the money gone? Where is the 
announcements that we were looking for in education, in health, 
in agriculture, in transportation? And they look in the budget 
and it’s not there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They look at the budget and see no vision for the future. This is 
our centennial year, Mr. Speaker, a year when you would think 
that the legislature and the government of Saskatchewan would 
want to do something that would be a legacy, a vision, a goal 
for the next 100 years. And what do we have, Mr. Speaker? 
Nothing but disappointment. 
 
You look at the resource revenues that have come in, Mr. 
Speaker, using the Minister of Finance’s own numbers. Over 
and above what he estimated for revenues for last year, Mr. 
Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan received $1.113 billion; 
well over $1 billion of excess surplus revenues that they had not 
budgeted for, Mr. Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan 
know and understand that that money is there. They may not 
exactly know what the number is but they know that the royalty 
revenues are hugely increased, Mr. Speaker. And they expect to 
see something of benefit to them to be done with that money. 
 
And then in the budget, using again the Minister of Finance’s 
own numbers, he’s projecting an increase of an additional $400 
million over last year’s estimates, Mr. Speaker, over $400 
million. So over last year and the upcoming year, that’s almost 
$1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker — almost $1.6 billion. 
 
And so people say, well you know, our school system should be 
improving; our health care system should be improving. There 
should be able to be support for agriculture at a time when, as 
my colleague pointed out, many rural municipalities, including 
a number in my own constituency, have declared themselves 
disaster areas because of the ruined crops, because of the border 
being closed to cattle, Mr. Speaker — a huge, huge hurt across 
rural Saskatchewan; north to south, east to west — because of 
the inclement weather and the adverse political conditions, Mr. 
Speaker, allowing for the normal course of business to take 
place. 
 
So they’re saying, we expect, we know the money is there. We 
expect the province to be a part of our pain and suffering, to 
back us up. That’s why we have programs like crop insurance. 
Theoretically, that was why the CAIS program was there. The 
federal government, no matter how much we may criticize and 
vote against the federal Liberal government in this province, 
they at least put forward a program that would have helped 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And the Minister of Agriculture waits until the very last minute 
in 2004 to agree to fund the program for 2003, a year after, Mr. 
Speaker, the end of the year almost. You know, it’s like coming 
to any one of us and saying, we’ll give you your wages but 
we’ll give them to you a year later. We wouldn’t find that 
acceptable as wage earners and it’s not acceptable in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. It’s not acceptable there either. 
 
And so when you look at additional revenues of almost $1.6 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

billion, and you say to agriculture, no we’re only going to give 
you the amount we’ve promised for 2003 minus any additional 
monies that the minister finally agreed to give at the end of 
2004, we’re going to go back to that original amount even 
though we have a huge disaster because of frozen crops across 
this province where it degraded yield, it degraded the quality 
immensely — regardless of that, we’re not going to put any 
additional money into the support programs. 
 
And the fact that the US border remains closed to cattle, to 
buffalo, to bison, Mr. Speaker, and to elk, and I believe sheep as 
well — any of the ruminants — Mr. Speaker, regardless of that, 
the provincial government refuses to put additional money in to 
meet the commitment they already made. Not a new 
commitment, not one-time money, but the commitment that the 
member for Yorkton demanded and negotiated with the federal 
government, committed the provincial government to — 
refusing to meet that commitment. 
 
Not only is it a disappointment, Mr. Speaker, to the people 
across rural Saskatchewan, it’s a betrayal of the very promises 
that this government made. But quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that 
doesn’t surprise anyone across rural Saskatchewan. They expect 
nothing more from an NDP government than betrayal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to the 
Minister of Finance in his address. I listened to the member 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld in his discussion and talk about the 
debt. I listened to my own colleague, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
from the Minister of Finance’s own documents, the debt has 
increased. The debt of the province of Saskatchewan in a year 
when revenues increased by $1.6 billion over the last year, our 
debt increased by $361 million. The people of Saskatchewan, 
and I’m sure most of the legislatures in this building, fail to 
understand how you can do that. So that means there has been 
an additional dollar value available of almost $2 billion that is 
being spent, that has gone someplace in this province, and yet 
people don’t see any benefit from it. 
 
The price of gasoline is still 92 cents a litre. Education hasn’t 
got any more money, so property taxes are going to go up. The 
waiting lists are getting longer in health care, not shorter, Mr. 
Speaker. For all the Minister of Health brave words about 
putting together a tracking program, Mr. Speaker, the waiting 
lists get longer. So for almost $2 billion, what benefit do we 
see? 
 
This morning on the radio, there was a couple of university 
students being interviewed. And they were asked, well what do 
you think of the freeze in tuitions, Mr. Speaker, the freeze in 
post-secondary university costs? And they were happy for the 
freeze, but understood, Mr. Speaker, that next year they’re 
going to get hit with the cost increase that was taking place that 
they would have normally paid this year, and they’re going to 
get hit with a cost increase over the next year as well. So 
they’re going to get a double whammy on tuition fee increases, 
Mr. Speaker, unless this government wakes up and recognizes 
that that is an impediment to keeping youth in our province. 
 
The reporter asked the students, was there anything in this 
budget that would encourage you to stay in Saskatchewan? And 

their response was, there was nothing in this budget to keep us 
here. Not a thing, Mr. Speaker. The value of their tax credit had 
such little value to those students that there was no incentive to 
stay. None, Mr. Speaker. So even on that front that the NDP 
government is touting as their great salvation in this budget, the 
students recognize that it’s of extremely little value. They’re 
pleased to get the cents this year, the few pennies that the 
government is tossing out to them. But as a long-term benefit 
they recognize it was not there, and there was nothing there to 
keep them in this province. 
 
I listened to the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld talk about 
the debt from the previous administration and how that burden 
on government was causing the difficulties in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Going back to 1991, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look using that 
member’s time machine that he was talking about. And I have a 
quote, Mr. Speaker, for the member from Idylwyld and this 
comes from this legislature, Mr. Speaker, on July 30, 1992 from 
Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to read . . . of a question, a 
discussion by Mr. Ed Tchorzewski, who was the minister of 
Finance at that time, Mr. Speaker, talking about the debt of this 
province. And I quote. I don’t have a page number for Hansard 
to quote from but it’s from their book, Mr. Speaker. The Hon. 
Ed Tchorzewski, and I quote: 
 

Because here is what happened. [He . . . talking about the 
former premier, Grant Devine.] He took this province from 
a total debt of 3.5 billion . . . 

 
The debt was already there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1982, 
according to Ed Tchorzewski. And he was only talking, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about the GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt. 
There was an additional debt there, Mr. Speaker, as well, of $3 
billion of unfunded pension liabilities, unfunded pension 
liabilities. 
 
So when the government wants to talk about time machines and 
looking at debt, let’s look at the debt. Six billion dollars from 
pre-1982 when the interest rates were 20 per cent plus, Mr. 
Speaker. That goes a long way to explaining how part of the 
debt in this province grew. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at how the debt in this 
province is growing in 2005 — 2005 the liabilities of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the GRF fund, Mr. Speaker, 
changed from $8.2 billion of debt to 7.6 billion, a $700 million 
decrease. That, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I would ask members 
on both sides of the Assembly to just allow the debates to 
proceed in an orderly fashion and in a way that debates can be 
heard. I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, that gave me 
an opportunity to have a drink. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debt . . . The GRF fund was reduced, and that 
is a good thing, but, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other 
categories listed under liabilities as well. Debt of other Treasury 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2005 

Board organizations increased by $9 million. Debt of Crown 
Management Board organizations, a Crown corporation, 
increased by 371 million. Unamortized foreign exchange losses, 
no real money there, Mr. Speaker, but what you owe decreased 
because the exchange rate changes by 23 million. That’s a good 
thing. 
 
Pension liabilities, now I would think that every superannuated 
public servant, every superannuated teacher would be interested 
in this if they belonged to the pension program pre-1979. 
Increase in the amount owed to superannuate pensioners by the 
Government of Saskatchewan increased by $87 million. That 
number should be coming down, Mr. Speaker, but it’s going up 
under the NDP. 
 
Other liabilities . . . and this will be an interesting one because 
I’m not exactly sure what falls under the category of other 
liabilities, but the debt in that area, Mr. Speaker, increased by 
$575 million. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I would ask 
members if they have other conversations, side conversations, 
to take them behind the bar, lower their voices. It’s becoming 
very difficult for the debates to proceed in this Assembly. I’m 
going to have to enforce this a little more stringently because I 
find members are just making it too difficult for the debate to 
proceed in an orderly fashion, and it’s very important that a 
member who gets up has the right to speak and to be heard. I 
recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So overall 
while the government is bringing in over $1.6 billion of 
additional monies over the 2004-2005 estimates, Mr. Speaker, 
the debt has increased for the province of Saskatchewan by 
$361 million. It’s like winning a lottery and going deeper in 
debt, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan are extremely 
disappointed in the fiscal management of this government, of 
the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier the students found no 
reason in this budget why they would want to remain in 
Saskatchewan. And that speaks to the lack of vision, the lack of 
vision as presented by this Premier, the lack of vision as 
presented by the Minister of Finance, and in fact the lack of 
vision by all of the members represented on the government 
side of the House. There was nothing in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, that deals with growing the province. 
 
The other day the Premier and the minister for Energy made an 
announcement that provided a very small amount of tax relief 
for resource companies that wanted to enhance production, 
additional recovery methods in the oil patch such as a CO2 
injection to enhance recoveries. Now that’s a good thing, Mr. 
Speaker. Remove the PST for the capital purchases that were 
necessary there to encourage additional production. 
 
You heard from my colleague that the government’s own 
projections for increased drilling in this province is a negative 
increase, in fact a decrease in drilling, year over year over last 
year, which was a decrease over the year previously. Again at 
the record levels of oil, we’re seeing less drilling. 
 
So the government comes forward with this minute change, Mr. 

Speaker, to try and encourage people to step up the drilling. 
Well on one hand where they give us very small incentive, they 
turn around in this budget and increase the corporate capital tax 
on resource industries, Mr. Speaker. They give a pinch of salt 
with one hand and take back a whole loaf with the other, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not going to encourage those businesses to 
look at Saskatchewan when they have capital to invest. That’s a 
disincentive, Mr. Speaker. That works against the growth of this 
province. That works against creating jobs in this province. 
That works against keeping our youth in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us knows that the number 
one export we have had in this province for the last 60-some 
years has been people. Go to Alberta, Mr. Speaker. As an 
example, go to a Roughrider game in Calgary, and half the 
stands are Saskatchewan people. You go across the country. 
You know, the Riders like to brag that they are the best 
supported team across the country. That’s because of the 
number of people that have out-migrated from this province to 
other locations in Canada. It’s not to our benefit that we have 
sent so many good people across the country. I’m glad that 
they’re successful, but why could they not be successful in 
Saskatchewan? The reason is because of the economic regimes 
put in place by the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] and the NDP. 
 
And the very moves they have made to try and entice an 
increase in royalty production in resource production in this 
province, such as the removal of the PST on enhanced recovery 
systems, are completely offset when they increase the corporate 
capital tax, Mr. Speaker. They’re working at cross purposes, 
and they’re keeping the people and the vision and the 
businesses out of this province that we need to grow. When 
people even in this province develop ideas and items, 
businesses that would grow this province, they stay here until 
they get their feet going and then they leave, Mr. Speaker. They 
take their ideas. They take their businesses out of this province 
because of the disincentives that are in place. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Idylwyld talked about cutting . . . 
about what the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs was 
talking about — cutting taxes. Well there is one thing in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, that we do need to cut — one thing 
above all else — and that is to cut out the NDP in government, 
Mr. Speaker, to eliminate the NDP as the government. That, 
Mr. Speaker, would go a long ways to changing the attitude 
towards growth in this province. They are an anchor on our 
growth. They’re driving our youth out of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So even when members like the member from P.A. Northcote 
speaks . . . he talks about it’s a good thing when people leave 
this province because it leaves more for the rest of us, Mr. 
Speaker, leaves more for the rest of us. What kind of an attitude 
is that? That’s a dog-in-the-manger attitude, Mr. Speaker, that I 
believe does nothing to enhance the image, and it does nothing 
to enhance the vision of growth in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that in mind, with the need to change 
the government, to change the vision for the next 100 years in 
this province, I will be supporting the amendment as presented 
by the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs and voting 
against this non-vision, disappointing budget by the NDP 



March 24, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
all government members, I would move that this House do now 
adjourn, and I wish everybody a very, very pleasant Easter for a 
much deserved break. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Therefore pursuant to an 
order of this Assembly, this House stands adjourned until 
Wednesday, March 30 at 1:30 p.m. I wish everybody a Happy 
Easter. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:40.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard..................................................................................................................................................................................................... 2205 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2205 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2205 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2205 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2205 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2205 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2206 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................2206 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2206 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2206 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2206 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Better Business Bureau 2005 Torch Awards 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2206 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2207 
 Easter Greetings 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................2207 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2208 
 New Store Opening in Batoche Constituency 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................2207 
 2005-2006 Budget 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2207 
 Rose Valley Dance Competition 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2208 
 Outstanding Principal from North Battleford 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2208 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Budget Commitments 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2209 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2209 
 Taxation Policy 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2210 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2211 
 Operating Grants for School Boards 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2211 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................2211 
 Opportunities for Nursing Students 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2212 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2212 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2212 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2212 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 94 — The Apiaries Act, 2005 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2214 
 Bill No. 95 — The Ecological Reserves Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2214 
 Bill No. 98 — The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2005 
  Forbes ......................................................................................................................................................................................2214 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2214 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2214 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2215 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2217 



 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2222 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2226 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 


