















































Hansard: April 04, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 84A  MONDAY, APRIL 4, 2005, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2327 
 April 4, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure again to present a petition regarding school 
amalgamations. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks of Montmartre, and basically it’s all Montmartre. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Tompkins, Carlyle, 
Wawota, Eastend, and Gull Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
constituents concerned about the deficiency in residential 
support offered to people with long-term disabilities in my 
home community. The prayer of their petition is as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
and lifelong disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And today the petitioners are from Wymark, Swift Current, and 
Rhineland. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
tragedy of crystal meth: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine, the education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are all from the town of 
Wadena. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by people who are concerned at the size of the proposed 
school division. It’s far too large to retain any local input into 
the education system. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Rosetown, Elrose, Plenty, and Richlea. And 
I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with forced amalgamation of school divisions. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Balcarres, Kamsack, and Melville. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the forced 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

amalgamation of school divisions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Moose Jaw, Caron, Ardill, and Kincaid. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have petitions to present on behalf of citizens around the 
Avonlea, Claybank area regarding their brick plant. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconsider the decision to reduce funding to the Claybank 
Brick Plant. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is significant. There are people signing this 
petition from Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Regina, and the Big 
Apple, New York city, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
stand to present petitions from people in my constituency who 
would like to see the development of cabin lots in the area of 
Rafferty dam. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the development of 
cabin lots in the area of Rafferty dam proceeds. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Estevan, Alameda, and White 
Bear. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are very 
concerned about the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 
stabilization] program and also about the BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] assistance package. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the CAIS program 
receives adequate provincial funding, the funding formula 
is changed to ensure equal access to compensation, and to 
contribute funds to the latest BSE assistance package 
released by the federal government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Bengough. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here 
to improve SaskTel cellular service in rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray to your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
in Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Jansen and Esk and Lanigan, I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
another petition to revisit the effects of the TransGas Asquith 
natural gas storage project. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Grandora, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned with 
the effect that the TransGas Asquith natural gas storage project 
will have on the quantity and the quality of their water supply. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

an environment assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by the citizens of Vanscoy and Delisle. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today as well with regards 
to problems from the TransGas Asquith natural gas storage 
project. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read from the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately address the concerns of all individuals 
affected by this project, pay 100 per cent of the costs 
involved to rectify disruptions to water supplies, produce 
an environmental assessment study encompassing a larger 
area outside the scope of the project, disclose the project’s 
long-term effects on these areas, and consider alternative 
sources of water for the project. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once again 
I am pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens gravely concerned with this 
government’s plan to force the amalgamation of school 
divisions. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to reverse the decision to force the 
amalgamation of school divisions in Saskatchewan and 
continue reorganization of school divisions on a strictly 
voluntary basis. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Goodeve, Melville, Grenfell, and Balcarres. I 
so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk Assistant: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) they are hereby 
read and received as addendums to sessional papers 72, 180, 
637, 640, 666, 715, 716, and 720. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 89 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many new egg 
production units were allocated to Saskatchewan in 2004? 
How many of those new egg production units were sold to 
existing registered egg producers? When were they 
issued? 
 
Of the new egg production units that were sold to 
registered egg producers, what amount of money was 
collected? Of the remaining new egg production units that 
were not sold to existing registered egg producers, how 
many have been allocated to new producers? When an egg 
production unit is sold, where does the money go? 
 
What policies or guidelines are in place regarding the 
spending of the funds generated from the sale of egg 
production units? If a public auction of egg production 
units is held, what happens to the units that do not receive 
bids? When was the last time that an egg production unit 
was offered to a new producer who had his name on the 
Saskatchewan Egg Producers’ Marketing Board waiting 
list? 

 
And I have the same question for the year 2003. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly a group seated in the western gallery. 
This is a group of 56 — count them, 56 — students from grades 
5 and 8. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Krista Strube, 
Trisha MacBeth, and chaperone Donella Harvey, as well as 
another teacher, Ms. Kerry Jedeck. Now I want to single Kerry 
out for a bit of special attention of course, because Kerry and I 
went to school together a few short years ago at Scott 
Collegiate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Sacred Heart is a very special school. It’s 
from my home neighbourhood. I’m a Kitchener kid of course 
and so it’s a bit of a rivalry there, but it’s always good to see the 
students from Sacred Heart. I look forward to having a visit 
with them a little later on, a picture, maybe some juice, and 
we’ll have a good exchange, I’m sure. 
 
Anyway, please welcome to this Assembly, their Assembly, the 
group from Sacred Heart Community School. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to take this opportunity to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the legislature two people, two constituents of 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

mine, seated in your gallery today. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Randy Pritchard, area 
services manager, and with him Mr. John Turner, family 
services supervisor, for the Department of Community 
Resources and Employment in North Battleford. I ask all 
members to welcome them to their Assembly and to thank them 
for the dedication they demonstrate on a daily basis protecting 
children and helping to build healthy families in The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to join my colleague, the hon. member for The 
Battlefords, in welcoming Mr. Pritchard and Mr. Turner here 
today, and particularly to welcome Randy Pritchard back to this 
legislature. 
 
Members will recall that Mr. Pritchard served as the chief staff 
person to the committee of MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] on both sides of the House that looked at the whole 
question of how to stop the sexual exploitation of children in 
this province. And he served that committee with distinction, 
Mr. Speaker, and helped that committee and this legislature 
formulate some of the actions that have been taken on behalf of 
vulnerable children today. 
 
So I know all members will want to join me in welcoming 
Randy back to the House and expressing our deep appreciation 
for the very, very effective way in which he served our all-party 
committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well 
and on behalf of the official opposition, I want to extend a 
welcome to Randy Pritchard and John Turner, and certainly 
thinking back to the days when we spent a fair bit of time doing 
committee work, especially addressing the issue of sexual 
exploitation of children, and to have Randy’s expertise and all 
the advice he gave us. Now we didn’t always accept it but it 
was certainly advice that was worth chewing over and we want 
to thank Randy and certainly welcome John on behalf of the 
opposition. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 

Tribute to Pope John Paul II 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is with sadness but great 
respect that I rise in the Assembly today to pay tribute to Pope 
John Paul II, who passed away on Saturday, April 2. 

Mr. Speaker, for over a quarter of a century on the global stage, 
Pope John Paul II used his office to draw attention to the plight 
of the world’s downtrodden and oppressed. During a trip to 
Africa early in his tenure he said, “I speak in the name of those 
who have no voice.” And he spoke forcefully, eloquently, and 
he spoke often on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a man who worked and travelled 
tirelessly to bring his message to the world. He was an advocate 
of peace and nuclear disarmament. He was a strong defender of 
human rights and religious freedom. And he was the first pope 
to enter a mosque or to preach in a Protestant church or in a 
synagogue. 
 
He was born in Poland in 1920 and played a prominent role in 
the struggle for and the achievement of Polish independence 
and democracy. He created World Youth Day in 1985 to bring 
together young Catholics from across the globe. In 2002 we 
well remember this celebration of faith took place right here in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pope John Paul II touched the lives of billions, 
Catholics and non-Catholics alike, and the world mourns his 
passing. Mr. Speaker, the role of the Holy Father is sometimes 
described as servant of the servants of God. Pope John Paul II 
served and for this the world is grateful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, over the weekend this world lost 
one of the remarkable figures of our time. Pope John Paul II 
was truly a transformational leader, not only of his faith but of 
the world. Karol Wojtyla became a priest in 1946, the same 
year the Iron Curtain descended across eastern Europe and 
millions of Christians who lived behind it were prohibited from 
freely practising their faith. 
 
On his first trip to his native Poland as pope in 1979, the new 
pope called on the Holy Spirit to “renew the face of the earth” 
— the words of a man who understood that God does not 
change but through his grace God can change the world. And he 
was right. 
 
Lech Walesa said the visit to Poland led to the rise of the 
Solidarity movement and the eventual toppling of communism 
in Poland and throughout eastern Europe, where today millions 
of Christians and others enjoy the same religious freedoms we 
take for granted here in the West. Walesa said, “He was a gift 
from the heavens to us,” which just proves that God has a way 
of putting the right people in the right place at the right time. 
John Paul II was clearly the right pope for his time. 
 
Later in his papacy he oversaw an explosion in the growth of 
Catholicism throughout the Third World due largely to his 
unprecedented travels to the Third World nations and his 
advancement of the social gospel. 
 
Over the weekend I heard media reports that the Pope had 
visited 140 nations but, you know, I don’t think he was there to 
visit. Wherever he went he was there to change things, to spread 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

the word of God and the gospel of Christ. 
 
On Saturday the most travelled pope in history made his final 
journey, a journey home to be with the Father he had served so 
well and whose word he had spread to so many throughout the 
world. 
 
This was a life that lived up to the words of the Apostle Paul 
and we pay tribute to it today. Those words: 
 

I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I 
have kept the faith. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

National Ukrainian Centennial Celebration 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Sunday I had the honour of attending the cultural extravaganza 
put on by the Association of United Ukrainian Canadians, the 
National Ukrainian Centennial Celebration which was held here 
in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 350 performers came from nine cities 
across the country. The Ukrainian dancers, orchestra, choir, and 
violin virtuoso put on a performance — 100 years in the making 
— that left the audience exhausted, in awe, with tears of joy 
from this centennial celebration. The performance was an 
artistic demonstration of what can be achieved when we work 
together in the spirit of confederation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pictorial presentation covering the history of 
Ukrainian settlement in Saskatchewan was a source of 
inspiration. The Ukrainian community has a long history with 
our province from opening the West to developing industry and 
political leadership. The first wave of Ukrainian settlers arrived 
here in 1891 and since then our Ukrainian citizens have truly 
helped to shape and define what Saskatchewan has become in 
our first 100 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join in congratulating 
this weekend’s performers, organizers, and guests, and in 
commending the national and the Regina branches of the 
Association of United Ukrainian Canadians for all they have 
done to help enrich the cultural diversity of our province. It is 
an honour that they chose Saskatchewan for this wonderful 
centennial celebration as a tribute to our province which cites as 
our official motto, “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Remembering Pope John Paul II 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
speak on the shepherd. He was only a shepherd but he changed 
the world. He conquered nations but had no army. He captured 
the hearts of the young but never met them. He comforted the 

old, even in his pain and suffering. He brought relief to the poor 
but never fed them. He converted love to peace. He gave us all 
hope, faith, and love of fellow man. With just the name of our 
Saviour, Jesus Christ, he did all this. 
 
I saw Pope John Paul in Toronto in 1985 and although not a 
word was exchanged a simple glance was all that was needed to 
deliver a peace of both mind and body. It has been 20 years 
since that encounter, but Marie, Kelly, Paul, and I still 
remember to this day that glance and the warmth we felt. It is 
what we believe that keeps us strong at this time; that he must 
die in order to be raised. We will remember him now and when 
we meet him again, and we thank God for the time he allowed 
us to have John Paul II here on earth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all in this House remember the Pope in 
your own time and in your own manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon Principal Honoured 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As is the case with any 
organization, a school reflects the person who leads it. 
Principals are leaders, administrators, and facilitators who help 
shape a school’s vision and mission as well as its culture and 
climate. Great principals lead by example and are role models 
for the teaching and learning process in their schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased to share with the Assembly 
today that Mr. Basil Hughton, the principal of the high school I 
attended, Mount Royal Collegiate in Saskatoon, has recently 
been honoured by the Learning Partnership and named as one 
of Canada’s outstanding principals for 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a prestigious and national award that 
recognizes administrative as well as academic excellence. It is 
particularly meaningful because recipients are determined based 
upon nominations and information provided by their colleagues. 
Mr. Hughton was recognized for developing a satellite campus 
for 18- to 22-year-olds that provides an atmosphere particularly 
suited to the learning needs of older students. He has also 
formed a partnership with the Saskatoon Rotary Club to employ 
a restorative justice worker to help to develop peer mediation 
and conflict resolution skills with students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Mr. 
Hughton on being chosen as one of Canada’s outstanding 
principals, and to thank him for innovative approaches to 
education and for his dedication to his students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

25th Anniversary of CJWW Radio 600 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I 
had the opportunity to join with 1,500 country music fans from 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

across Saskatchewan to honour the 25th anniversary of 
Saskatchewan’s most listened-to radio station, CJWW. In April 
1980 CJWW hit the airwaves at 1370 on your AM dial, soon 
moving to 750 and then to 600. Mr. Speaker, what better way to 
honour this radio station than by having a big country music 
concert featuring some of the great talent this province has to 
offer. 
 
The evening began with Saskatchewan’s rising star on the 
national and international stage, Jessica Robinson, followed by 
Donny Parenteau, the fiddle playing magician from Prince 
Albert. Then the Poverty Plainsmen took to the stage followed 
by Mr. Saskatchewan, Brad Johner. The evening finale was a 
rousing rendition of the Saskatchewan centennial song. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CJWW radio has been a great supporter of 
Saskatchewan musicians for the past quarter century. The 
station has been led by my good friend, community builder Vic 
Dubois. Vic and his team, including the morning duo of Rod 
Kidder and Steve Shannon, are extraordinary community 
volunteers, building on examples set by such radio legends as 
Denny Carr and Easton Wayman. 
 
CJWW is known for its morning segment called Boots and 
Salutes. Mr. Speaker, they say you haven’t arrived politically in 
Saskatchewan until you’ve been booted on Boots and Salutes 
— I have had that distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all my colleagues to join me in a big 
salute to CJWW radio 600, Saskatoon. Happy 25th anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Timing of Memorandum of Agreement 
Regarding Health Care Workers 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, just prior to the 2003 general election there was a 
memorandum of agreement signed between SAHO and three 
unions representing health sector workers, CUPE [Canadian 
Union of Public Employees], SEIU [Service Employees’ 
International Union], and SGEU [Saskatchewan Government 
and General Employees’ Union]. This agreement dealt with 
joint job evaluation for health care workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day the Premier stood in his place and 
defended his government’s record on fair negotiating. He said 
his government believes in settlements negotiated in good faith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Was this 
memorandum of agreement that was signed just before the last 
election the result of negotiating in good faith? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the health care field there 
have been many challenges around making sure that the various 
unions that are providing the services to the regional health 

authorities across the province, one of the initiatives that was 
introduced quite a number of years ago was to work towards a 
joint job evaluation which would allow for comparisons to be 
made across workplaces across the province. That’s an ongoing 
project and people have been working at it for many years. 
 
We think we’ve been able to solve many problems. There are 
still some others that are challenges and we’ll continue to work 
with the managers and with the workers to sort these things out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that response. A 
very interesting response when we know that before the 1999 
election the NDP [New Democratic Party] government 
promised health care workers it would undertake a joint job 
evaluation. But by the time the 2003 election rolled around, 
none of the details had been ironed out for any kind of 
agreement on how to proceed. 
 
But then on the eve of the 2003 election, the memorandum of 
agreement was signed between SAHO, CUPE, SEIU, and 
SGEU. 
 
My question is to the Premier. Why was there political 
interference by his government in negotiations in order to get 
this deal done before the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people who are working 
on this project — and it included many people from a number 
of different unions across the whole health care system in the 
province — spent years, literally years, working towards how 
they were going to do this process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it started I think in 1999 or in fact earlier 
than that, some of the discussions, but in 1999 we made the 
commitment to go ahead and do this. And, Mr. Speaker, people 
are still . . . been working diligently on all of these different 
issues. And I think the important thing to know is that in any 
process that takes a lot of years to implement, you have to work 
at it carefully with all of the appropriate people. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that’s what’s been happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
memorandum of agreement was signed on the eve of the 2003 
election call. It included, among other things, a $1,000 lump 
sum payment to health care workers. I remember that quite 
clearly because one of the NDP’s many scare tactics in the last 
election was to threaten that if the Saskatchewan Party formed 
government, they would tear up the agreements and take away 
the $1,000 payment. 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Why was the NDP 
government in such a rush to get this deal done before the 2003 
election? Was there political interference by his government in 
the negotiating process in order to get this deal done before you 
called . . . before the Premier called this election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding of how 
this worked, from being involved with this government for 
many years, was that in 1999 there was finally a decision made 
to go forward with the process of joint job evaluation and that 
was based on years of discussion. 
 
Before 1999, people were working to figure out how to do this 
in many different ways and the goal was to have that 
implemented. Different decisions were made all through that 
time to have the whole matter go ahead and it’s continuing now. 
 
Each time that people go to the bargaining table, there are 
questions that are either referred to the joint job evaluation table 
or come back to the bargaining table. That’s continuing. It’s a 
process where the people involved — the managers, the 
employees — solve the problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — . . . clear that this government circumvented 
the normal negotiating process. The Saskatchewan Party has 
obtained a copy of the decision rendered by the dispute 
resolution tribunal, the tribunal that was put together to try to 
correct this mess. The decision is dated January of 2005 and it 
says, and I quote: 
 

By the fall of 2003, a provincial election was drawing 
close and the issues surrounding JJE remained 
outstanding. There appears to have been a desire to ensure 
that pay rates were established for new positions resulting 
from the JJE project prior to the election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, since when does election timing have anything to 
do with collective bargaining and a fair negotiation process? 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: was there political 
interference from his government in the negotiation process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll reiterate that this was a 
long-term project that had started in the years prior to ’99, but I 
think in ’99 was the time that the decision was made to go 
ahead with the joint job evaluation. It involved many, many 
people. It involved dealing with pay equity issues right across a 
whole number of employees. And that project continues to this 
day because there are some parts that haven’t been totally sorted 
out. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these kinds of problems aren’t solved in one 
document, in one agreement, one kind of particular situation. 
They’re solved in relationships over a long period of time. Mr. 
Speaker, that is what’s been happening in this case, and that’s 
what’s going to continue to happen as we make sure that we 
have good health care across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gets 
a little worse. And I’d like to quote from the tribunal’s decision 
again. And I quote: 
 

It was the intention of the parties that . . . [their] respective 
proposals would become the basis for a negotiated 
settlement. However, government officials prepared a 
Memorandum of Agreement. 

 
Let me repeat that part. Government officials prepared a 
memorandum of agreement. Continue with the quote: 
 

This document which was hurriedly put together, and not 
actually negotiated, was signed by the parties on October 
3rd, 2003. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this document was signed a few days before the 
election was called. Mr. Speaker, what government officials 
wrote this agreement, and did the Premier approve of the blatant 
political interference in negotiations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when you’re working with 
thousands and thousands of employees across the province who 
are doing many different jobs . . . And as we all know, there 
were some changes that were taking place around the regional 
health authorities, in the establishment of the regional health 
authorities, meaning that there were different groups of 
employees put together with members of different union 
contracts. All of these things ended up creating questions 
around how the fairness worked. 
 
Joint job evaluation was one way that this was looked at. 
Another place was at the bargaining table. Pay equity issues 
between male and female line kinds of jobs were also being 
dealt with. All of these particular issues were dealt with over 
quite a number of years, and that process continues to this day, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I remember quite clearly how 
the NDP government threatened health care workers that during 
the election, if the Saskatchewan Party would win, they would 
not honour the agreement or pay the $1,000. 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

Well it looks like the chicken has come home to roost, only it’s 
the NDP’s fault. On June 15, 2004, some health care workers 
received a memo from their union stating that they might 
actually have to give back their $1,000 lump sum payment. The 
memo to CUPE employees stated, and I quote: 
 

. . . it is in your best interest to keep this increase in wages 
separate and available in case it has to be repaid. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why did this NDP government try to unfairly 
influence the outcome of the last election by promising health 
care workers a $1,000 lump sum payment only now to have to 
take it back? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this is a 
long-term process. We knew when we made some of the 
decisions in the late ’90s that it was going to take quite a 
number of years to implement. We had large committees 
working together to try to sort this out. It took a lot of resources 
to make sure that all of these things were being dealt with in an 
appropriate way. We had to make sure that the various unions 
were all on board. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this process continues to this day and, Mr. 
Speaker, we are not afraid to be making sure we have 
appropriate benefits for the workers within our system. We 
think that’s entirely appropriate as a government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s 
review what happened in those last few days before the 2003 
election was called. The Premier knew he was going to call an 
election on October 8, 2003. Let’s assume that. 
 
The NDP wanted to be able to tell health care workers that they 
were getting a $1,000 lump sum payment and then threatened 
that the Saskatchewan Party would take it away. The only 
problem was SAHO and the unions weren’t getting the deal 
done quickly enough. So the NDP drafted its own agreement in 
the dead of night, Mr. Speaker, and told SAHO and the unions 
sign it, and completely circumvented the negotiating process for 
blatant political purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only person who would have known for sure 
when the election was to be called was the Premier. The deal 
was rammed through by the NDP a few days before the election 
was called. Mr. Speaker, what role did the Premier have in this 
blatant political interference in these negotiations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this is a 

long process which we’ve been working at for many years. 
There have been some challenges in the initial discussion about 
going ahead with the joint job evaluation. 
 
In the actual process itself, there have been some challenges 
and, in fact, based on the agreement that the parties entered into, 
there have been questions about some of the wording in that and 
that’s where the continued discussion takes place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work with this whole 
issue and make sure that the problems are sorted out in an 
appropriate fashion. That’s what we need to do; work with the 
managers, work with the workers, and make sure that the 
people are providing care for all of our citizens in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the 
minister has brought forward the point about the language in 
this document that is unclear. I want to quote from this tribunal 
decision again. It says: 
 

It is clear that the Memorandum of Agreement . . . was 
structured in a most undesirable manner. Although the 
parties signed the “agreement” . . . 
 

The word agreement is put in italics by the tribunal, Mr. 
Speaker, and I continue with the quote. It says: 
 

. . . the large “p” [large “p”] considerations which led to it 
created a document that is quite incoherent. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s quite a statement. Will the Premier please 
explain what exactly were the words large “p” political 
considerations all about? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll reiterate that 
this has been a long process and the process continues. And in 
this whole situation, what is the ultimate goal? 
 
The ultimate goal is to pair fair wages for fair work providing 
good services in health care for our Saskatchewan citizens. And 
sometimes there’s disagreement about how that’s done. 
Sometimes those disagreements are sorted out at the 
negotiations table. Sometimes they’re sorted out in arbitration. 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, sometimes they’re sorted out in the 
courts. All of those places can provide solutions. But ultimately 
it’s the people involved who have to come and sort out what 
they’re doing. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, are going to use all the processes that are 
available and make sure that we end up with a joint job 
evaluation plan that implements pay equity and it’ll be going 
and providing good support for all of our workers for decades to 
come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the tribunal’s decision leaves 
absolutely no doubt that this agreement was the result of 
political interference on the eve of an election call and not the 
result of fair and legitimate negotiating process. The decision 
says and I quote: 
 

Quite clearly, it is an agreement the parties would not have 
arrived at if left to their own devices. It is an example of 
the distortion that can occur when the normal negotiation 
processes are circumvented. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and why were the normal negotiating processes 
circumvented? Because of the large “p” political considerations. 
Because the Premier needed to ram this deal through before the 
election was called. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that the 
NDP interfered in the negotiating process because he needed 
this deal signed before the election was called? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think this is a place where 
we can be quite frank with each other. I think that the members 
opposite — that member and we can go down the line — have 
talked about civil servants and our public employees as 
deadwood and people that have no use to society. People have a 
great deal of concern about what kinds of attitudes that they 
have towards public servants. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you’re in a situation where there’s a 
possible election call you might look at lots of different options. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think that what we have to remember is that 
on this side of the House we set up a plan in the late ’90s to 
move forward with pay equity through a joint job evaluation 
program. It was a long process, we knew that it would be; we 
knew that it was going to cost money to do it, but we think it 
was the right thing and the fair thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The Premier stands in this House and defends 
that he is negotiating in good faith, but he has no problems 
interfering in the negotiating process when it suits his purposes. 
That’s exactly what happened with this memorandum of 
agreement on joint job evaluation that was signed just before 
the election. It wasn’t getting the job done quickly enough 
through the normal negotiating process so someone in this NDP 
government stepped in, wrote their own agreement, and got the 
parties to sign it just a few days before the 2003 election was 
called. 
 
My question is again for the Premier: what role did the Premier 
play in circumventing the normal negotiating process and 
ramming through this agreement on the eve of an election call? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think a few years ago 
people reminded me here that I talked about lemons and what 
was going on in the back room over there. But today we’ve got 
sour grapes. We’re refighting an election that was two years 
ago. Mr. Speaker, we need to move forward. 
 
But I think what we always have to remember is that the 
concerns during those years 2002-2003, after Premier Campbell 
was elected in British Columbia, is that there was a lot of 
privatization going on in the health care system. And those 
kinds of issues were permeating every discussion across this 
country. Mr. Speaker, when I was involved as the Minister of 
Health, and I was appointed in 2001, this became a number one 
topic in all of the discussions here in Saskatchewan and in the 
country. And, Mr. Speaker, all of these kinds of things are 
factors which involve people ultimately coming to some 
memorandums of agreement about what they should do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this agreement was signed 
between SAHO and the three unions — SGEU, SEIU, and 
CUPE. This negotiating process was circumvented on the eve 
of an election call because of large “p” political considerations, 
because the Premier wanted this deal done before he called the 
election. He wanted to dangle a carrot in front of the health care 
workers to vote NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier please explain what was his exact 
role in circumventing these negotiations and politically 
interfering in the negotiating process? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
made a lot about very specific dates but I would remind him 
that if he looks at the information there, the memorandum of 
agreement — in other words, the agreement to agree to do 
something — was done in early October, but it wasn’t ratified 
by all the unions and SAHO until December of that year. 
 
And it’s now the discussion going on about what was ratified in 
December is the real issue. And these discussions continue and 
hopefully they’ll get sorted out. There’s agreement on most 
things, but clearly there’s a reference to an arbitrator for one or 
two or more clauses. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s quite normal 
when you have agreements that if you want to sort them out you 
get some outside help or ultimately you go to the courts, Mr. 
Speaker. But what’s really important here is that the workers, 
the managers, are sorting out all of these issues so that they can 
provide good health care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the tribunal that reviewed the case that is before it has 
used words like incoherent, has used words like large “p” 
political consideration. It has used words that says that if the 
bargaining units would have been left to negotiate a settlement, 
they would not have done what they did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quoting again from that tribunal’s decision, on 
page 2 it says: 
 

This document . . . was hurriedly put together, and not 
actually negotiated, was signed by the parties on October 
3rd, 2003. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier knew that he was calling a general 
election on October 8, five days after this memorandum was 
signed. This memorandum as stated by the tribunal is 
incoherent, is hurriedly put together, and in fact it was not 
negotiated. How can the Premier stand in this House and say he 
defends negotiated contracts when in fact the proof is the exact 
opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague here has told 
me that I probably should quote the Eagle lyrics to this song: 
 

Get over it 
Get over it 
All this whinin’ and cryin’ and pitchin’ a fit 
Get over it, get over it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what happens in any situation is that you look at 
all of the factors involved, in the political situation of 2003 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
Order, please. The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we 
will continue to work with all of the people involved to sort out 
problems. And we will get agreements, we’ll get memorandums 
of agreements; we’ll get agreements, we’ll get all these things. 
When there are problems interpreting how those things are 
done, we will seek help from arbitrators, we’ll seek help from 
courts, we’ll seek help from mediators. That’s how you sort out 
relationships. 
 
But ultimately, Mr. Speaker, what you try to do is make sure 
that your main goal is a tack which is providing the best care for 
Saskatchewan people. And we’re going to continue to do that 
because we’ve got so many good people doing that job here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell 
the Minister of Health that I’m not an Eagles fan as such. But I 
understand from my colleagues that the Eagles group also has a 
song called “Lyin’ Eyes”. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, for that minister, for that 
minister to stand in this House and say to the workers, the 
health care workers, just get over it. I want to read from a memo 
that was circulated in the Prince Albert Health Region dated 
June 15. And I quote from that memo and it says: 
 

. . . any overpayments will be recovered by the Employer. 
This may include the $1000.00 lump sum payment in lieu 
of retroactive pay that was paid out December 2003. 
 

Later on in another paragraph it says, quote: 
 

. . . you will be required to pay back any overpayment . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that minister to stand in this House and tell 
workers to get over it, what did he really mean by the 
negotiated contract? Will the Minister of Health clarify whether 
or not he intends health care workers to have to give back the 
money that they’ve been paid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I and all of the members on 
this side of the House, the Premier, we believe in going forward 
with fair wages for our employees, for pay equity. And we will 
go forward with the agreements and making sure that we can 
provide that kind of compensation to the people who provide 
valuable care throughout this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to apologize for that. We 
will continue to work at that goal. It’s not always easy. There 
are challenges, there are disagreements. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
why we have such good processes in place in this province that 
all these things can be sorted out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. Order, please. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Orders of the day. Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. I 
wonder if Mr. Speaker could undertake to review Hansard, and 
in particular the exchange of the question period just past. And 
in particular the comments of the member for Canora-Pelly, 
where he, I believe, undertakes to do something that he would 
not be allowed to do directly in this House, and that is to make 
use of a certain word. But in my view, in my view, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order, please. I do 
want to hear the entire point of order. The Government House 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But in 
my view, Mr. Speaker, the member is doing indirectly what 
he’s not allowed to do directly. And as well, it is a premise of 
debate in this House that the member ought not to do that, and I 
would ask the Speaker to review the record and to rule at an 
appropriate occasion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — On the point of order, I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly would 
like to speak briefly on the point of order that the Government 
House Leader makes. Mr. Speaker, as I recall the member in his 
comments about the Eagles’ song was very specific and very 
careful to make sure that he said it correctly, that this was the 
name of a song. And I think in that context, it’s a quote, it is a 
song that’s on the record in the Eagles’ library, and I think that 
it is entirely appropriate that he use it in that context, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Order, please. Order, please, 
members. Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. I will take 
the matter under advisement and bring back a ruling in due 
time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Let’s just . . . I would ask all 
members to just settle down a little, please, so we can carry on 
these routine proceedings. If there are any further interruptions 
. . . I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased today to stand on behalf of the government 
and table responses to written questions 917 through 920 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — 917 to 920. The responses have been 
submitted. 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that the Assembly 
approves in general the budgetary policy of the government, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 

Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise to support the budget. I rise to support the people 
of Saskatchewan. I rise to continue to repair the damage caused 
by the party opposite. I rise to protect the children, the elderly, 
the working people, and the future of our province from the 
policies of the party opposite. I rise to defend our way of life, 
our traditions of decency and sharing, from the rapacious 
policies of the members opposite. 
 
This budget tries to address the needs of the province in the 
context of the fiscal situation we find ourselves in. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to explain how we have tried to balance the needs of 
many. The opposition has over the years pointed out that there 
are shortcomings in infrastructure and in services in 
Saskatchewan. We have consistently acknowledged that the 
debts left to this province by them when they were government 
have hobbled this province. We have done the best with what 
we have had to work with. 
 
They have said that there is not a thing in this budget that they 
can vote for, not hospitals, not schools, not fire observation 
towers, not farm support, not increases to social assistance, not 
transportation for the disabled, not better or increased volumes 
of cancer treatment, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s bizarre. These 
people who tell us every day that we are not doing enough for 
the people of the province can’t find a thing to vote for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m calling on the members opposite during any 
stage of the budget, if there is anything they can agree with, to 
vote for it. During estimates in committee, they can vote for it 
then. For once, Mr. Speaker, they could do something positive 
instead of letting out their usual, unholy belch of anger and 
resentment. 
 
We have had to clean up the mess they left this province. We 
have had to rebuild this province one budget at a time, arm in 
arm with the people of Saskatchewan. This province was left in 
terrible shape by their policies. During the ’80s when the people 
across the aisle were in power, they scared away business, 
investment, and people. Businesses didn’t want to be part of an 
economy that was unstable and . . . [inaudible] . . . downward 
out of control. People didn’t want to invest while the 
kleptocratic predecessors were in power. And the people — 
well they just moved away. 
 
I remember the graffiti downtown on a boarded up building that 
said, quote, “Tory times are tough times.” And now they want 
to do the same thing all over again. They won’t vote for the 
budget. They won’t support a balanced and sustainable plan. 
They won’t vote to maintain a manageable state of affairs. They 
want to blow the bank again; $1 billion in five minutes, the 
opposition Finance critic tried to spend. Every day they scream 
to spend more and tax less without a concern as to how it will 
be paid for, without a concern as to how to balance a budget, 
without a concern about a long-term plan to maintain stability 
and steadily increasing prosperity 
 
The members opposite are victims of and are peddling 
unworkable, get-rich-quick schemes. They are duped by their 
own blind . . . [inaudible] . . . belief. Wishful thinking is their 
substitute for policy, Mr. Speaker. Their previous leader, Grant 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

Devine, still won’t admit their policies were wrong. 
 
This budget is the 12th consecutive balanced budget for 
Saskatchewan, NDP balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — . . . after the people on the other side of the 
House almost bankrupted the province. This province was three 
days away from bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker. Those people when 
they call themselves Devine Conservatives almost bankrupted 
this province. And their members still praise their previous 
leader. The member from Arm River-Watrous has said, quote, 
“You look at the Devine government. It did a lot of good things 
. . . ” Mr. Speaker, once again they proved they are incapable of 
managing our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are Devine Conservatives 
and, as my colleague called them, the Progressive Conservative 
Party under the witness protection program. Now Mr. Speaker, 
they don’t like it when we expose them from under their rock. 
They want to go scuttling back to the cover of their shadows. 
They get really upset and call us names, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Wood River stood in the House a short while ago 
and said, quote: 
 

We get the member from P.A. Northcote, gets up and 
wants to call this side of the House Conservatives; the 
other member gets up and wants to call Conservatives; and 
yet, Mr. Speaker, by ruling in this House I can’t call them 
what they . . . are. So the only thing I . . . [could] call them 
is [that] they have the policies and the attitude of their 
Cuban cousins. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the House — and this 
is parliamentary, Mr. Speaker, because I’m using it as part of 
the proper name of an organization and not as an epithet — that 
I have never been or run as a candidate for the Communist 
Party. The member for Wood River, however, cannot deny that 
he was a Conservative. The MLA for Wood River was defeated 
as a Progressive Conservative candidate for Wood River 
constituency in the 1995 election. He was only later elected as a 
Saskatchewan Party MLA in a by-election in 2000 for Wood 
River. And do we believe his sudden conversion to the kinder, 
gentler Saskatchewan Party? I think not. 
 
Let’s review a few of things the member for Wood River has 
advocated. Cut millions from social services, boot camps, 
general downsizing of government, the privatization of every 
Crown corporation, health care premiums, medicare user fees. 
In 1998 the member for Wood River said: 
 

I dislike monopolies and any time you deal with a 
monopoly, you lose one basic little word in our life and 
it’s called freedom. 
 

The article goes on with the member from Wood River’s 
philosophy and I quote: 
 

(Saskatchewan drivers lose their freedom by having only 
one choice of where they may [buy] their car insurance, he 
said.) 
 

I guess that’s the missing freedom, to be able to cough up an 
extra 2, 3, or $4,000 a year in insurance premiums, Mr. 
Speaker. That helps young people, doesn’t it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The list of Devine Conservatives goes on, Mr. Speaker. And 
apparently I’m obviously hitting a nail because we’ve got very 
few members listening to this speech. The MLA for Cannington 
was first elected as a Progressive Conservative member in the 
legislature for the constituency of Souris-Cannington, 1991, 
re-elected as a Progressive Conservative MLA in 1995. He 
currently sits in the legislature as a Saskatchewan Party MLA. 
 
The MLA for Moosomin was first elected as the Progressive 
Conservative member for the legislature for the constituency of 
Moosomin in 1986 and sat in the Grant Devine government. He 
ran again in the 1991 election as a Progressive Conservative 
candidate and currently sits as a member of the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus. 
 
The MLA for Swift Current was a ministerial assistant to the 
Progressive Conservative cabinet minister, John Gerich, during 
the Grant Devine administration. He ran for the Devine 
Conservative nomination in 1991. He was elected as a 
Saskatchewan Party MLA in 1999 for the constituency of Swift 
Current. 
 
The MLA for . . . keep listening, it’s interesting. The MLA for 
Martensville was elected to the legislature as a Progressive 
Conservative MLA for Rosthern constituency in 1995. He now 
sits as a Saskatchewan Party MLA. 
 
The MLA for Weyburn was defeated as the Progressive 
Conservative candidate for Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency 
in 1995 election. She was elected as a Saskatchewan Party 
MLA in 1999. 
 
The MLA for Estevan was the constituency assistant to Estevan 
Progressive Conservative MLA, Progressive Conservative 
leader and premier Grant Devine. She was elected as a Sask 
Party MLA in 1999. 
 
The Conservative MP [Member of Parliament] for 
Regina-Lumsden-Lake Centre used to be employed as the 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Party. He was formerly 
the executive director of the Saskatchewan Party of 
Saskatchewan and is currently the Conservative MP. 
 
The MLA for Thunder Creek was an executive member for 
Thunder Creek Progressive Conservative executive. In 1985, he 
sought but did not win the Progressive Conservative nomination 
for Thunder Creek. He was then endorsed by Colin Thatcher for 
the nomination and is listed as one of the founding members of 
the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the most interesting part of my research. 
When these people changed their name from the Progressive 
Conservatives to the Saskatchewan Party, they didn’t even 
change the phone number to their party office. 
 
One of the founding and most influential members of the Sask 
Party was the former MLA for Kindersley who was the former 
leader of the Progressive Conservative Party. Did you know 
that the last leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

Saskatchewan picked the first leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party? Did you also know that the first leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party, the member for Rosetown-Elrose, used to 
hold a Conservative membership, and that The StarPhoenix 
reported he was to be nominated to leadership at the convention 
by, I quote, “former Tory leader, Bill Boyd”? 
 
Mr. Speaker, both leaders of their party were picked by the last 
leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
Yes, it’s true, Mr. Speaker, hand-picked. The last leader of the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan was the 
biggest donor to the leadership campaign of the member for 
Swift Current who happens to be the current leader of the 
present Conservative Sask Party. I quote directly from the 
Leader-Post April 22, 2004: 
 

Wall’s campaign had to provide a list of donors who had 
contributed more than 250 . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. The 
member has made some wide-ranging remarks, and while we 
do allow for a wide range of debate in the budget speech, 
eventually the remarks ought to be related to the budget. So I’d 
ask the member to relate her remarks to the budget. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m simply describing what 
reasons they have for not voting for the budget, and I’m leading 
up to that point right now. 
 
So I repeat, “Wall’s campaign had to provide a list of donors 
who contributed more than $250.” Quote: 
 

The biggest individual donation was $1,500 from former 
provincial Progressive Conservative leader and 
Saskatchewan Party co-founder Bill Boyd. 

 
The former member from Kindersley is now the campaign 
Chair of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’m not sure if I made myself clear to 
the member, but the member ought to relate her remarks in 
some manner to remarks that have been made by other 
members or to remarks that have been made . . . or to the 
motions and the amendment. So I ask the member to do that. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’m simply pointing out that 
they’re opposed to the budget because this is not the way that it 
was done formerly under Grant Devine and that this is 
something that therefore is not part of their ideological process. 
Mr. Speaker, I quote from the Leader-Post February 7, 2005, of 
this year: 
 

Wall [says] . . . recruiting candidates for the party is key. 
The party has appointed former provincial Progressive 
Conservative leader, Bill Boyd, one of his [Sask Party’s] 
. . . founding MLAs, as campaign Chair for the next vote. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I quote from the StarPhoenix, January 20, 2005: 
 

The Conservative side [quote] has always worn the pants 
in this marriage, and the core of the party has . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. The member 

for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They simply can’t 
vote for this budget. We can see why they can’t vote for the 
budget because it struck a chord. We now know what the 
history is and what it’s led to and why they feel the way they do 
about this budget, especially when it’s a budget of this sort. Mr. 
Speaker, I quote from the StarPhoenix January 20, 2005: 
 

The Conservative side has always worn the pants in this 
marriage and the core of the party has always been rural 
conservatism. Not coincidentally, [Bill] Boyd remains a 
key player in the Sask Party to this day. 
 

And again, that’s why they won’t vote for this budget. They are 
Devine Conservatives. Their out-of-control spending promises 
proves it. So of course they can’t vote for this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. The budget is everything they are not. They are wild, 
out-of-control spenders who would take this province down the 
tubes again. “$1 million in five minutes,” I quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to quote from the opposition . . . one billion, my 
apologies. I want to quote from the opposition leader’s scrum of 
April 1, 2005. The question was, “So, is debt reduction amongst 
your 100 ideas?” The Saskatchewan Party leader’s answer was, 
“I’m not sure. I’m not sure if it is or what number it is.” Mr. 
Speaker, he doesn’t even know his own phony-baloney 
supposed booklet of new ideas, the Conservative Saskatchewan 
Party 100 points of light booklet. And he doesn’t know if 
balanced budgets are parts of their ideas. Mr. Speaker, in my 
lingo, how lame is that? 
 
But I have faith in the people of Saskatchewan. I have faith 
because at the last election the StarPhoenix also said: 
 

Last November, 61 per cent of the population rejected the 
Sask Party’s ideas. It’s going to take more than just a new 
face and little whiteout on the campaign flyer to change 
that.” 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, we should look at what the budget does for 
the people of Saskatchewan. We should also once again ask of 
the members opposite, is there nothing that they can support in 
this budget? 
 
The member for Carrot River Valley said he wasn’t even 
prepared to vote for buying new firefighting aircraft. He said he 
had heard about our press release asking him if he was in favour 
of buying firefighting aircraft and building fire observation 
towers. He said: “There was nothing in the budget that was 
good.” Mr. Speaker, the member said: 
 

I said in my years of being in politics, both federal and 
provincial, almost every budget, almost every budget that 
comes down the pike, there might be something that you 
could say, okay it’s good; I like that. You might not vote 
for the budget, but you still could say, well that was a good 
step. It might have been, didn’t go as far as we would have 
liked to have gone, but at least it was a [good] step. 

 
Yes, he really did, and he continued to say: 
 

I told the reporter last night, I said that there was not one 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

thing in this particular budget that I could say was a good, 
solid step . . . 

 
That means that the members opposite don’t believe that 
building fire observation towers is good. Increasing firefighting 
capacity is not good either, according to the member for Carrot 
River Valley. What a slap in the face to the people of Carrot 
River Valley whose homes were threatened by fire in the last 
years. What a slap to the people of the Prince Albert area. What 
a slap to the people of Nipawin and Hudson Bay. 
 
I challenge the members opposite to introduce a private 
member’s motion into the House with a list of the things they 
think we should not have built that are included in this year’s 
capital budget. We have to accept the member’s word for it 
when he’s speaking on behalf of his caucus. 
 
There goes the Preeceville integrated health facility, the 
Cypress Regional Hospital, the highway twinning, the 
Humboldt health facility. The list goes on. There goes $326.9 
million in total capital spending for schools, universities, 
hospitals, highway twinning, and other capital projects. There 
goes $110.1 million in education property tax relief. There goes 
tuition grants and the replacement of the 1913 section of the 
Regina Correctional Centre. The member isn’t going to have 
much luck running for a nomination in Saskatoon when he 
thinks health upgrades and more cancer treatment in Saskatoon 
is a bad idea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are so negative and so wrapped up in 
their blind ideological vision that they can’t see anything good. 
I wonder if the member for Carrot River Valley told the reporter 
from Missinipi Broadcasting company that he was against 600 
training opportunities through the northern skills training 
program; and against $3.5 million to expand the Saskatchewan 
bursary program by increasing bursary assistance for up to 
10,000 students; against $2 million to increase training 
opportunities through 1,000 additional training seats in 
JobStart/Future Skills, basic education, and apprenticeship 
programs. 
 
The members opposite are saying that none of the following are 
good, solid steps: a $16.2 million increase for universities, 
federated and affiliated colleges which includes $6.7 million for 
the Saskatchewan centennial university tuition grant; $4.7 
million increase in operating grants; $3.8 for accreditation at 
College of Medicine. The member opposite is saying that 
money to retain accreditation at the College of Medicine is a 
bad idea; as well as panning $888,000 for enhanced and 
expanded nursing programs as well as College of Medicine 
enrolment expansion; training and recruiting health 
professionals, including 280 new and 109 continuing bursaries 
for students in nursing, internships, specialized health fields, 
and other disciplines; 50 new and 65 continuing physician 
bursaries. Remember, Mr. Speaker, the opposition does not 
support physician bursaries as a good, solid step. 
 
$547,000 for nine new residency seats at the College of 
Medicine with four of those seats reserved to provide 
foreign-trained doctors with better access to residency 
programs. One hundred new nursing education seats in the 
Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan, and forty new 
seats in the northern Nursing Education Program of 

Saskatchewan . Total nursing seats will increase to 1,333 for the 
four-year program. A $4.75 million increase in operating 
funding for SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology], which includes $900,000 for expansion of the 
Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan. 
 
The opposition also think building schools in Saskatoon is a bad 
idea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition needs to get a grip on reality. They 
are telling the people of the province that $3.9 million to fund 
new childhood vaccines is a bad idea. I will be telling that to the 
parents in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. $2.8 million to expand 
renal dialysis capacity, increasing dialysis treatments by 8,000 
procedures, is likewise a bad idea to the opposition. 
 
Remember the opposition said, and I quote from Hansard, 
“There was nothing in the budget that was good.” Now we 
know why the opposition is not government, and why we are 
still cleaning up their mess. I am pleased to support this 
government and vote in favour of this budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
glad to have the opportunity to speak to the budget today. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan had great, great hope and 
anticipation that because of the windfall revenues in oil and gas, 
that the budget would address some of the hurt being felt across 
the province. They thought that the budget would address the 
increase in PST [provincial sales tax] that was brought in last 
year’s budget. They thought that the budget would address the 
property tax concerns and they thought the budget would 
address the crisis in agriculture. They thought it would address 
the need for municipal revenue sharing, the need to reduce 
business taxes, the opportunity to address the taxes paid by 
low-income earners by increasing the personal exemption so 
that they could have a real increase in their take-home pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were hoping that this 
would be a budget with a vision and a budget with direction and 
a plan of action for the future of Saskatchewan. As we all know 
now that the budget contained none of these things, and I 
believe if there is one word that describes this budget, it is 
disappointment. And this is how the people in the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency feel about this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d like to quote from my local paper, the Weyburn Review, 
and I quote: 
 

The day after the budget, Agriculture minister Mark 
Wartman visited Weyburn and addressed a 
sparsely-attended audience on the budget at the McKenna 
Hall and answered criticisms that there were no new 
dollars for agriculture in this budget after one of the 
toughest years ever for the province’s number one 
industry. 
 
Mayor Don Schlosser, who is also president of 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association . . . 
expressed disappointment that their group’s request for 
$10 million more in revenue sharing was ignored this year, 
increasing the possibility many municipalities will have to 
hike taxes this year. 
 

And I further quote from the Review: 
 

The mayor also noted infrastructure grant monies that used 
to be . . . one-third split between federal, provincial and 
municipal governments are now a 50-50 split, where 
municipalities have to pay half the costs of any 
infrastructure projects. 
 

And the mayor goes on to say: 
 

“When I looked around the rotunda at the Legislature, in 
all the years that I’d gone to the budget, that was the most 
dissatisfied group I’ve ever seen. With the amount of 
money available, there should have been some groups 
coming out of there happy.” 
 

End of quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $1.2 billion in extra revenue, and yet most people 
across the province are asking, where did the money go? And 
even with $1.2 billion in extra revenue, the NDP are still 
running a deficit of $1.5 million. And at the same time, none of 
the major concerns facing Saskatchewan residents were 
addressed in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is clearly outlined in an editorial in The Star 
Phoenix on March 29, and I’d like to quote from this editorial: 
 

But the government is only spinning its wheels with the 
magic of FSF. The budget is not balanced. Total spending 
is higher that total revenues, period. 
 
Budget time is the government’s best chance to 
demonstrate a serious commitment to the economy. [The 
Finance minister] . . . has had all year to consult and listen 
to the opinions of the business community, and it has not 
been one bit shy about letting him and his government 
know what it thinks. It’s been shouting it loud and proud: 
Lower taxes and cut regulations! Do it now! 
 
But rather than throwing the truck into first gear and 
hitting the gas pedal by actually doing what it’s been told 
him, the minister announced with great fanfare in his 
budget speech that his government will create a new 
committee to undertake a business tax review. 
 
What? Haven’t there been enough opportunities to listen? 
Hasn’t there been enough consultation? Hasn’t the 
business community told him what needs to be done? 
 
This government is just spinning its wheels. 
 

End of quote. 
 
And who, Mr. Speaker, wrote this editorial? It was Todd Hirsch 
of the Canada West Foundation. Mr. Hirsch was one of the 
participants of this government’s centennial summit. The 

government indicated at that time that they were listening to the 
presentations and that they would act on their counsel. 
Apparently it did not happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas industry is very important to our 
province and certainly to my constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. Never had this been more evident than this year when 
the farming industry has been in such a desperate situation, and 
many, many people in our province are working off the farm 
and are working in the industry. But here is what the NDP said, 
Mr. Speaker, about what was going to happen, I’d like to quote 
in the budget: 
 

There were 1,743 new oil wells drilled in 2004 compared 
to 1,875 new oil wells drilled in 2003. Oil drilling is 
expected to decrease to 1,700 new wells in 2005 and 1,600 
new wells in 2006. 
 

They further go on to say, when they’re talking about natural 
gas: 
 

Drilling for new natural gas wells declined in 2004. The 
industry is estimated to have drilled 1,930 new natural gas 
wells in 2004 after a record 2,314 new wells drilled in 
Saskatchewan in 2003. 
 
Just as the number of new oil wells drilled is expected to 
decrease, drilling of new natural gas wells is also expected 
to drop in the near term. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable in this province that this is the 
attitude of this government. And I’d like to quote from The 
Globe and Mail on March 29, and in The Globe and Mail it 
completely contradicts what this government is talking about. 
And it says: 
 

Even with the rampant drilling activity — more than 
17,000 natural gas wells are forecast to be drilled in 
Canada this year . . . 
 
“And that’s with every rig and every farm kid working flat 
out,” said Martin King of FirstEnergy Capital Corp. 

 
And yet in this province, we have the Minister of Finance and 
the Minister of Industry and Resources planning to fail. This is 
no different than we had the Minister of Learning who got up in 
this House, I believe it was about a year ago, and told us that 
they were planning to have 30,000 less children in this province 
in the school system. 
 
This government has no idea what it takes to grow a province. 
And so instead of doing what it needs to grow the province, 
they’re out there planning to fail. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the question is, why are we not experiencing 
a boom when we have the highest price per barrel of oil that 
we’ve ever seen in this province? Mr. Speaker, it’s about a lack 
of confidence in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are experiencing untold revenue from the oil 
and gas industry and, yet, what does this government do? In 
their budget under resource taxation issues, they talk about the 
corporate capital tax surcharge on energy trusts. They call it a 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

revenue leakage problem, a revenue leakage problem. Mr. 
Speaker, this is what this government thinks about the oil and 
gas industry, that they’re going to stop a revenue leakage 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about two weeks before the budget, the Premier 
addressed the business community in the city of Regina. And at 
that time, he talked about making Saskatchewan the energy 
heart of the nation. Very, very, very good words. But you know 
where he got those words from, Mr. Speaker? He got them right 
out of our policy document. And we applaud him. 
 
We applaud him for taking this initiative. Mr. Speaker, no one, 
no one was more surprised in this province when that happened 
than the oil and gas industry; that the Premier of this province 
— the NDP who have driven the oil industry out of this 
province for the last 60 years, have done everything to 
discourage them from expanding — gets up and addresses the 
business community and says, we are going to make 
Saskatchewan the energy heart of the nation. Sixty years after 
the fact, when everyone else in Saskatchewan has known this 
for 60 years, the Premier finally realizes that we have an 
opportunity here. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the Friday before the budget, he made an 
announcement about putting in incentives for enhanced oil 
recovery. Another good step. He said he’s going to awake a 
sleeping giant. That was the government’s press release. Again, 
everyone else in this province has known about this giant for 60 
years and the Premier just realized it. But again, we applaud 
him for that. We applaud him for finally recognizing that we 
have an opportunity. 
 
Then five days later when the NDP release the budget, they 
bring in a corporate capital surcharge on energy trusts — this is 
unbelievable — to raise $20 million, when we have the oil and 
gas industry and other mining industries who have just 
generated over $1 billion in extra revenue. This government 
does not get it. They turn around and they slap the very people 
that are generating the most economic development in the 
province and put a surcharge on the energy trusts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in the oil and gas industry and certainly 
across the province are asking, who has driven our economy? 
Who has made over $1 billion in extra revenue? Who is 
creating hundreds of direct jobs in the industry? Who is creating 
hundreds of jobs in spinoff jobs from this industry? Who is 
paying millions of dollars in property tax? Who is paying 
millions of dollars in utilities, Mr. Speaker? And who more than 
anyone supports our local communities? The oil industry and 
the mining industry, by giving thousands of dollars back to our 
local communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my community, we have oil companies. We 
have service companies that service the oil industry. We have 
the coal industry. They give back in cash donations. They give 
back in volunteer time. They give back in goods and services. 
And they give back to all kinds of charities and sports 
organizations that would not be able to survive without their 
generous contributions. 
 
Yet, the NDP have done everything possible to discourage the 
development of the oil industry in Saskatchewan. And again, 

we see this in the budget when they turned around and put a 
surcharge on energy trusts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak about another issue for a few 
moments and that’s the whole issue of addictions in the 
province of Saskatchewan that I have been very concerned 
about during my time as an MLA, and prior to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most addiction services at one time in the 
province were under community-based organizations and that 
was for a very good reason, because they were the most 
efficient way to provide addiction services. They were 
provided, in a large part they had volunteers involved. And 
these people in these community-based organizations are 
closest to the problem and are able therefore to find solutions to 
these problems. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what has this government done? They have 
decided to turn many of these community-based organizations, 
that they have decided to put the services under the Department 
of Health or under the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment. And I’d just like to give you a couple of 
examples. 
 
We had the Larson House in Saskatoon who had worked 
diligently. that local volunteer board had worked diligently for 
years to try and get a mattress detox in Saskatoon, tried to get a 
mattress detox in Saskatoon. And you know who was standing 
in the way of it? It was this government. This government stood 
in the way. They froze the funding out of them so that they 
finally said, you know what? We cannot do this any longer. 
And who took it over but the government. The NDP 
government took over the mattress detox and the running of 
Larson House because they pushed the community organization 
out. 
 
This happened in Kindersley as well. They pushed the Danny 
Fisher Centre out of business and put it under the health region. 
The same thing just recently happened in Moosomin where they 
closed down the volunteer board and the community-based 
organization and put it under the regional health authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they did the same thing in Regina where they 
closed down Recovery Manor and they put it under the health 
district and those people, many of those people had nowhere to 
go, no place to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the answer. There is no organizations 
that are more efficient and effective and provide a valuable 
service than community-based organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major concerns with addictions is 
crystal meth and this drug is devastating communities across 
Saskatchewan and jurisdictions in Canada and the United 
States. And governments all across the United States and in 
Canada are taking action to address the concerns around this 
deadly drug and the crime that flows from it. This drug, as well 
as all addictions, tax our law enforcement resources. It taxes the 
security and well-being of our communities. 
 
Law enforcement will tell you that 80 per cent of all crime is 
directly related to addictions, that is crimes especially of 
property, gangs, and domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, children 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

are the innocent bystanders who are caught up in this unhealthy 
situation, exposed to physical harm and parents whose focus is 
on drugs instead of their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all taxpayers are touched by drugs, whether 
directly or indirectly, because of the cost to the health system, 
the social services system, and the justice system, is they are 
touched because of loss of security in their communities and in 
their homes and of the human cost of lost productivity and the 
drain on our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many governments are taking action and in the 
United States they are enacting stricter laws. In Alberta they 
have introduced legislation to enable parents to help their 
children who are caught up in this destructive lifestyle, to bring 
them actual, real help. In Ontario they’ve brought in laws to 
fight organized crime. And a recent report, Mr. Speaker, 
alarmingly from Iowa, indicates that today’s infants that are 
born in that state, one in ten have been exposed to crystal meth. 
 
And yet what does this NDP government do? They decide to 
study the issue. This is now six, no it’s seven years since, 
according to the Minister of Health, they found out about the 
serious and growing problem of crystal meth. 
 
When the Saskatchewan Party brought this issue up — it’s a 
year ago now — the NDP decided to dismiss it and they chose 
to do nothing. And now the Premier has decided that he’s going 
to do a study. But, Mr. Speaker, this is 20 years after the 
Premier realized that there was a problem. And I’d like to quote 
from the Premier in 1986, and he’s talking about a treatment 
centre. And I quote from The Commonwealth NDP newsletter: 
 

Calvert called for establishment of a provincial youth 
alcohol and drug treatment centre in Moose Jaw. 
 
“The time for delay is long past,” he said referring to plans 
by the . . . [Progressive Conservatives] to mount yet 
another study of drug and alcohol abuse among the 
province’s young people. 
 

Again I quote. He said: 
 

“The time for action is now.” 
 

Further quoting the Premier: 
 

“We cannot rest while a whole generation is lost.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, those were very, very true words at that time. But 
sadly it’s 20 years later and this NDP government, under the 
leadership of the Premier who made those quotes at that time, 
has still failed to take any actions. How many lives will be 
destroyed before the NDP actually gets serious and take a 
leadership role to fight crystal meth in our communities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many other issues in my constituency 
which the NDP have failed to address and I’d like to speak 
about one, which is the VLT [video lottery terminal] revenue. 
Including cities of Weyburn . . . included in this in the city of 
Weyburn and throughout my constituency, there’s 100 VLTs 
which take in $6.8 million from our communities. And in 1995, 
the NDP promised that they would return 10 per cent of all 

VLT revenues to communities. This would amount to $681,000 
last year for my constituency alone. Another broken promise 
that has never been fulfilled, while we see organizations that are 
trying to raise funds to support local communities unable to do 
so because of the money that is pumped into VLTs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highway 35, I asked a written question which I 
just received the answer to prior to my speaking today. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d asked about what were the plans for Highway 
35 to be repaired, and sadly the answer does not give any 
definitive answer. And this is unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that 
this highway was reverted back to gravel last year with the 
promise that it would be fixed this year and now the 
government is saying, and I quote: 
 

The length of the surfacing to be completed in 2005 and 
beyond remains dependent on budget levels, and the 
performance of the provincial Thin Membrane Surface . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, again the NDP are pleading poverty and have no 
intention in this answer of reverting Highway 35 totally back to 
highway surface as opposed to gravel. This is unacceptable 
when this is an entry point from the United States, in an area — 
I might add, Mr. Speaker — where a large portion of the 
revenue from oil and gas flows into the coffers of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also the threat of school closures in my 
constituency, when the Minister of Learning said of 
amalgamating of school divisions would allow more dollars to 
be spent directly in schools and less on administration so this 
should stop further closure of schools. This, obviously, is not 
the direction that the minister is giving his boards at the local 
level who are now talking about plans to close schools in my 
area. Well this is not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also the whole issue of agriculture that’s 
been going on for some time, but this year more than ever it is 
certainly having a very devastating effect. There is land for rent 
throughout my constituency, with many . . . in many instances 
where there are no takers for this rental. And there are auction 
sales — very, very large amount of auction sales, Mr. Speaker. 
And this has all got to do with a lack of commitment by the 
NDP to fully fund CAIS, to address the issue of crop insurance, 
and of the high cost of utilities, of a lack of commitment to . . . 
for property tax relief. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on in 
agriculture. 
 
There’s also the ethanol industry, Mr. Speaker, which because 
of the interference of the NDP and no firm mandate of what is 
going to go on with this industry and about them directly 
interfering and trying to buy equity into ethanol plants, we still 
have yet to see a plant open in Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have the issue of health care in my 
constituency, which this NDP has continually failed the people 
of my riding. And just last week, Mr. Speaker, I had a 
gentleman call my office who said I’d just like to give you one 
more example of the two-tiered system that the NDP has for 
health care. 
 
In the hospital in Weyburn they have to pay for day surgery. Up 
until April 1 it was $400, where health care’s free in 
Saskatchewan, but they’re paying $400 for day surgery. Now as 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

of April 1, they’re paying $635 for day surgery in the hospital 
in Weyburn, and yet this NDP government says that we have 
free health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I’d just like to read a portion of a letter 
from a gentleman in my constituency who has watched and 
listened and is very saddened by what he sees as the NDP 
turning their back on rural Saskatchewan, and I quote: 
 

Since our province wants . . . to celebrate Saskatchewan’s 
100th anniversary. Let us compare our area to a former 
provincial celebration — Homecoming [in] 1971: [and this 
gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, is from Bengough] At that time 
our community had twenty-eight . . . [businesses] and 
three service organizations. Our population had risen from 
575 in 1958 to over 800 in 1971. It is now 2005 and our 
present businesses can be counted in one set of hands, we 
have one service club and our population is now under 
500. We had a well-run hospital that everyone in the area 
helped with raising any funding needed for its operation. 
We now have a health centre with very limited respite 
facilities. 
 
Our community exists largely on the . . . [agriculture] 
aspects of the area. As in the rest of rural Saskatchewan 
the population is aging. At present we do not have enough 
room in the seniors home to hold our own. Many have 
either been shipped to another area or were forced to move 
themselves if still able. The Saskatchewan government has 
built a policy of paying the care administrators instead of 
paying the care givers and moving . . . [everyone] to the 
. . . [city]. This has been quite a change from past policy of 
low cost volunteer boards and moving people back to their 
home areas for respite after medical operations. 

 
And this gentleman goes on to talk about agriculture and about 
BSE and about how farming practices have changed, how the 
CAIS program has failed, and he ends by saying: 
 

You can go back over predictions by outsiders for this 
province for the last twenty years. Each prediction 
affirmed Saskatchewan’s promise for the future. Our 
resources and our people are second to none. Our 
provincial government has been pushing and campaigning 
for its people to improve their attitudes towards the future. 
Why is it then those around us are prospering with less, 
and our promise is never realized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, we ask the question, whose lives in 
Saskatchewan has it improved? Has it improved the ranchers 
and the farmers in my constituency and their family? Has it 
improved the lives of business people, students, low-income 
families and their children, children at risk on the streets, those 
suffering with addictions, teachers, nurses, young people 
looking for jobs in Saskatchewan so that they can stay here and 
make a future here, those on waiting lists, outside investors who 
would like to invest in Saskatchewan, many of them ex-Saskies 
who would like to come back here and be part of our future? 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it about community leaders struggling to keep 
their facilities open? Has it improved CBOs [community-based 
organization] organizations? Has it improved property 
taxpayers? Mr. Speaker, sadly the answer is none of the above. 

I will not be supporting the budget. I will support the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I begin my brief remarks to the budget debate this 
afternoon I first of all want to extend congratulations to the 
entire government caucus, but a very special congratulations to 
the member from Regina Dewdney, the Minister of Finance, 
whose stewardship, whose care, whose attention to detail, and 
whose vision for the future of this province is recognized and 
identified in this budget. I want to congratulate the Minister of 
Finance for the budget that he has laid before the legislature and 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I come, Mr. Speaker, to this debate this 
afternoon with two documents. I have with me, of course, a 
copy of the budget of the province of Saskatchewan under 
debate, and equally I have a copy of the platform commitments, 
the vision, and the goals that we set before the people of 
Saskatchewan prior to the most recent provincial election. 
 
In this platform document, Mr. Speaker, we set before the 
people of Saskatchewan our vision, our goals for this term in 
government. We believe that as a political movement and as a 
political party at election time you lay before the people your 
vision, your goals, your philosophies. And then in government, 
having been provided the privilege of governing, it is your 
responsibility to govern under those principles and to govern 
towards those very goals and commitments that you make in the 
campaign. 
 
Now this may seem as a novel approach to members opposite. 
They are not bringing their campaign documentation into this 
House. They’re not talking about their visions. They’re not 
talking about their plans. In fact they’re doing everything under 
the sun to hide from what they said to the people of this 
province during the last election. 
 
But that’s not the way we operate here, Mr. Speaker. We lay 
before the people a vision, goals, commitments, and we work to 
build to that vision and those goals with careful planning and 
careful stewardship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this platform when we went to the people of 
Saskatchewan we identified an overarching goal, an 
overarching goal that said in this term of government we would 
seek, that we would seek to build an even better life for the 
people of this province. That is our overarching goal, and we 
would build a better life for the people of Saskatchewan, an 
even better life, through four major visions, through four major 
goals. 
 
One, Mr. Speaker, to make Saskatchewan an affordable place 
for families. Secondly, to build in this province the best public 
health care and the best quality of life that we can possibly 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

build in Saskatchewan. Number three, that we would build a 
green and a prosperous economy. And number four, that we 
would provide opportunities for our young people. We made 
those four central commitments to the people of Saskatchewan 
going into the last election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you go into the election with your 
commitments. You’re privileged to receive the support of the 
people of the province, and then you go about the task of 
building towards those goals. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget, 
this budget under debate is the, is the result directly of that 
vision. Within this budget are contained, in fact, the building 
blocks towards that vision and those goals. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind I will be supporting this 
budget. I’ll be supporting the Minister of Finance as he 
concludes his remarks today on this budget. 
 
So let’s just reflect a little, Mr. Speaker. Let us reflect just a 
little about what we find in this budget as it applies to the very 
commitments that we have made to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We committed, as I said, to making this 
province an affordable place for families to live. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, contained within this budget are the resources to meet 
our commitment that people of Saskatchewan will enjoy the 
lowest cost bundle of utilities anywhere in Canada. That is a 
promise we have made; that’s a promise we’re keeping. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, if you access the 
budget documentation, you will find, you will find in this 
budget documentation at categories of income of $25,000 per 
year, single person with $25,000 income, or with a family with 
an income of $50,000 a year total income, or in fact a family 
with $75,000 total income — all fees, charges, cost of living 
included — Saskatchewan now is the most affordable place in 
Canada in which to make your home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, members, if reviewing 
these charts of household charges and taxation and all which 
contributes to the cost of living, members, I invite members to 
review these charts and note this very salient and important fact, 
that of all of the provinces in Canada that now enjoy the have 
status under equalization — that being three: Alberta, Ontario, 
and Saskatchewan — there is only one province in Canada who 
enjoys have status and does not charge a health care premium, 
and that is the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But, Mr. Speaker, this budget takes us 
even further in making life more affordable for Saskatchewan 
families because within the context of this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
are $55 million, stage one of a $110 million plan to provide 
property tax relief for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we talked in the campaign 
about quality of life, particularly to building the best public 
health care system that we could build in Saskatchewan. This 

budget takes us to that commitment, Mr. Speaker, because in 
this budget we are spending a record $2.9 billion in the 
provision of public health in Saskatchewan — $2.9 billion. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s $192 million more than we spent on 
health care in this province last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And that, Mr. Speaker, is about $100 
million more than is provided in the new federal funding, for 
which we are grateful. Mr. Speaker, that is the commitment to 
public health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what does 
that kind of commitment, what does that kind of commitment 
mean in real, practical terms for the people of Saskatchewan? 
I’ve been just reviewing today announcements that this 
government has made just in the last two weeks. Just in the 
course of this budget debate, here are announcements that this 
government has made in regard to health care in this province. 
 
We have announced $12 million for new diagnostic imaging 
equipment, equipment that will be distributed across the 
province. We have provided funding, Mr. Speaker, just — and 
this is just in the last two weeks — to establish full-time, 
24-hour, on-site emergency room physician services. Where? In 
Moose Jaw and in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In just the past two weeks we have provided another $1 million 
to help increase the number of physicians working in 
Saskatchewan and $400,000 to expand the Telehealth network 
by adding eight new locations across the province, and that 
brings us to a total of 26 sites. That’s the work that’s gone on in 
just these past two weeks. 
 
A budget of $2.9 billion — 192 million new dollars. And I 
challenge the members of the opposition to stand in this House 
today, if they dare, and vote against that kind of expenditure in 
public health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of health care funding that comes from this budget, let me 
review again, let me review again for the member from Wood 
Mountain just — Wood River, Wood River — just exactly 
where health dollars will be expended in this budget year in 
terms of capital, in terms of building for the future, the facilities 
and the capital necessary to provide good public health care. 
 
Do you know where we’re going? We’re building in Swift 
Current, Saskatchewan. We’re building in Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
We’re building in Preeceville. We’re building in Moosomin. 
We’re building in Maidstone. We’re building in Outlook. And 
we are building in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. We are building in 
Humboldt, and I’ll be very interested to see the reaction today 
of the member from Humboldt. Will she vote for the budget 
that will provide for a new St. Elizabeth’s in Humboldt to be 
opened in the year 2007 or will she vote against a new St. 
Elizabeth’s for Humboldt in 2007? 
 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

There are health capital dollars being expended here in the 
capital city. There are health capital dollars being expended in 
the city of Saskatoon. And because of this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
there will be new opportunities for the Oliver Lodge in 
Saskatoon. There will be a new mental health clinic in 
Saskatoon. 
 
We are investing in capital for the provision of public health 
care services because that is the number one priority of the New 
Democratic Party Government of Saskatchewan when it comes 
to the expenditure of public funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But, Mr. Speaker, in my view, health 
care is often determined by factors that we might not 
traditionally describe as health care — those provisions of life 
which we sometimes now describe as health determinants. And 
significant in providing quality public health care is the 
opportunity to provide for those in our communities who 
sometimes we describe as our neighbours in need. And when 
we are providing new resources for our neighbours in need, we 
are contributing to their health care and the public health care of 
the province. Here specifically, Mr. Speaker, I refer to housing. 
 
One of the most significant determinants of health is housing — 
good, quality housing. Good opportunities to put shelter around 
our families, to build secure and strong neighbourhoods, to give 
our children stability in their growing up and in their education 
— it relates, Mr. Speaker, very much to housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no part of this budget that I am more 
proud of than the commitment within this budget to the 
HomeFirst program, the most innovative housing program in 
the nation of Canada today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — New resources, Mr. Speaker, new 
resources for public housing, new resources to assist family into 
the ownership of their own housing and their own 
accommodation. And, Mr. Speaker, in a $10 million 
investment, a new rental supplement for our neighbours who 
are most in need, a new rental supplement, a supplement that 
will be tied to quality housing. This is innovative. There is 
nothing like it in the rest of Canada. We are investing in the 
families of Saskatchewan in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for the first time, and for the first time in many years there 
is in this budget an across-the-board increase in the basic 
allowance for social service recipients in our province. We’re 
very, very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To be fair, the Leader of the Opposition and members of the 
opposition have called for a basic allowance increase. It’s not 
what they said before the election when they were talking about 
a $50 million cut in social services. It’s not what they were 
saying just before the election when they were talking about 
work for welfare. But wherever they’ve had the conversion, I 
appreciate it. 
 
Now they’ve called for an increase in the basic assistance. The 
first three days of this session, on a daily basis they were calling 

for an increase in the basic level of social assistance. Now 
today, Mr. Speaker, now today comes the test of the credibility. 
 
Will they stand today and vote against an increase in the basic 
allowance for the recipients of social assistance in our 
province? Will they vote against it or will they have some 
courage in their convictions and stand and vote for it, Mr. 
Speaker? The test will come in a matter of moments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked in the campaign, as I indicated, about 
building a green and a prosperous economy in this province 
because the foundation of social progress is economic progress. 
The foundation is economic progress and we have committed to 
the people of Saskatchewan in campaign and in the decision 
making of this government to build that green and prosperous 
economy. Mr. Speaker, it’s happening. There is a momentum in 
our economy today that has not existed, if I may say, for many, 
many years — for many, many years. 
 
We’ve got a predicted growth rate — the headlines are putting 
it, the banks are bullish on Saskatchewan — we’ve got a 
predicted growth rate this year of 3 per cent, real growth on 
growth of the years just behind us. We have seen the test of this 
growth in the monthly reporting on the growth in job numbers 
in this province — record levels of employment in 
Saskatchewan today. And one of the truest tests of the strength 
of your economy is the willingness of investors to invest in that 
economy. And as the Minister of Industry and Resources 
reported last week, private sector investment, total capital 
investment predicted for the province of Saskatchewan this year 
will be more than double than the national average. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — More than double the national average. 
Mr. Speaker, that, that, Mr. Speaker, is a sign of the confidence 
in the Saskatchewan economy, of the momentum that exists in 
the economy of Saskatchewan today. 
 
And we can see it all around us; we don’t need to travel far 
anywhere in this province to see the momentum in our 
economy. I look at the momentum that’s happening in the film 
and video industry right now. I look at the momentum that’s 
happening in the forestry right now, where we’ve seen the 
tremendous private sector investment, the tremendous 
expansion in value-added forestry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see the momentum in terms of tourism and the 
arts community in Saskatchewan. I have just returned from 
Winnipeg where Team Saskatchewan, the YESK team went, 30 
of us strong, and influenced the Canadian music industry. 
They’re looking at Saskatchewan like they’ve never looked at 
Saskatchewan before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at what’s happening in terms of the housing 
numbers. I look at what’s happening in terms of the mining 
sector, Mr. Speaker — the mining sector, working at full steam. 
And we intend to work even closer with the mining sector in the 
days ahead. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Speaker. The one sector of the economy 
that we know holds such tremendous potential, that sector of the 
economy that we are focusing on, is building the energy sector 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

in Saskatchewan because this is a province with a future that 
has energy, Mr. Speaker. I tell you we have a future with 
energy, Mr. Speaker, and this budget speaks very, very directly 
to building an energy future for Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re building an energy future using the renewable sources, 
the wind. This budget will place Saskatchewan from a position 
three years ago of no wind-generated electricity to a position 
where we will be third in Canada already. This budget will take 
us there. 
 
This budget has resources now to see the expansion of ethanol. 
We will see the plant in Weyburn that the member from 
Weyburn seems to want to criticize today. It’s unbelievable. We 
will see the world’s largest wheat-based ethanol plant built in 
Lloydminster. We will see this province taking, as we have, 
leadership in terms of ethanol in the nation of Canada. 
 
And just last week the Minister of Industry and Resources 
returned from Nipawin and talked about the biomass, the 
tremendous potential in the announcement of the biomass 
project in Nipawin. 
 
We’re taking the green sources of energy, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re growing them. We’ve pioneered hydrogen research and 
energy. We’ve had here in the province the world’s first hybrid 
hydrogen/diesel truck pioneered, and now the world’s first 
gasoline/hydrogen truck here, built by the researchers in 
Saskatchewan. There’s a tremendous future in the 
non-renewable . . . in the renewable resources and energy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let us look at this resource that’s buried 
beneath our ground — the coal resource and the potential for 
coal bed methane gasification. And look, Mr. Speaker, look, 
Mr. Speaker, at the tremendous resource that’s buried beneath 
our ground in terms of oil and gas. 
 
Now we have seen, Mr. Speaker, as a result of significant 
changes made in the oil and gas royalty regime several years 
ago — two, three years ago now, I guess — the expansion of 
that industry in our province. Mr. Speaker, we know that buried 
beneath the soils of Saskatchewan today are 35 billion barrels 
of oil. Already discovered, we don’t need to go looking — there 
are 35 billion barrels of oil buried beneath our ground. But our 
challenge, Mr. Speaker, is not to find that oil; our challenge is 
to get that oil out of the ground. Because with the technologies 
that we have today, only about, only about 15 per cent of that 
oil is available to us — only about 15 percent. What that means, 
Mr. Speaker, is we’re leaving 30 million barrels of oil in the 
ground. Now at today’s prices, that’s worth about $1 trillion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to get that resource and make it serve 
the people of Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we’ve set out a plan to do just that. 
It’s a plan that involves the research and development capacities 
to enhance oil production, the kind of research and development 
that’s happening here at the University of Regina, at the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre. 
 
We know that we will need to build the infrastructure to make 

this happen — infrastructure of pipe lining, an infrastructure of 
upgrading. We know that we need to get a fair equalization 
formula and deal with the nation’s government. We know that if 
we’re going to develop that energy resource we need to do it in 
the context of a fair and just equalization formula. We know 
that we need to train people and we know that we need the right 
royalty regime. 
 
As I’ve been very proud in just recent days, as a result of this 
budget, to announce a regime that we’ve worked out with the 
industry over the course of many months, a regime which we’ve 
worked out with the industry that will provide for tremendous 
investment in enhanced oil recovery in our province. It’s in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. We’re voting for this budget because we 
believe in the future of that industry and we believe in the 
future of this province. That’s why we’re voting . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, 
the vision of this budget and the priority of this budget and the 
priority of this government is to invest in the young people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is our centennial year when 
we celebrate 100 years of heart. But we turn our attention as we 
celebrate this 100 years to the 100 years in front of us because 
there’s a lot of history in this province but, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
a lot of tomorrow in this province. 
 
And this, this budget, Mr. Speaker, above all else — above all 
else — invests in the young people of Saskatchewan, in their 
future and ensuring, as we said in our campaign, that we would 
build a future in this province for our young people. And that’s 
what this budget does like no other budget that we’ve ever 
delivered in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
highlight some of that which is in this budget that is directly, 
directly to provide opportunities for Saskatchewan’s young 
people. In this budget we are doubling — doubling, Mr. 
Speaker — the centennial merit scholarship program. We’re 
doubling that program. 
 
We’ve put in a $2 million increase of training opportunities. 
We’re going to create 1,000 new training opportunities for the 
young people of Saskatchewan bringing our total, as a result of 
this budget, to 27,000 opportunities for young people to train in 
this province — 27,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are providing another 
$3.4 million to expand the Saskatchewan bursary program, 
increasing bursary assistance to 10,000 students in our 
province. This budget will provide for 16,500 student loans. 
 
This budget will reserve 86 seats for Saskatchewan young 
people at post-secondary institutions across Canada where they 
can study and bring that knowledge home. We’re reserving 
seats for our young people. 
 
In the North, 600 training opportunities through the northern 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

skills training program. This year, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This year, Mr. Speaker, we are 
increasing the graduate tax credit program to provide that 
valuable tax credit to those students who will graduate in 
Saskatchewan and stay in Saskatchewan and work in 
Saskatchewan, to help them get started in Saskatchewan. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is a . . . clearly a promise made and a promise 
being kept. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a 6.8, a 6.8 per cent 
increase for SIAST which will include $900,000, Mr. Speaker, 
for the northern education program, the northern nurses training 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for our universities, our federated and 
affiliated colleges equally, a 6.8 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s $16.2 million and, Mr. Speaker, that includes the $6.7 
million centennial, centennial grant to the universities that the 
universities can freeze the tuition fees while we sit down with 
the universities and the students to look at the whole question of 
accessibility and affordability for students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that invests in the young people of 
Saskatchewan. I challenge the members opposite, will they . . . 
Well I’ll ask the member from . . . or the former leader of the 
opposition, will he stand and support a budget that provides this 
for the students of Saskatchewan? Well he’s got a lot to say 
from his seat. Let him get on his feet and we’ll know what he’s 
doing in a few moments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night, night before last, Saturday evening, I 
had the opportunity to be at Credit Union Place in Saskatoon. I 
was there with the Chair of the centennial, the member from 
Moose Jaw North. I was there with Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor and with about 7,000 or more other spectators in the 
stands as we watched the figure skating clubs of Saskatchewan 
come together to do a centennial gala, a centennial skate show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to report to members of the legislature 
today that never before in the history of Canada has as large a 
skating program been assembled as what we observed in 
Saskatoon on Saturday night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Never before. Right on the ice, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, right . . . Well the members opposite 
laugh about the figure skaters in Saskatchewan. That’s their 
choice. They can laugh at the show. 
 
But we’re not laughing. We’re applauding them, Mr. Speaker, 
because there was 1,000-plus young Saskatchewan people on 
the ice at Credit Union Place in Saskatoon on Saturday night — 
over 1,000 Saskatchewan young people. And at the end of it, 
Mr. Speaker, they came out and they all were wearing a 
centennial T-shirt — 1,000 young people on the ice. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I saw right there, right there on the ice in 

Saskatoon, I saw the future of Saskatchewan. I say when there’s 
a lot of tomorrow in this province, we saw the tomorrow right 
there on the ice in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what this budget is all about. That’s what 
this budget is all about. It is investing in those very people. And 
the member from Rosetown can harp from his seat and criticize 
it. The Leader of the Opposition probably will vote against it. 
This government is going to vote for the young people of 
Saskatchewan. You make no mistake about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we went to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We talked about making life affordable in 
Saskatchewan. We talked about public health care and quality 
of life. We talked about building a green and prosperous 
economy. And we talked about investing in the young people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We go to the people of Saskatchewan with a vision. We go with 
a plan. We don’t come up with a new plan every six months 
like they do over there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Every three months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Every three months, I guess it is now. 
We’re down to three months. We’re The Way Up and then 
we’re the way out and then we’re Grow Saskatchewan and then 
we . . . What are we this week? I don’t know. 
 
We go to the people of Saskatchewan with a vision and a plan, 
and we build to that plan, Mr. Speaker. This budget builds to 
that plan and it builds in a fiscally sustainable, a fiscally 
sustainable manner, Mr. Speaker. This is the 12th consecutive 
balanced budget delivered by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As a result of this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
as a result of this budget, we now are . . . we now carry the 
lowest debt that we’ve carried for 14 years in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is the careful financial 
stewardship of this government that has earned us consecutive 
credit rating upgrades for the last 11. And today, Mr. Speaker, 
for the first time in two decades, this province enjoys a AA 
credit rating from both major American bond rating agencies, 
Mr. Speaker. That is fiscal stewardship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, just before I take my 
place, I want to point out the kind of fiscal stewardship we’ve 
heard from over there in the course of this budget debate. 
 
Although why should I be surprised? I guess, why should I be 
surprised when a few weeks ago the Finance critic over there 
was being interviewed about the money that we earned from the 
federal government last year in terms of making up for some 
equalization injustice from the past — $360 million, that’s what 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

we earned — and what is it that the Finance critic across the 
way called? How did he describe $363 million? He called it a 
table scrap. He called it table scraps, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So am I surprised then, on the day after the budge, that very 
same Finance critic is on the radio while I happen to be driving 
in the car, budget morning, and he’s being interviewed. And the 
interviewer appropriately says, well you don’t like the 
government’s budget; what would you have done? Well in four 
blocks, Mr. Speaker, in four blocks, that Finance critic over 
there spent $1 billion — $250 million a block. It was just good 
luck, Mr. Speaker, I got to where I was going and shut the radio 
off. The province would be going broke. That’s the kind of 
fiscal and financial stewardship you’ll get from these folks. 
 
Now I ask myself, why is this? Why is this? Haven’t they 
learned? Haven’t they learned? Well you know, Mr. Speaker, 
there are some I think in this province — I’m not sure in this 
House — but I believe there are some in this province who have 
graduated from the London School of Economics. I had . . . 
Very good, very good school of economics. I had opportunity to 
graduate from the University of Regina’s school of economics 
— I would argue also a very good school of economics. 
 
But what we’ve heard today from the member from Regina is 
how many members over there were busy attending the Devine 
school of economics? Quite a few of them, if I may say so. 
Quite a few of them seem to have learned their economics of 
public stewardship from the Conservative governments of Brian 
Mulroney and Grant Devine. That’s where they learned their 
economics. 
 
So is it any surprise at all, is it any surprise at all these folks on 
a day after day after day will stand up in this House and say cut 
the taxes, cut the taxes, cut the taxes? You know they say, Mr. 
Speaker, you shouldn’t do a careful review of business taxation, 
which is recommended by the chartered accountants of 
Saskatchewan, you shouldn’t do a careful review of business 
taxation; you should just holus-bolus cut everything in sight. 
That’s what they say. Cut the taxes, cut the taxes, cut the tax. 
 
But then what do they say? Spend more on agriculture, spend 
more on highways, spend more on education, spend more on 
health, spend more . . . And then they say cut the taxes, cut the 
taxes, cut the taxes. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s absolutely no limit to the 
amount of money they’ll spend in opposition and no limit, I’m 
afraid, they would spend in government because they trained 
under this Conservative school of economics. That’s how 
they’ve trained. And that, Mr. Speaker, ought to concern any 
thinking person, any thinking taxpayer in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we laid before this legislature a budget that is 
based on the vision and the priorities of this government, a 
budget that reflects the campaign commitments that we made to 
the people of Saskatchewan, a budget that focuses on building a 
green and a prosperous economy, a budget that focuses on 
building an opportunity-filled province for the young people of 
Saskatchewan as our legacy from the centennial. That’s what 
this budget does, Mr. Speaker. That is why I will be voting 
against the amendment and will be voting for the budget. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter the budget debate here today 
and in so doing, I do want to take this opportunity to again 
acknowledge the people that allow me to do this job, by and 
large the constituents of Swift Current as well as my family. 
 
It’s always a pleasure to participate in a debate as important as 
that of the budget. I’d also like to acknowledge the work of the 
opposition Finance critic, the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs, who’s done an excellent job in executing his duties as 
a critic. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a centennial year in Saskatchewan. 
We’re 100 years old. And not just that, Mr. Speaker, but it is a 
year when we can look around us in the province of 
Saskatchewan and see the amazing potential, in very real terms, 
of Saskatchewan. We look around and we see for example, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we see resource commodity prices, and 
specifically the prices of commodities that we have right here in 
Saskatchewan, at all-time highs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see the price of oil . . . This morning driving in today I think 
the price of oil, west Texas crude, was trading in Europe at over 
$58 a barrel. We see forecasts of that growing over this year. 
Not so good news for those of us who drive vehicles with V6’s 
or V8’s, but good news for the economy potentially, potentially 
good news for our economy and frankly good news for the 
treasury of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We see strong prices in terms of potash commodity prices, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The same is true for uranium. 
 
And so given the fact that it is the centennial budget, given the 
fact that we’ve come through a year where we’ve enjoyed, the 
government has enjoyed record revenues from oil and gas and 
other commodities, I think it’s fair for people to have had fairly 
high hopes for this budget. I think people across this province, 
those in the economy and others who are waiting for a little 
relief, frankly, after tax increases from this government last 
time around in their last budget, ’04-05, I think expectations 
were high. 
 
And there was a little bit of hope out in Saskatchewan that 
given the fact that this government had a billion two more than 
they budgeted for last year and at a bare minimum almost a half 
a billion more already going forward, looking forward to this 
year, more in revenue than they budgeted for last year. It’s 
about a billion six or seven, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In light of 
that, I think there was a real hope on the part of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan that they could expect something 
more from this NDP government. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the response to the 
provincial budget that we saw here after it was delivered, and 
across the province . . . And by the way, notwithstanding what 
the opposition had to say; never mind what the official 
opposition had to say. If you just look at the response to this 
budget from different groups across Saskatchewan, you have to 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

ask yourself the question, how could this government fail so 
badly? How could they manage to do so little with so much, as 
the opposition Finance critic said. 
 
As I was out in the rotunda when the budget was delivered, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I couldn’t believe it, every single group 
that was interviewed — APAS [Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan], farm groups, SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], groups 
that represent the urban municipalities of the province of 
Saskatchewan, School Boards Association, teachers, nurses — 
they all said the same thing. They all said this budget let them 
down, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This budget let the province of 
Saskatchewan down. 
 
You walk a little, you walk around the beautiful plants that are 
arranged out in the rotunda and listen in on what the business 
community had to say about the budget. We heard from the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business. We heard from 
the taxpayers’ association. We heard from different groups who 
represent both taxpayers and those men and women and 
co-operatives who create jobs here in Saskatchewan for 
Saskatchewan families. What did they have to say about the 
budget? They didn’t like it either, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
said there was no long-term vision. There was no long-term 
plan for the economy. There was no plan to address the 
important competitive issues in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why? Why would they all say that? You just heard the Premier 
speak — sounds like he has been maybe on a different planet 
based on his response to the budget. Everything’s sort of 
sunshine and roses if you listen to the Premier. The people out 
in the rotunda that represent the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan, 
health care workers in the province of Saskatchewan, they don’t 
agree with the Premier. They think the budget was a disaster, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Why would they think that? Well I think we should try to 
answer that question. Why does all of Saskatchewan hate the 
Premier’s budget and the Premier loves it so much? It’s a fair 
question. 
 
Start with taxation, perhaps. Let’s start with that particular 
issue. Maybe when we look at this government’s taxation 
policies, we will find out why the people of the province all 
think the budget’s not very good and the Premier quite likes it. 
 
Did this government take the opportunity to lower what are the 
highest income tax rates for the lowest income families in 
Canada? Did they take the opportunity to do that? We laid out 
the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Finance critic and other 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs have stood in this place and said, 
did you know in Saskatchewan our low-income families pay the 
highest tax rates in the Dominion of Canada? And did you 
know that to move in terms of the exemption — even over a 
multi-year program, if that’s what the government wanted; we 
offered that — the cost, $90 million, $90 million. 
 
We asked those questions of the government. The people of the 
province seemed to think it was a pretty reasonable idea, a 
pretty good idea to get a little bit more competitive with respect 
to those low-income families. What did the government do? 

Did they give some of the money they took from them in the 
last budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they increased the PST 
last budget? You remember that. I think members on this side 
of the House remember that. Maybe the Deputy Premier from 
Yorkton remembers that. I hope so. 
 
I know that he remembers campaigning in 2003, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I know he remembers that because he was intricately 
involved in that NDP campaign. You’ll remember, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ll remember that he cooked up that deal with the 
. . . [inaudible] . . . taxpayer-paid lawyers in the SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] case to 
try to get a little political action in the campaign, actually 
manipulated the courts for their own electoral gain in the last 
election. You remember that. That was that Deputy Premier 
right there, the member for Yorkton. 
 
You remember what else he did in the campaign, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he and the other MLAs opposite? They went around 
the province and campaigned on lower taxes. You take a look at 
the campaign platform that that Deputy Premier, the architect of 
the NDP campaign team, must have authorized in addition to 
these tactics involving the courts, and now we find out, also 
interfering in collective bargaining earlier today. But also he 
authorized, he stamped his approval on a platform that said if 
you vote for the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the current 
leader of the NDP, if you vote for me, he said, the Deputy 
Premier, I’ll lower your taxes. 
 
That’s what he did. And what happened in the last budget, the 
first budget for the member for Regina Victoria since he 
became the finance minister? What happened? They increased 
the PST, took $140 million from the pockets of Saskatchewan 
families, from businesses, and from co-operatives, from 
municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan, $140 million. 
 
And then the intervening months occur of course, Mr. Speaker, 
and we see the price of oil go up, and we see the government 
coffers swell by 1 billion more than they budgeted for, 1.2 
billion. And so those families that had their pockets picked for 
$140 million were asking themselves in advance of that budget, 
are we going to get some back? Will they roll back the PST? Or 
maybe they’ll accept the Saskatchewan Party’s idea with 
respect to low-income families and increase their exemption. 
 
Did they do that, Mr. Speaker? No they didn’t do that. The 
government coffers swelled, but the wallets of Saskatchewan 
families stayed exactly as they were, as they were after the ’04 
budget, a budget that came months after they campaigned on 
lower taxes and then increased the taxes in the budget. 
 
What about other areas of taxation? You know, property taxes 
in the province of Saskatchewan may be the number one 
taxation issue. Both the municipal and the school portion of 
property taxes, it affects business. It affects residences. And you 
know what it is, Mr. Speaker? It’s a capital tax. That’s what it 
is. It’s not based on income for the company or the co-operative 
or the family. It’s based on capital. And I think we agree, 
certainly on this side of the House, and the chambers of 
commerce agree and those who create jobs and wealth in any 
jurisdiction where they might be agree that these capital taxes 
that we have in Saskatchewan — the highest in the country, the 
highest on the continent — are the most insidious kind of tax 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

because they tax capital, and they drive investment away, and 
they drive job creation to other jurisdictions. 
 
So if the property tax is a capital tax — and I think it’s fair to 
say it is — what has the government done with respect to 
property tax? Well in this budget they do precisely nothing. 
They re-announce an initiative from some months ago where 
they said they’re going to give back $55 million of property tax, 
an 8 per cent across the board relief for property tax in the 
province of Saskatchewan — $55 million, Mr. Speaker, almost 
$100 million less than what they took in the PST. 
 
And that relates directly to the Boughen report. For that we 
have to go back to that campaign of 2003 where the Deputy 
Premier, who’s listening carefully now, he was in charge of that 
campaign, as I’ve highlighted already, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in that election campaign what else did he authorize 
the Premier to say, because I don’t think the Premier makes a 
move without talking first to the member for Yorkton. What 
else did he tell the Premier to say to the people of the province? 
He said, tell them that we can accept the recommendations of 
the Boughen Commission; that was the commission on property 
tax which said increase the PST but provide equal or greater 
property tax relief. Remember that? He said to the Premier go 
out and campaign on that. Say, we can accept that; we can do 
that, if you just vote for us again. 
 
And the people of the province by the narrowest of margins 
vote for them again. And what do they do with that report, you 
know, the one that says, increase the PST but provide property 
tax relief? What do they do with that report? They threw it in 
the garbage because they only did the tax increase part. They 
gave back, they gave back just barely over a third of that in this 
announcement here. So on this important issue of the property 
tax, the capital tax in Saskatchewan, they provide no direct 
relief. 
 
Now there’s a form of indirect taxation as well, Mr. Speaker, 
that can happen with property tax when you refuse to properly 
or adequately fund municipal partners, municipal governments, 
when you fail to provide the multi-year revenue sharing as the 
Saskatchewan Party has proposed. And what did the city of 
Regina have to say on this count with respect to the budget? It 
says, quote: 
 

The 2005 Provincial Budget does nothing to address the 
basic needs of Regina. An increase in . . . [funding] was 
desperately needed to . . . reduce the heavy reliance [of] 
the city . . . on property taxes to fund programs and 
services. 

 
And so what will happen to property tax owners in the city of 
Regina? They are facing a . . . how much is the tax increase 
they’re facing? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . four and a half 
per cent tax increase. The Premier, maybe he was having fun, I 
don’t know; it looked like he might have been having some fun 
wondering how members opposite will vote. Well I ask this 
question, Mr. Speaker, to the member for Dewdney, Regina 
Dewdney, and the Finance minister himself, the member for 
Regina Elphinstone . When they vote for this budget, they’re 
voting for another property tax increase for the people of 
Regina. How will they vote? Will they have the courage of their 
convictions to vote against this budget? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The lack of new money in terms of revenue 
sharing . . . even though they’ve got it, sitting on a billion two; a 
billion two last year, a half a billion this year, they’re sitting on 
that. They’ve got that maybe put aside thinking they’ll come up 
with some sort of gimmickry, some election gimmickry next 
time around, but they’re sitting on that money, and what does 
that mean to the taxpayers of the city of Saskatoon? 
 
Seven per cent just on the municipal portion, never mind the 
education part, we’ll get to that in a moment. On the municipal 
portion, taxes of a 7 per cent hike, so I’ll ask the question again. 
What will the member for Saskatoon Sutherland do when in a 
few moments we’re asked to vote on this budget, because if he 
wants to represent the people of Saskatoon Sutherland he’ll 
stand in his place and vote for the opposition amendment and 
against this property tax-hiking NDP budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the issue of taxation, what about the business 
taxes that we pay in the province of Saskatchewan? For some 
period of time the chambers of commerce and business groups 
have been saying we have relied too heavily on taxing the 
people that create wealth. We’ve got to stop doing that; there’s 
an imbalance. And there is an imbalance. 
 
In fact, here’s what the imbalance is, Mr. Speaker. In 
Saskatchewan, 60 per cent of the taxes that businessmen and 
women pay, that entrepreneurs pay in Saskatchewan, is related 
to something other than income. In other words it doesn’t 
matter if they make any money under the NDP business 
environment, they’re paying 60 per cent of their taxes anyway; 
40 per cent they pay based on their income. 
 
Do you know what the Canadian average is, Mr. Speaker, in 
Canada? Eighty per cent of the business tax revenue collected in 
the country from businesses across Canada come from income. 
Twenty per cent comes from capital or investment. Now does 
that sound like a disparity that needs to be reviewed? I think it 
sounds like a disparity that requires action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has finally said, well maybe 
we ought to have a look at this, and so they’re appointing 
another review, Mr. Speaker. But it’s hard to take them 
seriously. It’s hard to take them at their word because the last 
time they reviewed taxes — you remember, that was that 
Boughen Commission I just talked about, where they talked 
about lowering property taxes by increasing the PST — we only 
wound up with a tax hike, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No wonder businesses were in the rotunda. Business groups 
were saying, you know what? We don’t need to review this. We 
need to do something about it because we don’t trust their 
reviews. We don’t trust the fact that this NDP government 
understands that we’ve got to do something about this problem. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker, the proof of that, the 
proof that Saskatchewan entrepreneurs have no reason to trust 
all of those members who are listening here today, why they 
don’t have a reason to trust them, Mr. Speaker, is this: because 
in the same budget that they commit to doing a business tax 
review, to potentially lowering the dependence on business 
taxes, what do they do? As the member for Weyburn-Big 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

Muddy and the opposition Energy critic has pointed out, they 
increase business taxes by 20 million this year, 40 million next 
year. They actually increase the taxes on capital. Who would 
take them seriously? Who in business would take them 
seriously? 
 
You know, there’s other examples of why the business 
community won’t take them seriously. You know, a few weeks 
ago in this Assembly when the Premier was going to announce 
his enhanced oil recovery initiative, we asked the same 
question. Why should they take him seriously? 
 
When in the election campaign a letter, again probably 
authorized by the Deputy Premier, the member for Yorkton, a 
fundraising letter from the Premier of Saskatchewan, from the 
Leader of the NDP to various, I guess, supporters of the NDP, 
what did he say about businesses in the province of 
Saskatchewan, those who he now says he wants to work with to 
grow the province? He said this, and I quote: 
 

Big corporations see a successful provincial economy and 
want to take over the most profitable parts of it . . . so they 
finance a political party, in this case the Saskatchewan 
Party, to get it for them. 
 

That’s what they really think. That’s what they really think, Mr. 
Speaker, of businesses. They say they’re committed to a 
business tax review. They increase the business tax and then 
they send out fundraising letters that say, that accuse the 
businesses of Saskatchewan of being greedy, of just wanting to 
take over part of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They have no credibility. They have no credibility. And if it 
weren’t for those two examples, we could also talk about 
government-directed hours, most available hours legislation. 
And there’s the Minister of Labour, when she set the economy 
of this province back years by musing, musing about that 
particular initiative before she was driven off her position by 
the opposition and by these businesses of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I want to get through the budget. And remember we’re 
answering the question, Mr. Speaker, we’re answering the 
question, why would the government, with so much money, 
how could they have messed up so bad? Why doesn’t anyone in 
Saskatchewan like it? 
 
Let’s turn to health care. Now in health care there are additional 
resources committed by the NDP — about $192 million. And 
the Premier stood up moments ago and took credit for it. He 
said, we have put in $192 million more into the budget. But 
who, who put the money in, Mr. Speaker? The federal 
government. 
 
In fact, if you look at the Canada health transfer and the 
equalization money and the . . . or the, actually the specific 
health care arrangement with the federal government, it more 
than covers off the money that they claim they put into this 
budget. 
 
And with respect to health care, Mr. Speaker, I think everybody 
in the province understands and everyone in the country 
understands that increasingly it seems more and more resources 

are being required of health care — financial resources. But you 
know what, Mr. Speaker? There’s only a few people in this 
province — or well in this legislature; we’ll say that — and a 
growing number of people in Saskatchewan and Canada that are 
saying, in addition to those resources, are we taking the right 
look at health care and is there an indication in this budget the 
government’s prepared to do it, that the government’s prepared 
to ask the question, are we spending the . . . is the money that 
we’re spending getting to the front line or are we spending too 
much on administration? 
 
Basic questions, Mr. Speaker, that aren’t answered in the 
budget. So we continue to throw more money into health care. 
And under this government with its plans, its refusal to look at 
the system, we see health care waiting lists increasing. 
 
Moving along, Mr. Speaker, we know, you know, the Premier 
talked a little bit about learning. This government, in education, 
what did they do, Mr. Speaker, to the foundational operating 
grants? Zap, you’re frozen. They froze those foundation 
operating grants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What will that mean for school boards in the province of 
Saskatchewan? They’re going to have to increase taxes. And 
again I wonder how the members for Regina will vote when 
their school board perhaps increases local taxes, not because of 
anything the school board has done but because of the NDP 
government that they support, the budget that they may actually 
vote for, if you can believe it, here in a few moments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They cut the student aid program. We heard the Premier talk 
about all of the, all the good that the government’s doing with 
respect to post-secondary. Is there a long-term, multi-year plan 
for funding post-secondary? That’s the long-term solution to 
tuitions by the way, Mr. Speaker, that we propose in our party. 
Did they talk about that? No. 
 
In fact they cut student financial assistance in the budget, the 
same budget that the Premier says is all about youth. If this 
budget is all about youth, Mr. Speaker, with its lack of 
long-term vision and specific measures like cutting student 
funding, heaven forbid they bring in a budget that isn’t all about 
youth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the largest parts of this budget, it 
fails. That’s why people didn’t like it. It failed on health care; it 
failed on education. 
 
What about rural Saskatchewan? It completely let down rural 
Saskatchewan. It abandoned them. It gave them no hope that 
they’d reverse their changes they made to the farm fuel tax 
rebate last budget when they said times were tough, even 
though they’re sitting on a billion two and another 6 or 700 
million on top of that at a minimum. It didn’t reverse anything 
that they had done. None of the attacks on rural Saskatchewan 
are reversed. Is there an indication in this budget that they’ll 
even fully fund CAIS? There’s nothing in it. Despite all of this 
money, there’s nothing in it for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Is there any indication in this budget about a long-term plan for 
the future? There isn’t, Mr. Speaker. At our centennial, time 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

when the government should be talking about the future, at a 
time when there should be amazing momentum for us to build 
on, the government is silent on the future. 
 
The only thing they have to say are things that we heard from 
the Premier last fall when he came back from Ottawa from 
meetings, and he was asked about the future of Saskatchewan, 
us being a have province and have-not equalization . . . a 
have-not province, Mr. Speaker. You know what the Premier 
said? He tried to lower expectations for Saskatchewan. He said, 
we’ll always be in and out of equalization. Under his 
leadership, apparently, we’ll always need welfare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the bold vision that we get in our centennial year from a 
government sitting on a billion two. That’s it? I think the 
Deputy Premier’s job’s not done yet. We know the Premier 
doesn’t make a move without him. I think it’s another . . . It’s 
time for another trip to the woodshed for the Premier. 
 
Because we can’t afford that kind of lack of vision in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Because where has it got us Mr. 
Speaker? We have the worst job creation record in the country 
in the last five years when we should have this momentum. We 
have the second worst population growth record in the country 
in the last two years. 
 
The Minister for Industry and Resources has been talking 
around the province how we only mentioned a few statistics for 
the last quarter of last year. It’s not true. We specifically talked 
about in the last two years we’ve gained 165 people. The 
government . . . this budget created more public sector jobs than 
that, frankly, Mr. Speaker — 165 people. 
 
What about the province of Manitoba — 17,000 more people, 
100 times greater than the province of Saskatchewan. Now with 
all due respect to our friends in Manitoba, I think, given the 
amazing resources of this province, we should every single year 
outperform our neighbours to the east, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And that day is coming. That day is coming but 
the government’s going to have to change first, I’m afraid. And 
so on the issue of vision, let me just conclude with this, Mr. 
Speaker. Don’t take the word, the words of the opposition if 
you don’t want to. The members opposite don’t have to. Let’s 
review what the newspaper headlines had to say the day after 
the budget. “Budget lacks path to future.” Quote: 
 

The pioneers whose visions and dreams laid the 
foundation [of the] province would be aghast at the utter 
banality [banality, I like that] that’s [becoming] the 
guiding spirit of Saskatchewan a century later. 

 
Here’s another one. Budget missing grand visions. 
Underwhelming, by the Federation of Labour, President Larry 
Hubich; disappointing, by Marilyn Braun-Pollon, the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday the headline on the front page of The 
StarPhoenix was, and I’m quoting, “Calvert and Co. walking 
blindly through [the] term”. And here’s what he had to say: 
 

We are now in the second year of a four-year financial 
plan, but there’s no clear picture of where the government 
wants to be at the end of it. The budget brought down 
Wednesday by Finance Minister Harry Van Mulligen 
continues the trend with a mish-mash of new spending 
initiatives, half starts and partial responses to political 
pressure . . . This is a government that campaigned on . . . 
lower taxes, but can’t find its way . . . to [even] roll back 
last year’s tax hikes even at a time when . . . enjoying a 
purse-busting surplus. 

 
Finally, Murray Mandryk, a columnist at the Leader-Post, says: 
 

. . . you truly have to wonder about a wealthy government 
that think not raising taxes is actually a budget highlight. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you also don’t catch a cold from this budget. 
Maybe that’s a budget highlight. And if you’re careful, you 
won’t get a paper cut from the budget. Maybe that’s also a 
budget highlight, Mr. Speaker. The truth is, you can’t find any 
highlights. There are more highlights from the NHL [National 
Hockey League] season that we’ve just witnessed, Mr. Speaker, 
than there are in this budget. 
 
And the sad reality is, we can’t afford that kind of lack of vision 
— not one moment longer, Mr. Speaker. And it’s why the 
people of this province, it’s why the people of this province are 
saying, bring on the election. Bring it on. It can’t happen soon 
enough. 
 
In the meantime, in the meantime, we can do our part and 
members opposite can do their part, Mr. Speaker. They can vote 
against this budget. And that’s what I intend to do. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I notice that the Minister of 
Finance is rising to speak. I would like to bring to everyone’s 
attention that if there’s any other members that wish to speak to 
this budget, the debate, they should rise and take their place 
now. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In the few minutes that I have available to me to close 
debate on the motion, I’d like to begin by thanking my family, 
my friends, my constituents, my colleagues for their support of 
this budget. I was honoured to stand in the House and deliver 
the centennial year budget on behalf of this government. I am 
proud of how this budget builds upon the tradition of supporting 
Saskatchewan priorities while at the same time reflecting a 
balanced, responsible approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this budget builds on 
our key commitments, the commitments that we outlined in the 
last election campaign; the commitments that we talk about in 
all our budgets, in all that we do. This builds on providing the 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

best health care in Canada, making Saskatchewan an affordable 
place to live and raise a family, building a future here for our 
young people, and building a green and prosperous economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to 
quickly deal with each of those areas, those key commitments, 
and to talk about how this budget — and I can’t do it 
exhaustively in the time I have available — but how this budget 
deals with those key commitments, and also to reflect on the 
debate that has taken place on the motion with respect to the 
budget. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, respect to health care. Our plan in health 
care is the action plan on health. This is a plan that we put 
forward a few years ago. It outlines our plan to deal with the 
major challenges in health care, provides a comprehensive 
framework for improving our health care system. 
 
That action plan includes four goals. Goal one is to improve 
access to quality health services. This budget provides money 
for surgical services, reduced waiting time for diagnostic 
services, expanding primary care services, enhancing home care 
services, additional funding for the cancer agency, money to 
support the cognitive disability strategy, money for an alcohol 
and drug strategy, catastrophic drug coverage, capital 
equipment, and capital construction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Those are specific commitments 
in this budget in support of that particular goal to improve 
access to quality health services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our second goal is effective promotion of health 
and prevention of illness. We have expanded the childhood 
vaccination program. We’re putting new money in for a 
provincial public health laboratory, and we’re expanding public 
health capacity. Those are specific measures in this budget to 
support our plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to goal number three, retention and recruitment of 
health care providers, we are providing for additional College 
of Medicine seats. There are 280 new, on top of 180 continuing 
return service bursaries for nursing, specialized health 
technicians, and other health disciplines. There’s 50 new, on top 
of 65 continuing return service bursaries . . . [inaudible] . . . 
positions. And 68 additional nursing seats and, Mr. Speaker, 
efforts to ensure safer workplaces, that is the prevention of 
needle stick injuries. With respect to that specific goal, again 
there are measures in this budget that support our plan. 
 
Our action plan has a fourth goal of efficient, accountable, 
quality health services, information technology, operational 
system reviews, energy conservation initiatives, and again our 
budget provides support for those initiatives in our allocation 
for health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to the area of health care, which now 
represents 44 per cent of our operating revenues, 44 per cent of 
the, if you like, the activities of government, we have a plan. 
We have a plan. 

The question is, Mr. Speaker, the question is, Mr. Speaker, what 
is their plan? What is their plan? Mr. Speaker, as I listen to 
them, as I listen to them, Mr. Speaker, they have no plan. They 
have no plan. Perhaps criticism of the plan that we have is their 
plan. Non-ending criticism of health care, Mr. Speaker, is their 
plan. 
 
And when I listen to their criticisms of health care which is 
usually done in the context of putting before the Legislative 
Assembly the details of someone who’s fallen through the 
cracks in the health care system — very few I might add — but 
providing the details of that, I get the sense that what they’re 
trying to do is to undermine public confidence in the public 
health care system. That is their plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, their 
plan is to undermine public confidence, their plan is to whet the 
public’s appetite for more radical reforms of the health care 
system because they have a different vision for health care. 
They have a different plan for health care, but they won’t talk 
about it in public, Mr. Speaker, but we know that’s where 
they’re going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — They’re hoping, Mr. Speaker, that 
by throwing out a few ideas here a few ideas there, that all of it 
you can masquerade that somehow as a plan. Well I can tell you 
a point here and a point there doesn’t add up to a plan, Mr. 
Speaker. They have no publicly announced plan for health care, 
have never had one and I don’t know if they’ll ever be . . . 
whether they will ever have the fortitude, Mr. Speaker, to 
publicly announce what their plan will be in anticipation of an 
election campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we have a plan, they 
have no plan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, could I just, could I 
just summarize in listening to some of the debate on this motion 
and their comments with respect to health care, it’s instructive 
now that they say that the additional funds that the government 
of Saskatchewan is putting into health care is all federal dollars, 
doesn’t reflect any commitment on the part of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Well all I can say, all I can say is that if you go, 
if you go to the budget and you see there that there’s an 
allocation for health in the area of $1.9 billion . . . $2.9 billion, 
$2.9 billion. 
 
And then you go to the other page and you see there the — you 
go, yes and you go to the other page and you see the allocation, 
the revenue item for the Canada Health Transfer, the Canada 
Health Transfer. And then you put the Canada Health Transfer 
on top of the budget for health care and you multiply it times 
100, you get a percentage figure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You get a percentage figure and that figure, Mr. Speaker, is 19 
per cent, 19 per cent versus 50 per cent that we had a decade 
ago. What we really need from this opposition is their support 
as we tackle Ottawa on these tough issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 
budget is also about ensuring that Saskatchewan is an 
affordable place to . . . for people to live and to raise their 
families. This budget provides another $55 million in property 
tax relief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget too, or this budget year, we remain committed to 
providing the lowest cost utility bundle of utility services for 
the people of Saskatchewan as we did in the last fiscal year. Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to utility prices we will be there for the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — And, Mr. Speaker, if the members 
would take care to simply understand how it is that our social 
services system worked, they would also appreciate how the 
shelter allowances that we have announced provide significant 
support for low-income people in Saskatchewan, very 
significant support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about youth and the Premier went 
through a long list of initiatives with respect to youth. I just 
want to reflect on one thing and that is when I read the debates 
and I listen to the members opposite and their contribution to 
debate, and especially when it comes to the K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] system. They can only talk about K 
to 12 education in the context of property tax payers. They can 
only talk about property tax payers. 
 
Not once, not once did the words quality of education ever 
cross their lips. Not once. There is no concern over on that side, 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the quality of education that we 
provide for our young people. That surely should be our number 
one objective when it comes to education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — That’s our objective, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s why we’re prepared to show leadership on issues such as 
school district restructuring and they simply provide 
followership — leadership over here, followership over there. 
Mr. Speaker, we remain committed to a quality education for 
our young people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of not 
saying certain things, Mr. Speaker, and speaking of a green and 
prosperous economy, one of the amazing things in this 
legislature is how it is that members opposite, members 
opposite simply cannot say the words green. They can’t say the 
word green. The word green never crosses their lips. It’s like 
it’s some dirty word or something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to them get with the real world. 
Everyone on this planet is concerned about the environment. 
They want to see governments provide leadership. In this 
budget we are providing leadership. All they can do is criticize 
and live with their people who would deny global warming and 
their funny scientists who . . . 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the 
point-of-sale purchases of Energy Star appliances, funds for the 
Great Sand Hills environmental review, abandoned uranium 
mine cleanup, Mr. Speaker, money for the Office of Energy 
Conservation, employment for young people on our Green 
Teams, continuing with our plan to increase energy generation 
from wind power, Mr. Speaker — this government has a plan 
not just for a prosperous economy but to ensure that in the 
future and now we will have a green economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of a 
prosperous economy, there are some things that you just can’t 
hide, some things that you can’t hide. We can’t ignore and we 
can’t hide the reality of what’s taking place in rural 
Saskatchewan, that our agricultural producers are suffering. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we will be there for our producers. 
We will be there for rural Saskatchewan. We won’t be there 
simply with rhetoric, as is the case of the members on the other 
side. No, Mr. Speaker, we will be there with cold, hard cash. 
Have done that before and will be there again, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, not with words, but with real demonstrable support, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Also can’t hide what’s taking 
place in the urban economies in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Booming, booming urban economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Growth last year that was 3.2 per cent that I know that 
the Leader of the Opposition, that’s never enough. But 3.2 per 
cent last year on top of — what was it? — 4.5 per cent the year 
before. And the projection for this year is 3 per cent above the 
Canadian average, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is tremendous growth and this is growth that’s borne out in 
unemployment that’s low, in employment increases that are 
high, Mr. Speaker, investment intentions for next year which is 
double the national average. But still, Mr. Speaker, the Leader 
of the Opposition says, oh we’re not doing enough. 
 
Well all I can say is that all the arm waving in the world, all the 
arm waving in the world and all the gnashing of his teeth can’t 
hide the fact that what is taking place in the urban economies of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And just . . . and he can’t, he can’t 
hide, he can’t hide for example what we see in The Southwest 
Booster in his own hometown where the headline is “Economic 
boom expected.” In this case to drive transit improvements. 
And this is a study that’s done by people in Swift Current and 
they say the primary case for improved transit in the city is the 
current economic boom. The current economic boom. 
 
In presenting their report, the chairperson noted economic 
activity is occurring on several fronts including new businesses, 
expansion of existing businesses, regional projects, and 
downtown, residential, and industrial development. He can 
deny it. The reality is right there in his hometown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I could go on at 
great length of what’s taking place in the hometown of the 
Leader of the Opposition. But in the time that I have available, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I’ve got time unless you’re prepared 
to give me an extra hour, Mr. Speaker. We could certainly get 
into it. 
 
Let me just say, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to economic 
development our record, our record, the record of the NDP in 
Saskatchewan is much, much better than any record that we 
have from the opposition members — much, much better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, very briefly I’d like 
to touch on the issue of fiscal management and debt and credit 
ratings. And I guess all I would say to the people of 
Saskatchewan is this. We are politicians. They are politicians. 
They are elected here for their political analysis and the people 
of Saskatchewan can rely on what it is that they have to say 
about our fiscal management. 
 
On the other hand, they might also want to pay attention to what 
it is the credit rating agencies are saying about what is taking 
place with respect to fiscal management in the province of 
Saskatchewan because then you get a completely different 
picture. Where it’s nothing but doom and gloom and nitpicking 
from their side, the credit rating agencies present a very 
different picture of what is taking place here — the same credit 
rating agencies that have increased Saskatchewan’s credit 
ratings 11 times in the last 10 years. Why? Because of sound 
fiscal management here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — We have credit rating agencies 
that like our sound financial management. They like the 
moderate tax supported debt. They like the increasingly 
diversified economy — not to be confused with the political 
analysis, Mr. Speaker, from the people on the other side. The 
credit rating agencies, we shouldn’t forget, they make it their 
business to know about our finances. That’s how they make 
their livelihood, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our debt, our debt, they can speak about 
debt all they want, but the reality is our debt as a percentage of 
our gross domestic product has gone from 69 per cent when it 
peaked in 1993 — all because of the efforts of the members 
opposite — is now down to 28 per cent of GDP [gross domestic 
product]. This is a phenomenal improvement, Mr. Speaker — a 
phenomenal improvement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Everybody in the whole world 
sees it but not the members opposite of course, Mr. Speaker. 
And of course now our debt is at the lowest point, our lowest 
point, in 14 years. And, oh yes, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, 
one of two provinces in Canada in the last nine years to actually 
pay down on its government supported debt. That’s very 
significant, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And again one of the reasons that the financial community 
outside Saskatchewan says, you know, that Saskatchewan 
government, they know what they’re doing; they provide sound 
financial management. But you would never, never hear that 
from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, again I 
think our record on financial management, our record of 
financial responsibility is a good record. 
 
I’ll let them speak to their own record, Mr. Speaker. Do they 
have a record, because some take the position that they’re a 
brand new party and they have no record. Well, that’s a record 
in itself. But just when I get to think that then the member for 
Souris Cannington reminds us that they have a record because 
he’s busy in the debate on the budget defending the record of 
Mr. Devine; that same Mr. Devine that racked up our debt, Mr. 
Speaker, and left us struggling at times to cope with the fiscal 
challenges that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were, there were some comments in this 
budget about apprentices. There are two apprentices on the 
other side — the Leader of the Opposition and the opposition 
Finance critic, both of whom served as apprentices under the 
Devine administration. They’ve learned well. Mr. Devine says, 
promise the people the stars, the sun, the moons, everything — 
anything to get elected. That’s what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget addresses itself to the fiscal realities of 
Saskatchewan — something they will never do. It’s a good 
budget. It’s a budget that deserves to be supported. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. The 
House will come to order. Order. 
 
The Minister of Finance has taken his seat. It is the duty of the 
Speaker at this time to put the budget motions. Before the 
Assembly there are two questions, first of all the original budget 
motion put by the Minister of Finance, the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, and seconded by the member for Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
and then the amendment to that main motion put by the member 
for Saskatoon Silver Springs and seconded by the member for 
Canora-Pelly, which reads: 
 

That all words after “That the Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 
 
disagrees with the general budgetary policy of the 
government because the Premier and cabinet have 
betrayed low- and modest-income earners by not 
increasing the basic personal exemption for . . . 

 
Order, please, members, order. 
 

. . . for people who earn less than 35,000 a year, have not 
included indexation to the food allowance for people 
living on social assistance, have predetermined the 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

outcome of collective bargaining for teachers and nurses, 
have frozen funding for K to 12 education, have not 
committed to fully fund the province’s share of the 
Canadian agricultural income stabilization program, have 
not addressed revenue sharing with municipalities, and 
have not laid out a long-term vision for the province for 
the next 100 years, therefore this provincial government 
does not enjoy the confidence of this Assembly. 

 
Members, we will now vote on the amendment to the main 
motion, the amendment put by the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs, seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Those who favour the amendment, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the amendment, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members 
for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:33 until 16:36.] 
 
The Speaker: — The vote we’re about to take is the 
amendment to the main motion, moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, seconded by the member for 
Canora-Pelly. Would those in favour of the amendment, please 
rise. 
 

[Yeas — 27] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Chisholm McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Morgan 
Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the amendment to the 
main motion, please rise. 
 

[Nays — 29] 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Morin Borgerson  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 27; 
those opposed, 29. 
 

The Speaker: — I declare the amendment defeated. We will 
now take the vote on the original motion as moved by the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for 
Moose Jaw North, which reads: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 
 

Those who favour the motion, please rise. Pardon me. Pardon 
me. Pardon me. I’m anticipating incorrectly. Those in favour of 
the motion, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion, say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I do believe that the ayes have it. Call in the 
members for a recorded vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:39 to 16:40.] 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll take the voice vote on the . . . 
individual vote on the original motion, the motion moved by the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for 
Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 
 

Those who favour the motion, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 29] 
 
Calvert Addley Lautermilch 
Hagel Van Mulligen Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Crofford Prebble Forbes 
Wartman Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 
Hamilton Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Quennell 
Trew Yates Taylor 
Morin Borgerson  
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 27] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
D’Autremont Krawetz Draude 
Hermanson Bjornerud Stewart 
Wakefield Chisholm McMorris 
Eagles Gantefoer Harpauer 
Bakken Cheveldayoff Huyghebaert 
Allchurch Brkich Weekes 
Kerpan Merriman Morgan 
Dearborn Hart Kirsch 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
29; those opposed, 27. 
 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2005 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move several motions in regards to referring 
certain estimates to the various policy field committees. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to make several motions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister of Finance. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 34, Chief Electoral Officer; 
vote 76, Children’s Advocate; 
vote 57, Conflict of Interest Commissioner; 
vote 55, Information and Privacy Commissioner; 
vote 21, Legislative Assembly; 
vote 56, Ombudsman; 
vote 28, Provincial Auditor; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on House Services. 

 
I move, seconded by the member from Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the 
member for Melfort. Will the members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 36, Community Resources and Employment; 
vote 73, Corrections and Public Safety; 

vote 27, Culture, Youth and Recreation; 
vote 3, Justice; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Melfort. Will the 
members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 26, Environment; 
vote 12, 18, 175, 176, 177, Finance; 
vote 23, Industry and Resources; 
vote 20, Labour; 
vote 35, Saskatchewan Research Council; 
vote 71, Fiscal Stabilization Fund; 
vote 165, Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 151, Municipal Financing Corporation of 

Saskatchewan; 
vote 154, Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation; 
vote 152, Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 
vote 153, Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation; 
vote 140, Saskatchewan Water Corporation; 
vote 150, SaskEnergy Incorporated; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion just read by the member for 
Regina Douglas Park and seconded by the member from 
Melfort, will members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

The following estimates and supplementary estimates 



April 4, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

being: 
vote 25, First Nations and Métis Relations; 
vote 16, 17, and 145, Highways and Transportation; 
vote 75 and 163, Northern Affairs; 
vote 43 and 144, Rural Development; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — Regarding the motion moved by the member 
for Regina Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Melfort, 
will members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 74, Information Technology Office; 
vote 13, Property Management; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 
vote 53, Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation; 
be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Melfort. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion moved by the member for Regina 
Douglas Park, seconded by the member for Melfort, will the 
members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:48.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2327 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2327 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2327 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2327 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................2327 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2327 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................2327 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................2328 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2328 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2328 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2328 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2328 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................2328 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................2329 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2329 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk Assistant ........................................................................................................................................................................2329 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................2329 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2329 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................2329 
  Prebble .....................................................................................................................................................................................2330 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2330 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Tribute to Pope John Paul II 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2330 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2330 
 National Ukrainian Centennial Celebration 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2331 
 Remembering Pope John Paul II 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................2331 
 Saskatoon Principal Honoured 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2331 
 25th Anniversary of CJWW Radio 600 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2331 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Timing of Memorandum of Agreement Regarding Health Care Workers 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2332 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2332 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2336 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2337 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2337 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2337 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2337 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................2337 
  Bakken .....................................................................................................................................................................................2340 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2344 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2349 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2353 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ...............................................................................................................................................2357 
 Recorded Division (motion) .......................................................................................................................................................2357 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Committee 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2358 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




