

















































Hansard: April 29, 2005


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVII NO. 102A  FRIDAY, APRIL 29, 2005, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Bakken Lackey, Brenda SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Hon. Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Hon. Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2745 
 April 29, 2005 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
back in my constituency yesterday and avoided Highway 32 for 
obvious reasons. The prayer I am about to read will tell you 
why. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these three pages of petitions are signed by 
residents from the communities of Cabri, Abbey, and Lancer. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitions with 
respect to the need for group home spaces in Swift Current 
continue to roll in. The prayer of this one reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to provide the funding required for 
additional residential spaces for Swift Current residents 
with lifelong disabilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise and present this 
petition on behalf of citizens of my home community of Swift 
Current, of Wymark, of Herbert, and of Selkirk, Manitoba. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I have a petition to present on behalf of people from 
my constituency who are very concerned about the crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reduction. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all necessary actions to reverse the 
increase in crop insurance premiums and the reduction in 
coverage. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this is signed by residents of Radville. I so present. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are very concerned about the spread of crystal 
meth. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will deal 
with crystal methamphetamine education, prevention, 
enforcement, and treatment. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from parents in the constituency 
of Saskatoon Silver Springs regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources to build an elementary school in Arbor 
Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Hinitt Place, Greaves Crescent, 
Wright Bay, and Kenderdine Road in . . . [inaudible] . . . 
Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
for citizens that want to improve SaskTel cellular service in 
rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take all the necessary actions to install the 
technical equipment necessary to ensure that all rural areas 
of Saskatchewan are protected by reliable cellular phone 
coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Jansen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present a petition for improved cellular telephone coverage. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in regions 
encompassing in the constituency of Biggar. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning Highway 51 through the town of 
Kerrobert; — that’s sessional paper no. 808; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 97, 637, 639, 640, 715, and 800. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my privilege today to welcome to the legislature, 14 grade 7 
and 8 students from Yellow Grass. And accompanying them 
today is their teacher, Bev Rosnau, and chaperone, Cindy 
Renas. And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with them 
after question period today. And I hope you all enjoy your time 
here, and welcome to your legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think all of 
we who sit in this Chamber have very much appreciated the 
opportunity that we’ve had to be part of the adopt a family, the 
program established by the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living. We’ve all had a wonderful experience; to 
meet our families, to be part of their lives in a small way, and 
from them to learn. And I’m very, very pleased this morning to 
welcome to our Chamber two members of that family which 
have adopted me. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are seated Margaret and Michael 
Halabura, and I want to welcome them to the legislature. 
They’ve had a tour of the building. Michael has joined me in 
my office this morning and helped me prepare for question 
period. And they are joined today by Mr. Scott Rodonets who 
was with me when I had opportunity to meet the Halaburas in 
their home. And Michael concluded that it wasn’t such a big 
deal to meet a premier, but Scott, he was very cool. Well we 
really think that Michael is a very cool young man, and I would 
ask all members to welcome Michael and Margaret Halabura to 
the legislature this morning. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the Assembly two young women who live 
about 800 kilometres apart in the nation of Argentina but had to 
come to Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan to meet each other. 
 
They are both Rotary exchange students, each hosted by one of 
the Rotary clubs in Moose Jaw. And I’d like to introduce first of 
all to the members Jesica Garino. And Jesica hails from her 
home community of El Palomar in the Buenos Aires province 
of Argentina. And she’s completed her grade 11 studies and is 
participating in studies and activities here in Canada, in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the other young woman beside her is Daniela Borgogno. 
Daniela is from her home community of Jesús Maria in the 
Cordoba province of Argentina and has a special, extra special 
place in my heart in that she lived with my wife Karen and I 
until just a couple of weeks ago. We were very enthusiastic 
about having a teenager back in our home again. We’re kind of 
breathing a sigh of relief. The pace of life in our home has 
dropped a bit in the last couple weeks since she’s moved on to 
another home. 
 
These are two young women, Mr. Speaker, who we’re very, 
very proud to have, hosting them here in Canada. They’re proud 
of their home nation, Argentina, and no one will be surprised 
that among those many pins that they have on their jackets, they 
each have a centennial pin. And they will go home, I think, 
destined to be leaders in their own nation. 
 
I ask all the members to join in saying, welcome to the 
Chamber here in Saskatchewan, and to wish them well in their 
visit till the end of this year and then much success on their 
return home to their native Argentina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Power of Pink Fundraiser 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, last night, artists, fashion 
designers, jewellers, cancer survivors, and supporters came 
together at the Power of Pink gala to raise money for enhanced 
breast cancer diagnosis and treatment services for women in 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from pink scarves to pink champagne to signature 
desserts, it was a memorable evening of entertainment and 
celebration. Some highlights of the night included a Power of 
Pink fashion show featuring the work of local award-winning 
designers. A silent and live auction showcased jewellery and 
original artwork by Saskatchewan artists and popular 
celebrities. And Saskatchewan native Beverly Thompson, 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

co-anchor of Canada AM and breast cancer survivor, was the 
MC [master of ceremonies] for the evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, breast cancer is a prevalent health issue for many 
women. Access to timely, effective diagnosis and treatment is 
essential in increasing women’s chances of survival. That’s why 
all of the money raised at last night’s event will go towards 
purchasing equipment for an enhanced breast assessment centre 
at the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with better, more effective care, more women than 
ever are surviving the fight against breast cancer. With the 
expansion and enhancement of the breast assessment centre, 
programs and services will continue to provide patients with 
optimal care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating the organizers of the Power of Pink gala on an 
impressive, sold-out event, and in thanking them and the 
Hospitals of Regina Foundation for supporting such a worthy 
cause. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Erindale-Arbor Creek Community Association 
Citizen Patrol 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to commend the many volunteers of the 
Erindale-Arbor Creek Community Association citizen patrol in 
the constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Citizen patrols were initiated last spring under the leadership of 
Trent and Sheri Perehudoff and other concerned parents in the 
Erindale and Arbor Creek communities. The group has been 
supported by various donations of radios, vests, and flashlights 
from organizations such as the Saskatoon Kinsmen and 
SaskPower. 
 
Every weekend evening from May through September, 
volunteers take shifts and walk through the neighbourhood to 
keep an eye on things. Hot spots are patrolled on foot and notes 
are kept on the type of activity taking place at the various 
locations. Generally, two teams are out at the same time with 
two-way radios to keep in touch. Anything suspicious is 
reported to the police for further investigation. 
 
At least 75 people are already scheduled to take shifts in the 
month of May. They receive an orientation and instruction from 
the Saskatoon Police Service community liaison so they are 
able to best respond to the various incidents they may 
encounter. Store owners in the patrol area are grateful for the 
efforts of the patrollers and have been accommodating with 
offers of free coffee while on duty. 
 
Citizen patrols have been very successful in curbing incidents 
of vandalism and reminding restless people that adults are 
watching out for trouble. It shows that this community cares 
about safety, justice, and the well-being of their neighbours. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the volunteers of the Erindale-Arbor Creek 
Community Association citizen patrol. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Saskatchewan Métis Wagon Adventures 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s an 
event that fits perfectly with the Saskatchewan centennial 
celebrations. Yesterday morning at the Louis Riel Park in 
Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan Métis Wagon Adventures 2005 
announced the kick-off of the Saskatchewan portion of a wagon 
trek that will be travelling across Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta this summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The trek has been planned in co-operation with the Métis 
people of Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC 
[British Columbia], and individuals from all these provinces 
will be participating in the celebration of Métis culture and 
Métis history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan part of the trek will be officially starting in 
Batoche on July 24 and follow trails used by the Métis in the 
19th century. Mr. Speaker, the specific goal of the 
Saskatchewan portion of the trek is to celebrate and promote 
Métis culture and to educate Saskatchewan people abut the very 
vital role the Métis have played and continue to play in the 
development of our great province. Within the trek there will be 
an arts and culture program, a youth leadership program, a 
Michif language program. As well, Mr. Speaker, Métis youth 
will document the journey and significance of Métis history of 
each of the towns and villages visited along the route. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those that are interested in participating in the 
trek, they can get information at www.saskmetiswagon.ca. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 
acknowledging all the members of the Saskatchewan Métis 
Adventures 2005, whose hard work has made this important 
cultural event possible. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

ArtsSmarts Awards 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
recently informed by the Saskatchewan Arts Board that three 
communities in the Moosomin constituency have received 
ArtsSmarts awards. 
 
The Broadview High School Drama Club received $7,500 to 
engage students, seniors, First Nations partners, and adult 
drama members in creating a musical snapshot of Broadview. 
The project, called Way Back When, will focus on the stories of 
Broadview’s main street, the surrounding farm communities, 
and First Nations. 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

Grenfell Elementary Community School received over $5,000 
to create a permanent art installation project that will reflect 
children’s individual perceptions of their family, community, 
province, and country. The project will consist of each child 
creating a cement stepping stone that will be used to create an 
outdoor courtyard. This project will be unique to Grenfell as the 
only permanent outdoor art installation project in the 
community. 
 
[10:15] 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, Centre 48 and Montmartre School 
received over $7,000 to present a series of arts classes and 
workshops that will engage students in transforming a storage 
space in Montmartre into a work of art that will serve as a 
studio for future art classes, literacy workshops, public 
readings, and music classes. 
 
Centre 48 is an arts and continuing education centre that has 
served over 7,000 students since its inception in 2002. It offers 
programming to communities of Montmartre, Kendal, Odessa, 
Sedley, and Wolseley. Congratulations to these community 
groups on their receiving ArtsSmarts awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

SaskEnergy Volunteer Challenge 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskEnergy is 
presenting sponsor of the Jeux du Canada Summer Games and 
official champion of volunteers. On Monday, April 18, 
SaskEnergy announced a challenge to all Canada Games’ 
corporate sponsors to encourage employee volunteerism and to 
get the highest percentage of volunteers registered. 
 
SaskEnergy is pleased to announce and congratulate the winner 
of that challenge, Prudhomme Trucks Ltd. of Regina, with an 
extraordinary 33 per cent of registration of games volunteers. 
SaskEnergy would also like to extend its appreciation to all of 
the corporations who got involved, including Farm Credit 
Canada and Grand & Toy. 
 
During National Volunteer Week, 500 volunteers registered as 
Canada Games volunteers. The games now has just over half of 
the 6,000 volunteers required to successfully present this 
world-class athletic competition. As the games official 
champion of volunteers, SaskEnergy volunteers will be 
assisting in training volunteers, providing accreditation, 
distributing uniforms, and hosting volunteer recognition events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in commending 
SaskEnergy for this initiative and in thanking Saskatchewan 
volunteers and Saskatchewan businesses for their ongoing 
support of community events. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
 

Biggar Residents Receive Volunteer Recognition Awards 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to congratulate four Biggarites who on April 19 
were recognized for their volunteerism. Mr. Richard L’Hoir, 
Mrs. Kate Yaroshko, Mrs. Kay Roach, and Mrs. Mary Ann 
Assailly were presented the awards at the 12th annual Volunteer 
Recognition Awards banquet in Eston. 
 
The Wild Goose Recreation Association honours volunteers in 
member communities each year during National Volunteer 
Week. The awards are presented to individuals, facilities, and 
organizations who have displayed outstanding commitment and 
dedication to the betterment of culture, sport, and recreation 
within their region through their volunteer efforts. These four 
individuals were nominated by various groups within the 
community of Biggar to acknowledge their appreciation for the 
many hours they have contributed to the betterment of the 
community. 
 
It is volunteers such as Richard, Kay, Kate, and Mary Ann that 
keeps a community active, healthy, and vibrant. I would like to 
thank these individuals for their time and dedication to the 
community of Biggar, and again congratulate them on receiving 
this award from the Wild Goose Recreation Association for 
their efforts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

French for the Future Conference 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, recently two students from 
Regina, Gina Hochban and Nadine Kirzinger, were among 36 
French immersion and francophone high school students from 
across the country to attend the eighth annual French for the 
Future national conference in Ottawa. 
 
French for the Future is a non-profit organization that was 
founded by John Ralston Saul in 1997 to encourage students to 
study in French after high school. The program fosters 
linguistic and cultural ties among students enrolled in second 
language education programs, and encourages them to think 
about bilingual and bicultural lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to those students who gathered in 
Ottawa, hundreds of French immersion and francophone high 
school students from Regina also gathered to debate whether 
Canadians are engaged citizens. In total, Mr. Speaker, 3,000 
students from 18 cities participated in simultaneous discussions. 
The conference also included a series of workshops on issues 
such as crime and the law, marketing, tourism, business, 
journalism, and arts and culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, bilingual education is becoming increasingly 
popular in Western provinces. Students at the Ottawa 
conference said the ability to read and speak French not only 
provides them with career opportunities, but they also 
appreciate learning about another culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all my colleagues will join me in 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

congratulating Gina Hochban, Nadine Kirzinger, and all of the 
students from Regina who participated in the French for the 
Future conference. We are proud of their commitment to 
enhancing cultural diversity and in leading the way to an even 
more open and inclusive Canada. 
 
Je voudrais dire pour le gouvernement provincial une grande 
bienvenue et félicitations. Merci, Monsieur. 
 
[Translation: I would like to say for the provincial government 
a great welcome and congratulations. Thank you, sir.] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Negotiations with Federal Government Regarding an 
Energy Accord 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well Prime 
Minister Paul Martin is in town today. Back in February, the 
Premier of this province agreed with the Saskatchewan Party 
when we said it was time to ramp up, to pick up the tone and 
the volume of our request for a better equalization deal and 
specifically an energy accord for the province of Saskatchewan 
here in the province. 
 
Yesterday they asked the Premier if he would be meeting with 
the Prime Minister . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when we say the word our, in 
this case because we agree, we’re talking about all of us in this 
Legislative Assembly. We’re talking about the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So they asked the Premier yesterday, are you going to get a 
chance now to meet with the Prime Minister on the need for an 
energy accord? And here’s what he had to say: we have no 
formal scheduled significant meeting time around the energy 
accord. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen so far from this Premier — he’s 
gotten a flyby meeting with the Prime Minister at the airport on 
his way out of town, he has taken the opportunity not . . . has 
not taken the opportunity to travel to Ottawa to meet with the 
Prime Minister. Now there’s no time scheduled when the Prime 
Minister is back in Regina. 
 
Is this the Premier’s definition of ramping things up for a new 
deal for Saskatchewan and an energy accord? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, point number one. Last 
year when we were engaged in a similar debate with the 
national government around equalization and we ramped it up, 
we went so far as to take out public ads. What did the Leader of 
the Opposition do? Criticized this government, criticized us for 
doing it. 
 
Now I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, how things are accomplished. 
They are accomplished with determination. They are 
accomplished with logic. And let me report to the House this 
morning activities of just the last two weeks where senior 
officials — the most senior officials of this government — have 
been at the nation’s capital meeting with the most senior 
officials of the federal government on this very issue. Those 
conversations and discussions have continued this week. 
 
This week, Mr. Speaker, I had opportunity to sit down face to 
face with the Minister of Finance, federal, who lives in Regina. 
We had a good, if I may say, very productive discussion. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I spent time on the telephone with the 
Prime Minister of Canada on this very issue. That is getting the 
work done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well we hope the Premier is successful. We do. 
And we for the record offer our help . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We hope the Premier’s 
successful. And for the record, we offer our help. But you 
know, it’s strange that the Premier would point to his ads in the 
major daily papers of the province of Saskatchewan as evidence 
that he can make a solid and strong and effective case for a new 
deal for Saskatchewan. 
 
Takes out ads — $75,000 — in the daily papers, which generate 
three phone calls, Mr. Speaker, when the market for this is not 
the province of Saskatchewan, not the readers of the dailies. 
The market, Mr. Speaker, is the Prime Minister and the Finance 
minister. The people of this province expect the Premier to 
show some leadership. Newfoundland had leadership. Nova 
Scotia had leadership. When will Saskatchewan get that same 
leadership? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I mean, the opposition will 
say one thing. The people of Saskatchewan know the facts. The 
facts of the matter are that a year ago, through the efforts of this 
government, we were able to achieve a sense of fairness for 
those years of equalization where this province was unjustly 
treated to the tune of over $300 million, $300 million. Now the 
Finance critic over there . . . 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. We’ve got too many people 
trying to enter the debate at the same time. Order, please. 
Premier of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this year earlier in 
front of the media, the Finance critic over there described that 
achievement by the people of Saskatchewan a year ago as 
achieving table scraps. That’s how they described it. That’s how 
they describe it. Mr. Speaker, I repeat — one achieves for the 
people of Saskatchewan through determination, through logical 
approach, and through perseverance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the last two weeks there have been very significant 
discussions between the most senior levels of our governments. 
There has been an extremely important conversation between 
myself, face-to-face, with the Minister of Finance, federal. I 
spoke to the Prime Minister yesterday. Mr. Speaker, we are 
making progress on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, with 
or without the support of the Conservatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — On two occasions now this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier has said the most senior level of officials 
of his government have been meeting with Ottawa. Isn’t the 
most senior level of officials himself and his cabinet, Mr. 
Speaker? Isn’t that who should be providing leadership on this 
issue? No, the Premier’s shaking his head, no. In this case, it’s 
the civil servants that are driving this issue. And no doubt that 
Finance officials can . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, no doubt that our senior level 
officials in the Finance department can and have done an 
effective job on this. But the people of this province and the 
people of this country need to hear from this Premier. They 
heard from Atlantic premiers before the Atlantic accord and 
everyone understands that, whether you disagree with their 
tactics or not, that’s why they got a deal. 
 
In our province we hear nothing from this Premier. When we 
ask him about the progress he claims to be making, you know 
what he says? He says, trust me. That’s what he said yesterday 
to the media. Just trust me. Well you know, this Premier 
unfortunately has given the people of this province absolutely 
no reason at all to trust him, whether it’s on new police officers, 
whether it’s on tax cuts that he promised in the last election, 
whether it’s on reducing waiting lists. Why in the world should 
the people of this province trust him on a file that he is 
completely silent about, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me say this in regards to 
leadership. The proof of leadership, Mr. Speaker, is in 
benefiting the people we seek to lead. That is the proof of 
leadership. Now I know that the Leader of the Conservative 
Party over there doesn’t want to talk about what’s been 
happening in this province in just the last 12 months. Let’s just 
review the record. 
 
Stats Canada this week reported for the year 2004 that in all of 
Canada — in all of Canada — Saskatchewan has achieved real 
GDP [gross domestic product] growth at a rate third highest in 
the country. We have achieved personal income growth at a rate 
that is second highest in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now get this, Mr. Speaker, nominal 
GDP growth — number one; nominal GDP growth per capita 
— number one; real GDP growth per capita — number one; 
personal income growth per capita — number one; personal 
disposable income growth — number one; personal disposable 
income growth per capita — number one; productivity growth, 
real GDP per employment — number one in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Behaviour of Health Official 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, last month the Minister of 
Health promised to look into allegations that a department of 
Health official made insulting comments to Brenda Goulet of 
Moose Jaw who was seeking reimbursement for an 
out-of-province MRI [magnetic resonance imaging]. 
 
As of yesterday, Ms Goulet had not heard from this government 
about her concerns; not until after we raised the question again 
in question period. Now it appears that the investigation into 
allegations against Dr. Jim O’Carroll have been completed. 
 
Question to the minister: does he approve of this kind of rude 
and condescending behaviour from an employee in his 
department? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I stated a number of 
weeks ago any kind of behaviour that is detrimental to people or 
rude to them is not tolerated and needs to be corrected. So, Mr. 
Speaker, what do we do when there are challenges or concerns 
raised? We make sure that the senior administrators, the deputy 
minister, and others work to resolve those particular issues as 
personnel matters and that’s how this matter has been dealt 
with. 
 
I understand the associate deputy minister has talked to the 
individual involved and that she now understands what has been 
done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it took six weeks and further 
questioning from the opposition for this government to finally 
contact Brenda Goulet out of embarrassment. Ms. Goulet 
wonders why someone else had to apologize for Dr. O’Carroll 
after a reminder from the opposition and why that individual 
proceeded to defend Dr. O’Carroll’s actions by saying, quote, 
“You have to understand doctors.” 
 
Not only did the department not encourage her to file her claim, 
they only offered excuses for Dr. O’Carroll’s behaviour. Can 
the minister report to this Assembly what actions were taken 
against Dr. O’Carroll to ensure that this doesn’t happen again? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, personnel matters like this 
are dealt with in the department, in the civil service. And it’s 
not an appropriate place here in the legislature to be talking 
about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is an Assembly where elected officials bring forward issues 
of concern to Saskatchewan people and look for solutions. 
 
On Wednesday, the member from Kelvington-Wadena brought 
forward a concern and a solution in the form of a private 
member’s Bill to give families the legal tools they need to help 
their children fight drug addiction. We are asking the 
government to support this Bill so that we can together find a 
solution that will enable families to help their kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker: to the Premier: will your government support this 
Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve said earlier this week, we are looking very seriously at this 
Bill and comparing it to our powers under section 18 in The 
Child and Family Services Act because we think it would be 
appropriate, if we already have 80 per cent of the solution, to 
look at improving it the other 20 per cent. 
 
And as well I want to be very thoughtful about this Bill. The 
Children’s Advocate has recommended that before such a major 
change is made in youth rights in this province, we should as 
well be talking to their office and to youth. We intend to do this 
properly, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very big change and I do think 
parents deserve more ability to intervene, but we do need to 
look carefully at how this is going to happen and how it’ll affect 
a large number of young people. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government has not given a good enough reason why they 
will not support this Bill. Merely to hide behind section 18 is 
not good enough. They continue to want to study and to talk, 
but people want action now. And there is no more time to waste 
because every day we wait, more kids’ lives are ruined and 
families are torn apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will your government take positive 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would ask the member 
to restate her question through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
Premier: will his government take positive action and support 
the Bill put forward by the member from Kelvington-Wadena? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I want to say again that we’ve had a 
member of our Assembly, the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, who’s been working closely with addictions people, 
with families, with communities. A number of announcements 
that, were made this week of things that will happen right away. 
So there is action being taken right away. 
 
On this particular matter, it has big legal implications. And I 
want to say that the Bill also includes, under the definition of 
addictions, alcohol, other drugs as well as crystal meth. It’s 
quite wide reaching. And I think we need to be thoughtful about 
what the hurdle is to determine someone has an addiction 
before they can be locked up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken Lackey: — Mr. Speaker, we have listened for a 
year about the government’s talk about doing something. 
Parents are forced to stand by and watch their children slowly 
die in front of their eyes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
the Child has been ratified by 192 countries including Canada. 
Article 33 of that convention states, and I quote: 
 

. . . parties . . . [shall] take all appropriate measures, 
including legislative, administrative, social and 
educational measures, to protect children . . . [from] the 
illicit use of narcotic drugs . . . 

 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, children in our province do not have 
the legislative protection when it comes to ensuring they can get 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

addiction treatment when they need it the most. Mr. Speaker, if 
the government is unwilling to support the Saskatchewan 
Party’s Bill, what is the government going to do to give families 
the tools they need to help their children fight this deadly and 
destructive drug? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that in 
Saskatchewan, children the age of 15 and under can be 
apprehended and required to be in particular circumstances and 
in particular settings. The age of 16, between 16 and 18 is the 
age we’re discussing here. And I will just say that there is a 
reason why a province like Alberta, who tends to be pretty 
black and white on things, is taking until July 2006 to bring this 
into place. 
 
Now we have this legislative session, we have the fall 
legislative session, and we have the spring legislative session, 
all of which would bring this in faster than Alberta. But I intend 
to make my decision much more quickly than that, Mr. Speaker, 
after I am sure that this is actually going to make a difference 
and not create more damage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 

Housing Conditions in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
family in Wollaston Lake has been evicted from their home. 
The family was forced out after the home was declared unfit for 
human habitation. Mr. Speaker, Ed Benoanie is a local 
councillor. He blames the situation on the member for 
Cumberland. He says this member has failed to live up to an 
election promise to improve northern housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
who is also the member for Cumberland: why has she failed to 
live up to this promise? Why does she say one thing and do 
another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts are that the 
problems with the housing are related to it being winter, and 
sewage breaking and the ability to repair it before spring. The 
family has been relocated to appropriate housing, which is paid 
for by my department. 
 
And in fact we have spent 30 million in increasing improved 
housing conditions in the North. We benefited over 1,000 . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order. 
Order. The Minister for Community Resources and 
Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’ve spent 30 million on northern 
housing. We’ve had over 1,000 northern households benefit 
recently through HomeFirst. Another 6 million will be invested. 
There are five new homes moving into this community in the 
spring as soon as the water and sewer can be hooked up, when 
the ground thaws out. 
 
So in fact, we have informed Wollaston that there is housing 
money they can apply for. We’re waiting for their application. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
member opposite, the question is, why is this happening? There 
are chronic housing problems in northern Saskatchewan and 
many of them. There is a need for roads, and there is also a need 
for jobs. There’s also a need for this provincial government to 
do something. 
 
Here’s how Mr. Ed Benoanie describes this NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government’s efforts to date. They do 
nothing, zero for provincial housing in the North. They say one 
thing and do the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation, the member for Cumberland, live up to her election 
promises to improve housing in the North? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been three years and 
one month since we got a question in question period from that 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. Three years and one month — one 
question about the North, Mr. Speaker. And I want to stand here 
today, Mr. Speaker, defend the incredible amount of work that 
we have done in northern Saskatchewan to promote . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 
made incredible progress as a government to look at issues like 
home ownership through the remote housing program, Mr. 
Speaker. We have turned many social housing units over to 
families to finally own, Mr. Speaker. And we are continuing to 
work on water and sewer projects throughout the entire North, 
Mr. Speaker, and there are specific challenges as indicated in 
this case. 
 
But I want to tell the official opposition, the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party, this, is that no. 101 of your 100 ideas . . . I 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

want to add, why don’t you start dealing with the facts and find 
out what exactly is happening in northern Saskatchewan before 
you get up and make these brash assumptions, thereby . . . 
[inaudible] . . . the people of Saskatchewan and this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, Mr. Minister, to the Minister of 
Northern Affairs, this is maybe the first time we’ve asked 
questions in northern affairs in question period. But to the 
Minister of Northern Affairs: are you listening? This is only a 
band-aid solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member of Cumberland has come up with a 
brilliant solution to the immediate crisis. The family with six 
children forced out of their home because it was deemed unfit 
for human occupation, this family will spend the next several 
months living in a motel. This is only a band-aid solution. Mr. 
Speaker, why not fix the problem, like the minister promised in 
the election. Does she say one thing or do another? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the . . . Order, please. 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Community Resources 
and Employment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The members say one thing; the facts are another. 
There are five new housing units moving into that community, 
of which this family who is temporarily located until the sewer 
and water can be installed in the spring. So this is totally 
happening. The housing is there, the family is in appropriate 
housing, and you could not have people living in housing with 
sewage in the basement. And if that member thinks that that’s a 
good idea, he should stand up and say so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Financial Assistance for Farmers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, today in Saskatchewan farm families are making 
difficult decisions of how they’re going to put the spring crop 
in. And many are just trying to find that dollars they need to do 
that. This morning we learned that over 1,800 Saskatchewan 
producers are still waiting for their 2003 CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] applications to be processed. 
Mr. Speaker. That’s 1,800 families who need money for this 
spring and don’t know when or if it will ever be coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is completely unacceptable. Is the minister 
going to deal with this problem and get this money out there, or 
is he going to as usual sit back and just watch what happens? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s important to note that there are the observations of 
the members opposite, and then there are the facts. And I’d like 
to speak about the facts in this case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The facts are that in Saskatchewan we are far ahead of our 
neighbouring province in terms of the CAIS payments, that 
over 94 per cent of those payments are out. Mr. Speaker, the 
payments that are still left to come, generally — not all of them, 
but generally — are for the larger, more complex operations. 
Those payments we are told . . . and we have been pressing the 
federal government which means we are doing something on 
this, Mr. Speaker, to get the payments out as quickly as they 
can. They assure us that they are moving as quickly as they can 
through the system. Those payments will be out. 
 
There are other options, Mr. Speaker, like advances that these 
farm families may take to help them to help them through this 
time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister might be surprised to find out that 
fertilizer sales are down, chemical sales are down, car dealers in 
rural Saskatchewan are hurting, machinery dealers in rural 
Saskatchewan are hurting. They’re laying people off; it’s 
costing jobs. And at the same time this morning we hear the 
Premier bragging about the GDP is growing, everything’s 
growing. And yet they have no money for farmers, they have no 
time for farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe they should talk to Jack, their federal 
leader. He seems to have the Prime Minister’s ear. They don’t 
seem to be doing absolutely nothing for farmers. They can’t 
fund the CAIS program. They piddle a little money into the 
set-aside program. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to standing up 
for rural Saskatchewan, that government comes in last place as 
usual in this country. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of stress out in 
rural Saskatchewan. There’s a lot of really sad stories 
happening and coming out of rural Saskatchewan. Isn’t it time 
that government showed the compassion that they say they 
show and help farm families in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again it is important that we deal with the facts here; it is 



2754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

important that we not deal with distortions. We must recognize 
that farms are businesses and that those farmers are making 
business decisions about the kind of inputs that they will put in. 
They are doing that based on the kind of crops that they have 
had, the success that they have had in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
And it is very, very difficult for many of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been making sure that we have been 
pressing for better programs. The Conservatives opposite and 
their cousins have been of little help in that, Mr. Speaker — 
little help. Because when there was an opportunity to help shift 
the system, Mr. Speaker, where were the Conservatives 
opposite? Nowhere. They sat on their hands. Mr. Speaker, we 
have been and will continue to work to make sure that our 
farmers get the support that’s necessary. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. I would ask the 
Assembly to come to order. I would ask members to come to 
order. Order. Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased once again to stand on behalf of the 
government and table a response to written question no. 1,022. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 1,022 has been submitted. 
Seventy-five minute debate. Order, please. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask you to check Hansard because I believe in response 
to a question by the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, the 
member from Athabasca said — and I believe this is accurate 
— that there was . . . we were misleading the people and this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that is clearly unparliamentary language, 
and I would ask the Speaker to review Hansard, review this, 
and ask the member to apologize and withdraw those remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I will take the 
matter under advisement. I wish to — order, please; order, 
please; order, please — take the matter under advisement. 
 
I would advise members that I have been trying to listen 
carefully to remarks of this type, and tone is also important as to 
how it’s used. But I have been using a guideline with respect to 
words like misrepresentation or misleading or distortion, 
whether it is intended to be intentional or not, or deliberate or 
not. And that is the general rule, but I will check and I take it 
under advisement. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for . . . 

Order, please. Order, please. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Wood River. 
 

Funding of Municipal Agreements 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks, I’ll be moving a motion that urges the 
government to address the rising property taxes caused by the 
failure of this government to adequately fund municipal 
agreements. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear from this last 
budget that this government totally ignored municipalities, rural 
and urban. 
 
And I know we’ve heard from the minister that wishes to talk 
about that more money has gone out into the municipalities, but 
I’d just like to start off with quoting from the budget document. 
And I would like to read the figures into the record: 
 

The revenue sharing, urban revenue sharing for 
2004-2005, 44,109,000; estimated for 2005-2006, 
44,109,000. 

 
I don’t think that’s much of an increase, Mr. Speaker, because 
it’s exactly the same. 
 
Rural revenue sharing, 33,961,000 in ’04-05. Guess what it is 
for ’05 and ’06 — 33,961,000. I do not think that is an increase. 
 
How about northern revenue sharing — 6,980,000; ’05-06, 
6,980,000. Mr. Speaker, the revenue sharing is flat. Zap, you’re 
froze. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, municipalities were looking for increases in 
this year’s budget. Needless to say they were very, very 
disappointed. It had no increases, no increases in revenue 
sharing despite $1.2 billion in additional revenue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the times were tight, fiscal situation 
was tight, the NDP had no problem going out to the 
municipalities and cutting back, and cutting back substantially. 
So the municipalities tightened their belts and said, lookit, if 
you’re having a tight fiscal situation we can absorb some of the 
pain. But now, Mr. Speaker, there’s gain, $1.2 billion in gain, 
and what does this government do to the municipalities? Again, 
zap, you’re froze, no new money for revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent solution submitted to SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] for their 
convention . . . and I’d like to read this into the record. It says in 
part that the provincial government, asking: 
 

Reinstate the Revenue Sharing pool to an appropriate level 
from the general revenues of the Province that reflects the 
original commitments to Revenue Sharing before 
reductions occurred through Provincial austerity . . . 

 
The resolution also proposes that, once the revenue-sharing 
pool is established to an appropriate and acceptable level, that it 
again be indexed to the growth in personal and corporate 
income tax bases and fuel and retail sales. The basis for the 
estimates, the original escalator was based on the selected 
provincial tax basis — for an example, taxable incomes not 
actual income taxes and the value of the sales, not sales tax 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

revenues. It’s easier to track the actual tax revenues and 
revenues raised on the four bases, and this proxy for the original 
formula better fits the idea of sharing revenues, not just sharing 
tax bases. 
 
The provincial revenues from the four bases have increased 
over the ’78 to 2004 program period from 660 million to 2.92 
billion, an increase of some 342 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to put in what the magnitude of the 
gap really is, and this is the urban revenue-sharing pool annual 
amounts, in 1978 was initially about $34 million. This rose to 
67 million by 1986, before declining to 27 million — 27, that’s 
below the original of 1978. And it declined to 27 million by 
1997. And since that time it has rose to about 44 million, far 
less than the 67 million at its peak. 
 
If the original 34 million had fully kept pace with the growth of 
provincial revenues, today it would sit fairly close to $150 
million — 150 million — and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it’s at 
about 44 million now. It would therefore take more than another 
100 million per year to get back on the original track. 
 
Even allowing for a somewhat more conservative estimate, 
perhaps in closer proximity to the original tax base formula, it is 
still safe to say that the current annual pool of 44 million would 
have to more than triple — increase by more than 200 per cent 
— to meet the original goal. 
 
In recent years the annual request of the provincial government, 
led by the cities, have been for additional urban increases in the 
range of 10 to 20 million, while the actual increases have been 
around the $5 million mark. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is totally 
unacceptable to the municipalities. 
 
So what do some of the municipalities have to say about this? 
And again, I want to read into the record what the president of 
SUMA has to say on this budget and this revenue sharing, and 
I’m just going to read right from his article: 
 

The Provincial budget, panned by municipal leaders, 
contained no new revenue sharing for municipalities. 
 
Schlosser says that while municipalities are disappointed 
by the status quo approach in the budget, it is really the 
Province who will ultimately suffer for ignoring the 
critical need for true revenue sharing in every city, town 
and village in Saskatchewan. 
 
There is no doubt in my mind that there’s going to have to 
be property tax increases in communities now. 

 
So I’m dropping away from the quote, but we’ve talked about 
this, Mr. Speaker. Because of a lack of the revenue sharing, it is 
forcing communities and municipalities to raise their taxes. 
Although this government will say there’s no tax increase, 
they’ve off-loaded to municipalities to the point where tax 
increases are inevitable in the municipal system. 
 
Municipalities — and this is something I don’t believe that this 
government understands — municipalities are the economic 
engine of this province. When you tie the hands of 
municipalities by ignoring the fiscal pressures they face, you 

have not only hurt municipalities, but you have put the 
economic future of the entire province in peril. 
 
Schlosser points out that it is the provincial and federal 
government that benefit the most through economic growth in 
our communities as they take in 95 per cent of every tax dollar 
collected. But if fiscal pressures and aging infrastructure 
prevent municipalities from creating this growth, everyone 
loses. The only positive thing out of this budget is the 
commitment to review the current revenue-sharing arrangement 
in time for next year. 
 
Schlosser quotes: 
 

I’m putting the government on notice. We have 12 months 
to make good on that commitment and deliver true 
revenue sharing . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, we hear, we hear from the minister on occasion 
and he has talked about more money going to the municipalities 
and more money going to the municipalities in the form of 
Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund. 
 
Now I’d like to talk just a little bit on the 
Canadian-Saskatchewan Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund. 
And I know the minister has already spoke about this, that 
we’ve put money into this particular venture. But here’s the 
kicker on this fund. This fund is financed 50 per cent by the 
municipalities, 25 per cent by the provincial government, and 
25 per cent by the federal government. But the kicker is, if 
you’ve off-loaded and downloaded to the municipalities to such 
an extent that they don’t have the money for their 50 per cent 
portion of the infrastructure to access infrastructure funding, 
how can they do it? And I think that’s a fair question. How can 
they access it if they don’t have the money for their 50 per cent? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it actually even gets worse than that. It’s 
worse than that because . . . And I will read into the record from 
the guide: 
 

Applicants incur and pay 100% of the project costs up 
front and are reimbursed by the federal and provincial 
governments for up to 50% of the approved funding total. 

 
[11:00] 
 
So here we have a situation where they have been off-loaded. 
They’re not getting more money. Off-loading has taken place. 
And now they’re required to put 100 per cent of their funds 
upfront for municipal infrastructure funding and then claim 
back 50 per cent. Well if they don’t have the 50 per cent to start, 
how would they have the 100 per cent to do it upfront? There 
should be an explanation for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear about austerity and what has happened in 
times of austerity — how the municipalities have tightened their 
belts. But now in the good times they’re not getting any money 
returned. And it’s a perfect example of again this government 
doing so little with so much. 
 
There’s always talk about the money and where’s the money’s 
going to come from. Now I would like to read some of these 
investments from the business gurus on that side of the House 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

and how this would go to municipal revenue sharing. 
 
How about tappedinto.com? That was a $6.7 million loss. 
Wouldn’t that have been nice to have that as part of a 
revenue-sharing pool? How about Persona, 9.4 million? Would 
that not have been nice to have for revenue sharing? How about 
Navigata? 
 
And we talk about, can we continue every year sustainable 
revenue sharing. Again, I can’t emphasize it enough. When 
times were tough we took money away. Times are good; we 
don’t give it back. So the revenue sharing, it’s not sustainable. 
 
Well it seems like Navigata is sustainable because every year 
we put more money. I think it’s 16 million more this year. Now 
we’re at a loss of $43.4 million in Navigata. Would that not 
have been nice in a revenue-sharing pool? 
 
How about Retx.com, $26 million lost? That would have been 
nice in revenue sharing. How about Craig Wireless, $10 
million? That definitely would have helped in revenue sharing. 
 
I’ll just go through some other ones: NST [NST Network 
Services of Chicago], 16 million; Clickabid, 1.9 million; Soft 
Tracks, 2.2 million; Ag Dealer, 8.9 million. That list that I’ve 
just given, Mr. Speaker, is $124.5 million lost by this 
government on reckless investment in, some of them 
out-of-province companies like Atlanta, Georgia; Nashville, 
Tennessee; and in BC — $124 million. And how can this 
government go out and talk to municipal leaders and say, I’m 
sorry, we have no money for you for revenue sharing; but oh by 
the way, we have $124 million that we’re willing to lose on 
these ventures. 
 
And that’s not all. That is not all. We can never forget 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company], although that money was gone a little while ago. It’s 
still not finalized — a $35 million loss. That would have 
worked pretty nice in a revenue-sharing pool. How about 
Channel Lake, $15 million; Guyana, $2 million? That’s another 
$17 million that sure would have been nice in a revenue-sharing 
pool. How about SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
losing 16.1 million on Coachman Insurance? I think every 
municipality would have liked to have that amount of money. 
 
How about some of these other really, really wonderful 
ventures that this government entered into, like mega bingo — 
8 million bucks lost, 8 million. And yet there’s no money for 
revenue sharing. How about the ethanol deal, the bogus ethanol 
deal? We could talk about that one ad infinitum. It was only 
$750,000, so that was just kind of a small deal. But still, 
$750,000 blown. Even that, I know some municipalities would 
just love to have that in the revenue-sharing side of it instead of 
going into this venture. How about Pangaea? That’s another, 
that’s another huge one. That was $3.5 million that was lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is very, very clear. Here we have a 
government that this total amount has . . . adds to $204.85 
million. And I repeat, $204.85 million lost, lost on ventures 
around the country. And we have zero dollars for revenue 
sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to now read the motion that I’m 

putting forward, seconded by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats, and it reads: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to address the 
issue of rising property taxes caused by the failure of this 
government to adequately fund municipal agreements with 
northern, rural, and urban municipalities in the 2005-2006 
budget. 

 
Dated this date. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Wood 
River, seconded by the member for Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to address the 
issue of rising property taxes caused by the failure of this 
government to adequately fund municipal agreements with 
northern, rural, and urban municipalities in the 2005-2006 
budget. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad to have the opportunity this morning, along with my 
colleague from Wood River, to talk about municipal funding 
this morning . . . or lack of, I guess would be a better way of 
describing it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We go back, Mr. Speaker, into the early ’90s. And let’s go back 
to the days of Carol Carson, when she was minister of 
Municipal Government, and the cuts we saw. And, Mr. 
Speaker, at that time I was involved in rural municipal 
government and the downloading that went on that time for the 
sake of balancing the budget. And everyone knew out there that 
that’s why the reason of the downloading was happening and to 
some degree accepted it at that spot, but doing that with the 
promise that when things got better, that municipal funding 
would be increased and returned back to them. 
 
Well that hasn’t happened, Mr. Speaker. We saw in the last two 
or three years that a little additional funding has gone back into 
municipalities, up till this year of course, Mr. Speaker. But 
nothing to the tune of what was taken away from municipalities, 
whether you were a rural municipality, a village, a town, or for 
that matter the cities, Mr. Speaker, because they all took the 
brunt of the downloading that took on in the ’90s to balance the 
budget. But now, when things have supposedly picked up in the 
province, the economy has improved, that money’s not being 
returned to these municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can go back to the times of Carol Teichrob, 
when she was the minister of Municipal Government, and the 
downloading and the municipalities being asked to take less and 
do more and help build the economy in this province, while at 
the same time having to raise their local mill rates if they 
expected to receive any more money to keep up the 
infrastructure in all parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing that in our neighbouring 
province, in Manitoba in fact, even when we talk about the 
education tax on that province neighbouring us, they’ve 
dropped their education tax to the tune of about 50 per cent. 
And I realize this morning we’re talking about a motion that 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

talks about municipal tax and municipal funding, but yet the 
two are tied very closely together because the same taxpayers 
out there receive their municipal tax bill and their education tax 
bill usually all in one form out there, and one bill. So we’re 
talking about the same taxpayers. So when you give, as 
Manitoba did, give relief on the education side of it, it helps 
give relief to the same taxpayer and those that are paying 
municipal taxes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have saw now that the cities of, like, 
Regina, Saskatoon, are raising their taxes anywhere 3, 4 per 
cent just to cover the bare necessities of keeping the 
infrastructure built — to repair roads, for example, and the 
streets in the cities of Regina, P.A. [Prince Albert], Moose Jaw, 
Yorkton, Weyburn, Estevan, and all of the cities of that nature 
that we are expecting and seeing grow to some extent, 
especially the larger centres. And the infrastructure costs are 
rising dramatically for these municipalities. And yet they’re 
being asked to fund that on their own — the additional costs — 
because the government’s not there to support them on this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I found it interesting this morning that the Premier 
got up in question period and was actually bragging about how 
the GDP is growing, the economy’s growing. Everything’s 
wonderful in the province. And then on the other hand we find 
problems like, as we had in question period, where the CAIS 
program’s not being funded. They raise crop insurance 
premiums. They cut the coverage. They drop spot-loss hail. 
 
On one side they tell us that everything’s wonderful, and on the 
other side they completely ignore the parts of this province that 
have to actually provide the infrastructure to help an economy 
grow. And they don’t seem to get that, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 
seem to understand that without a vibrant infrastructure out 
there, businesses will not come to Saskatchewan, businesses 
cannot expand. And for that matter, the whole economy is 
affected by the infrastructure that we’re asking for and talking 
about today — that the government has not certainly put extra 
dollars into in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about taxes of all kinds in this province 
being probably the highest or second highest in the country. 
And then when we come to where we get high oil prices, and 
last year equalization money from the federal government — 
probably what, over a billion dollar windfall last year that 
wasn’t expected, that wasn’t included in the budget — and 
where do we see the benefits of that going? Well certainly not 
to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Certainly not to 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Because where have we saw 
them drop any taxes out here? 
 
They talked and they put 8 per cent, I think it averaged out, that 
they put into the education tax in the province — forgetting of 
course, is what I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, that in the early 
’90s the education tax on many farm properties out there 
probably went up 200, 300 per cent. And now we’re turning 
around and returning 8 per cent and saying, well this should be 
satisfactory; this should make you happy out there; don’t ask 
for more. Well I’m afraid people in rural Saskatchewan and 
urban Saskatchewan alike are saying, we need more. For this 
province to grow, we cannot afford any more local taxes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the problems out in rural Saskatchewan, especially 
this year, are magnified by the frost on August 20, by the BSE 
[bovine spongiform encephalopathy] problem that we had for 
the last couple of years — a number of things that have 
happened in rural Saskatchewan — low grain prices. In a lot of 
areas, Mr. Speaker, we have very low quality product out there, 
low quality grain. In some cases the bins are full but they can’t 
move that grain. And therefore how on earth are they expected 
to pay more taxes, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I think it comes down to, as my colleague said from Wood 
River before, priorities — priorities of what this NDP 
government has for the people of Saskatchewan. Their priorities 
seem to be . . . And I think he talked about $124 million that 
have been lost in ventures all around the world — some in BC, 
some in Ontario, some in Australia. I think we saw a $40 
million loss in Australia. 
 
It’s hard to understand, as a representative of the people of rural 
Saskatchewan out there, and explain to our taxpayers out there, 
how on one hand we can invest their money — the government 
of the day, the NDP government can invest their money — and 
it’s become commonplace, Mr. Speaker, it’s become so 
commonplace that it’s not a big deal when we lose 10, 15, $20 
million in these ventures all over. And as my colleague had 
talked about, SPUDCO, another venture out there that I think 
people of Saskatchewan are very aware of. 
 
But a lot of these ventures and investments people aren’t aware 
of out there. They can’t even understand, they can’t fathom, 
why a government would want to invest all these dollars and 
continually lose in these ventures around the world, and maybe 
creating some jobs in Australia, or creating jobs in BC with 
dot-coms, in Ontario with insurance companies. We’re creating 
jobs other places and losing these dollars. Mr. Speaker, 
somebody’s getting the benefit of those dollars that we’re 
losing, but it certainly isn’t the taxpayers in Saskatchewan. 
 
And at the same time we have a government, when the budget 
comes down, a Finance minister when the budget comes down, 
a Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs that said, we have no 
new money for municipalities. And that’s hard to justify. 
 
When we go home to our rural constituencies, Mr. Speaker, and 
people say, well what is going on in there? How come they had 
no new money for this, but they on the other hand can invest in 
this and continually lose? My colleague from Wood River had a 
whole list of ventures that this government has invested in and 
continually finding these horrendous stories of where we lost 
millions and millions and millions of dollars. 
 
We have questions in question period three, four, five times a 
week on the long waiting lists in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
Couldn’t those dollars be better spent shortening the waiting 
lists, dealing with the problems that we have here at home 
rather than playing big shot around the world with somebody 
else’s money? I mean, any one of us can look like we’re a big 
entrepreneur when we’re dealing with somebody else’s money. 
 
I think it was Nelson Skalbania said at one time . . . I remember 
when he went under, and said, it’s no big deal; I’m not using 
my own money; I really don’t, I’m not that worried that I lost 
all these millions of dollars. Because Nelson Skalbania was an 



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

example of somebody investing somebody else’s money and if 
they lost it, I get my cheque at the end of the month — I’m 
okay, I’m covered. 
 
Well it’s very similar to what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker. 
We have a government that’s been in power so long and so out 
of touch with people of Saskatchewan that they aren’t even 
embarrassed by the situations where we’re investing money into 
ventures all around the world. We don’t even seem to be at the 
point where we feel we have the obligation to explain to people 
of Saskatchewan that when we lose these dollars that we 
apologize for those losses. We’ve just got so accustomed to 
these losses that what we do is, before we know it, we jump into 
another one of these ventures and lose many, many more 
dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And all of it comes back to priorities of the Government of 
Saskatchewan of the day. This NDP government . . . And this 
has gone on, Mr. Speaker, since the early ’90s. We were told 
we had to tighten our belts and everybody in Saskatchewan did 
that, both urban and rural. We paid the price at that time. We’re 
told now — and on some occasions, the budget’s balanced; in 
the last three or four or five years, that certainly hasn’t 
happened — but we were told things are better now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well you’d never know it by the tax bills that we’re receiving in 
rural Saskatchewan, in urban Saskatchewan when it comes to 
municipal tax and education tax. And municipalities have done 
everything they can to keep from raising taxes, but have got to a 
point, I believe — as we see in Regina and Saskatoon and are 
going to see in many other municipalities, Mr. Speaker — the 
local tax has to go up. And the people picking up the tab are the 
local taxpayers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m here in support of my colleague from 
Wood River and the motion that we’re putting forth today 
asking for more funding for municipal government. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for The 
Battlefords, the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
hope that I have the opportunity here in the short time available 
this morning to be able to dispel some of the myths and provide 
some of the facts for those who are listening or who may read 
these remarks in Hansard in the next few days and months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to bring to the attention not only of the 
members opposite but to the public at large that a little over a 
week ago, actually on April 18 of this month, here in the 
Chamber in Committee of Finance I stood and defended the 
estimates of the Department of Government Relations. And 
anyone who wants to take a look at Hansard — the transcripts 
of the proceedings of the legislature — Hansard for April 18, 
beginning on page 2551, Mr. Speaker, will see about an hour of 
questions and answers with regards to revenue sharing and this 
government’s commitment to municipalities across this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, anyone who takes into account all of the 

information that was discussed, disclosed, and debated during 
that period of time will see this government is strongly 
committed to the municipal sector, strongly committed to the 
men and women who are elected to municipal councils across 
this province, and strongly committed to the people who benefit 
from good decisions that are made by municipal councils right 
across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — So, Mr. Speaker, the premise of the 
motion in front of us today, Mr. Speaker, is about the failure of 
this government in providing funding to municipalities that has 
led to property tax increases across the province. Well first of 
all, Mr. Speaker, let’s just get a handle, that municipal 
governments were all aware of it — balance expenses and 
revenues, balance their budgets, make choices in balancing 
those budgets. And they do so with a whole lot of different 
circumstances. 
 
Sometimes it’s additional revenue from the province. 
Sometimes it’s maintenance of revenues from the province. 
Sometimes it’s even less revenue from the province. Sometimes 
it’s with additional revenue from other sources. And sometimes 
it’s with expenses that are either higher or lower depending on 
what’s happening with policing services, library services, 
infrastructure services throughout their communities. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that municipal governments take their 
roles and responsibilities extremely seriously and are doing 
their best to balance budgets, given their circumstances that 
they have in front of them. So, Mr. Speaker, we will do our best 
to ensure that municipal leaders across the province have the 
support of the provincial government and resources available to 
the provincial government, to assist them in doing the job that 
they need to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, part of the debate here today has to do with 
revenue sharing. And it’s not that we have a lot of time to 
discuss the whole issue of revenue sharing, but I’ll do my best 
to throw a few of the facts on the table. 
 
Number one is that this government, my department, and 
representatives of the municipal sector are sitting down right 
now, Mr. Speaker, to discuss revenue sharing between the 
province of Saskatchewan and municipalities across the 
province. A working group has been established that includes 
representatives of the urban municipalities, the rural 
municipalities, and the cities, Mr. Speaker, in particular the 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina. And we are discussing the 
needs of the communities with regards to revenue sharing and 
the ability of the province to maintain a sustainable and 
predictable funding allocation to the municipalities. 
 
One of the things that’s on the table for discussion of course is 
comparison with other provinces, comparison with other cities. 
And I have some information I’d like to share with the members 
opposite during this discussion. But at the same time, they’re 
taking a look at the history of revenue sharing in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just had a question in the legislature a 
while ago; I didn’t have a chance to put all the numbers on the 
record, but I’d like to do so now, Mr. Speaker. The 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2759 

revenue-sharing pool that the municipalities — and what in fact 
the members opposite have seemed to, seem to support by way 
of their line of questioning — is a escalator formula that existed 
in the revenue-sharing pool beginning in 1980 and moving 
forward. That revenue-sharing escalator pool, Mr. Speaker, 
started off with about a 10 per cent increase in municipal 
revenue sharing back in 1981-82 and increased by another 10 
per cent revenue sharing to the municipalities in ’82-83. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, no sooner did the Conservatives get elected 
in 1982 in this province, and all of a sudden the escalator 
formula that had been worked out by the New Democratic Party 
government of Allan Blakeney, no sooner did they get elected 
— promising free gas, or lower gas tax, home ownership 
rebuilding programs, and beginning their debt building in the 
province, Mr. Speaker — no sooner did that happen, and the 
first budget of the Conservative government back in ’83-84 saw 
only a 4 per cent increase in revenue sharing. The next year, a 5 
per cent increase in revenue sharing. 
 
We hit 1985, Mr. Speaker, ’85-86, and all of a sudden we have 
0.1 per cent in revenue sharing; ’86-87, a 3 per cent increase in 
revenue sharing. But in ’87-88, 0.9 per cent. In ’88-89, 0.5 per 
cent; ’89-90, zero per cent; ’90-91, zero per cent. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, with this huge debt that was built up, no 
benefit to municipalities by the members opposite, the party of 
the members opposite, no benefit to the municipalities and a 
huge debt built up in this province, the government changed. 
And with the support of the municipalities, there was a 10 per 
cent decrease in revenue sharing followed by an 11 per cent 
decrease in revenue sharing, in order to deal with the 
circumstances that this province faced. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, as revenue sharing started to increase again 
in ’95-96, what happened? The federal government came 
forward with a new budget that took money away from 
education and health care, and severely crippled the province 
already in financial straits. And as a result of that, the 
municipalities again stepped forward with the provincial 
government and took a 38 per cent decrease in revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was a very strong commitment by the 
municipal sector there, to help get this province back on its feet. 
And what’s happened, Mr. Speaker? The province is back on its 
feet; it is improving. 
 
And this government began the following year, ’98-99, with a 
7.7 per cent increase in revenue sharing. But most importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at this government under this 
Premier in the last three years. 2002-2003, an 18 per cent 
increase in revenue sharing; 2003-04, a 15 per cent increase in 
revenue sharing; and ’04-05, a 13 per cent increase in revenue 
sharing, Mr. Speaker. A commitment to the municipalities that 
over a three-year period of time amounts to 54 per cent increase 
in revenue sharing to exactly address some of the issues that the 
municipalities have raised with us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a very short amount of time left to 
indicate that this government did put additional money into 
infrastructure this year because the municipalities said to us, we 
need to have some infrastructure money. We had the 
opportunity to find what is the equivalent of an additional $10 

million for municipalities in each of the next four years. We 
have committed those dollars, an additional $10 million in each 
of the four years to support the priorities of municipalities. And 
we have committed ourselves to working with the 
municipalities on improving the revenue-sharing arrangement 
between us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the single biggest threat to 
municipalities today is not the provincial budget that the 
municipalities know and understand, but the federal budget that 
at this point in time is in jeopardy because of the work of the 
members opposite, their federal Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this federal budget is roughly $18 million this 
year for the province of Saskatchewan municipalities, and over 
a five-year period of time, about a $60 million package for local 
municipalities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is very important, as I conclude my remarks 
today, that the members opposite commit themselves to 
working to get the federal budget passed, to get money moving 
forward to ensure that municipalities have their commitments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has lapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I listened 
to the Minister of Government Relations’ comments with 
interest. And what I heard that minister say is his explanation of 
this government’s failure to properly address this whole issue of 
revenue sharing and the larger issue of property taxes. And of 
course, as quite typical with members opposite, whenever they 
don’t have an answer, they revert back to the 1980s blues, Mr. 
Speaker. They blame everything on the 1980s. Well maybe if 
they don’t have . . . And then if that doesn’t work, well then it’s 
perhaps the federal government’s excuse or it’s their problem, 
and they look to the federal government to bail them out. And 
then if that doesn’t work, I suggest probably the next excuse 
they’ll use is, well we had a Depression back in the 1930s and 
therefore we can’t address anything. 
 
The people of this province realize that these people have been 
in power for the last 14 years, Mr. Speaker. And in that period 
of time all they can come up with is addressing the day-to-day 
situations without any long-term vision and without any 
long-term plan. And that’s the reoccurring theme that you hear 
from the people of this province whenever they look at what 
this government does. They say there’s no vision there; there’s 
no long-term plan. And again we see that today, and we saw 
that in that minister’s comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that he set up a working group 
with SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] and SUMA and the cities to address revenue 
sharing. And that perhaps is a bit of a start. But once again this 
government only gets it half right, Mr. Speaker, because what 
this government needs to do is look at property taxes in total. 
And there are two or three components, two main components, 
to property taxes. One is the municipal tax and the other is the 
education property tax, Mr. Speaker. And until you address 
property taxes — the whole, the total property tax bill that 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

property owners pay — and address that in a meaningful and a 
long-term way, we will never get out of this current situation 
that we find ourselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have seen over the years, and particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan but also in urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 
an ever-increasing dependence on . . . to fund the K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] system on the backs of property 
owners, Mr. Speaker. And until this government screws up its 
courage and addresses it as they said they would in the 2003 
election campaign . . . The Premier went around this province 
and said their program, their platform had the ability to receive 
the Boughen report. Well yes, they had the ability to receive it; 
they had no ability to do anything about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that’s why municipalities are finding themselves in the 
problems they have today. Because when they look at 
increasing their mill rate, they know they are only part of the 
total property tax bill. And in fact in rural Saskatchewan, quite 
often the municipal portion of the tax bill is only one-third or 
less. And so therefore they are very reluctant to increase the 
municipal portion of tax bills, but quite often they’re forced into 
that because of the lack of funding from this government. 
 
And particularly in the year that we’ve just seen, where this 
government had unexpected and windfall revenues of $1.2 
million, do you think there was ever a time that a government 
should look at the total tax question and sit down in a 
meaningful way and try and address that issue, you would think 
it would be in a year like this. But what do we see from this 
government, a half-measure once again. Instead of including the 
school board people, the boards of education, and sitting down 
with them and making them part of the group to address the 
total property tax bill and find a meaningful solution to the 
education portion; if we could address that and reduce that 
dependence on funding for the K to 12 system, that would give 
the municipalities some room to manoeuvre. And still the 
property owners would see a lower level of taxation if there was 
some meaningful reform in education property tax, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
But this government has no desire, no ability, and no plans to 
address that issue, Mr. Speaker. So what do they do? They say 
that it’s everyone else’s fault. It’s the federal government’s 
fault; it’s the government of the 1980s. And perhaps they may 
have to blame it on the Great Depression that we had, and it set 
this province back and we’re still suffering from that. It’s 
everyone else’s fault except their fault, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
not good enough. 
 
We need to have a government that has some vision, Mr. 
Speaker, some courage to address the real issues of the day. 
And property tax is one of them, Mr. Speaker. It’s a tax that 
prevents growth in our province. It’s a tax, it’s a barrier to 
people relocating in this province, because that is one of the 
issues that they look at when they look at what jurisdiction they 
would like to establish a business, or establish a home. They 
look at the total tax package, and property tax is an important 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, we not only have frozen funding for municipalities, 

Mr. Speaker, which then causes municipalities like cities, 
particularly the urban cities; we see property tax increases in 
Saskatoon of 4 per cent, and Regina of 4 per cent. We may not 
see any mill rate increases in some of the rural municipalities, 
Mr. Speaker, but we will see increased property tax bills 
because of reassessment. 
 
And this is what I think this government is hoping for. That’s 
why they froze revenue sharing, because they knew that there is 
a shift in assessment. And I’ve got municipalities in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, where their total assessment has 
gone up by 30 per cent or more. I’ve had property owners 
phoning me and saying that if the mill rates remain exactly the 
same as they were in 2004, Mr. Speaker, their property tax — 
total property tax bill — would increase by more than 30 to 40 
per cent. So that small 8 per cent credit that they’re going to 
receive on the education portion of their property tax is 
absolutely meaningless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s what that minister is depending on; that the 
municipalities, particularly on the east side of the province, 
won’t need any extra dollars because they can leave their mill 
rates the same. They can go to their property owners and say 
well look, we didn’t increase our mill rates, in fact, maybe we 
even lowered them a bit. But knowing full well that even those 
lower mill rates, will generate significantly more property taxes, 
both for the municipalities and the boards of education. 
 
And that’s why we saw — one of the reasons why we saw a 
freeze in the funding to the foundation operating grant, because 
these people over there know what the effects, or at least I 
would hope that they would know, perhaps they don’t and they 
don’t realize what’s happening out there in certain areas of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again, I would like to reiterate that what we need is a 
long-term solution to the total property tax package. We need to 
address the . . . not only the municipal portion of the property 
tax bill, but the education portion. 
 
If we can find a solution — and there are solutions out there, all 
we need to do is look at Manitoba — they were very . . . They 
brought in a program that lowered property taxes, the education 
portion of property taxes, by some 30 per cent last year and I 
believe it’s being lowered again this year. We’ve got an NDP 
government over there. I would suggest to the Minister of 
Government Relations, why doesn’t he give his colleague a call 
in Winnipeg and find out . . . and talk to him and see what 
they’ve done. 
 
But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that minister hasn’t got the 
courage to do that because it would mean some meaningful 
reforms that this government isn’t prepared to bring forward, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, then do . . . If you’re not prepared to see what 
Manitoba has done, bring in your local governments. Bring in 
officials of your local governments; sit down with them and 
develop a plan because all the various parties . . . SUMA would 
be affected, SARM is affected, the School Board Association is 
affected, Mr. Speaker. And I think . . . and they have ideas. 
They have resources. They look at this. They’ve been talking 
about it. SARM’s been talking about education on property 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

taxes for a long time. They have some solutions, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would think that it would be incumbent on that minister to 
involve these people. 
 
I asked officials of SARM recently if they’ve been consulted on 
the whole property tax issue. They said the last time they were 
consulted, other than perhaps in the last day or two, was when 
the Minister of Government Relations needed . . . requested 
their input on how to distribute their $55 million in education 
property tax release. That consultation took place I believe a 
year ago, and there’s been nothing since, Mr. Speaker. And you 
would think, with the pressing issue that property tax relief has 
become . . . it has always been an issue in rural Saskatchewan, it 
is a growing issue and a major concern to many property 
owners in our major urban centres, and what is this government 
doing, Mr. Speaker? They’re doing nothing. They like to blame. 
They sing their 1980s blues, blame the federal government, and 
now I think they’ll say we had a depression, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would like to thank the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood for his contribution to global warming 
today, because what we heard from that member today was 
nothing but hot air. It is a complete misrepresentation of the 
facts. It shows a member that is not paying attention to the 
issues, a member who is not connected to the community, and a 
member who is not giving credit where credit is due. 
 
Let me address a number of these points, Mr. Speaker, because 
what we are seeing with the members opposite is nothing but a 
smear campaign intended to lead the public . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. It is unparliamentary for a member to allege intentional 
wrongdoing on the part of another member. I would ask the 
member to withdraw the statement before he proceeds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I withdraw that statement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is clear that the member opposite is 
on a campaign of obfusification, obfusification I would say, Mr. 
Speaker. It is clear that the member does not want to make well 
understood what his party’s position is, or this party’s position 
is, in terms of moving forward. And I think that the member 
opposite owes his constituents better than that. 
 
Let me take a look simply at the points that this member has 
raised, and let’s put the facts on the table. 
 
Now the member opposite says that we should be implementing 
the Boughen Commission report. That’s what that member 
says. That member says that there should be a 7 per cent sales 
tax on the restaurant meals across this province, despite what 
the business community has said, despite the hundreds and 
hundreds and hundreds of people in his own constituency who 

have petitioned against it. That member says he knows better 
and we should be putting that sales tax onto restaurant meals. 
That’s what he says. He says that we should be shifting that tax 
over to the people who are buying food and make sure that they 
are paying more. 
 
That’s the position of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the position of the member opposite, and he pretends to 
say, no, no, no, all I’m saying is you should implement the 
Boughen report. 
 
Read the Boughen report. Read what that commission says, 
read what it is the petitioners said that that member tabled in 
this House, and tell us how he squares that position. That’s what 
we need to find out from that party, is how it is they think that 
you can implement the Boughen Commission report without 
increasing sales taxes and placing that burden on to the 
restaurant owners of this province? 
 
The member opposite says we should be drawing in the school 
boards into a discussion about how it is we deal with property 
tax. Well thank you very much for that helpful suggestion that 
we implemented more than a year ago. We brought together 
SARM. We brought together SUMA. We brought together the 
school boards. And we said, how do we address this issue? How 
do we make sure that we can get meaningful, sustainable 
property tax relief in this province? 
 
And do you know what those members suggested? They said 
that we should do what this government did in this budget, and 
that is to implement a tax credit. That we should use that money 
across the board not just for agricultural landowners, as the 
member opposite suggests, as Manitoba has done, but for all 
ratepayers. Why would we not have in place a regime that 
supports all ratepayers? Why is it that he continues on his 
anti-business rant that wants to see a sales tax placed on 
restaurant meals, that says that business owners should not 
participate in the property tax reduction that we’ve introduced 
and that that should solely be vested with agricultural owners? 
 
Why is it he does not support this government’s program which 
is reducing, reducing property taxes for businesses, for 
agricultural landowners, and residents? Why is it that he does 
not support that? Why does that Sask Party not support this? 
How is it that the members opposite can say on the one hand 
that we need to take a look at the whole tax package of the 
province, and then deny the fact that this province is the most 
competitive, most competitive, not only in Western Canada but 
in this part of North America, in terms of our business climate? 
 
How is it that that member can deny the facts that this economy 
is growing; that on indicator, after indicator, after indicator this 
province ranks number one in terms of GDP growth, in terms of 
income growth, in terms of support for our economy? How is it 
that he can deny the headlines that we see across the country 
that say the three Western provinces, British Columbia, Alberta, 
and Saskatchewan are booming? How is it the member can 
deny those facts? 
 
The member denies the facts because it is not in his political 
interest to recognize them. The simple fact is that we know 
what is good for the Saskatchewan people is not good for the 
Saskatchewan Party because the Saskatchewan Party is 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

interested in perpetuating a series of myths that are not based on 
the fact and are not supported by the record of this government 
and that is what the problem is. 
 
As we look from 2001, just from the time that this Premier took 
office — just from the time that this Premier took office — we 
have seen a tremendous turnaround in our provincial economy. 
We have seen this province move forward in terms of the 
changes that are making economic growth happen; changes to 
our resource royalty structure, changes to make sure that we’ve 
got growth in the manufacturing sector, changes to support our 
mining sector, investments that support our forestry sector. This 
is the way that we make sure that taxes are fairly based, because 
we support economic growth and thereby are able to better 
share the burden of the services. 
 
The members opposite launch a not so subtle attack on our 
public services by attempting to undermine the base by which 
we pay for them. High quality services have a high cost. That’s 
the simple fact of it. 
 
Now they stand up every day and they demand that the 
government spend more on services in health care, that we 
spend more on services in education, we spend more in services 
in housing. And yet, they offer no solutions except for the one 
that the member opposite has suggested in terms of putting the 
sales tax on restaurant meals. They suggest no other options to 
deal with the taxation regime. They provide us with no concrete 
advice on how to deal with property tax relief . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The member opposite says well, there’s ideas 
out there. What are those ideas? Articulate what that idea is. Of 
the 100 ideas, so-called new ideas that the members opposite 
cooked up into a little pamphlet, of those, I ask them where is 
the concrete idea that shows how you’re going to reduce 
property tax? 
 
I want to know why the members opposite voted against a 
budget which will shift the burden of education funding on to 
provincial coffers and off of property tax. I want to know if 
those members opposite are going to stand in this House and 
support the property tax reduction Act that I’ve introduced into 
this Assembly. I want to know what those members are going to 
do in a concrete way to move this province forward, that 
protects our health care and education systems, and at the same 
time recognizes that we need to shift the way within our tax 
system that those are paid for. 
 
I don’t want to hear simply more hot air and platitudes from the 
members opposite. They claim to have new ideas. They claim 
to have a new approach. It is the same old Tory scheme of 
saying one thing, saying another thing, saying another thing, 
and saying another thing, and doing nothing. 
 
That’s the approach of those members opposite — whether it’s 
on property taxation changes, whether it is in terms of their 
criticism of the Crowns which I have appreciated listening to 
today again, as the members opposite criticize our Crown 
corporations. 
 
They say publicly, in front of the media, oh no, we . . . 
 
[11:45] 
 

The Speaker: — I would remind members the debate is to be 
confined to funding of municipalities. I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I apologize, Mr. Speaker, for 
that. I was simply responding to the comments from the 
member for Saltcoats who went on at some length about that. 
However if that’s now not appropriate, I’ll move on to a 
different section of my comments. 
 
The overall support for our financial regime in this province is 
based on a number of things not the least of which, not the least 
of which is the strength of this government’s finances. It has 
been the ability for us to turn the economy around. It has the 
ability for us to refinance the massive Tory debt which today 
continues to cost us more, cost us more than we spend on K to 
12 education. 
 
The member opposite wonders why we’re not able to reduce the 
overall cost, the property tax. I’ll tell you where there’s $600 
million tied up. Mr. Speaker, $600 million is tied up annually 
paying for a debt built up with the kind of ideas, the kind of 
leadership that the member for Swift Current is again 
purporting to have within this House. 
 
That is the approach that those members . . . and I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, as I listen to their ideas and their approach, there 
is nothing new here. There is simply a rehash of the Grant 
Devine agenda. There’s an agenda there that is interested only, 
only in gaining power, not in dealing substantively with 
reducing property taxes, not dealing substantively with 
economic growth, not providing any real alternative, simply 
providing criticism. And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that 
during the coming weeks and months we will make sure 
Saskatchewan people know those facts. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
this debate. I noticed the member from Regina South, in his 
speech, was quite worried about the environment with hot air 
and global warming, and then he goes and contributes quite 
heavily to it, I might add there, with that speech. 
 
At the end there he talked about debt and that is a problem. But 
a lot of that debt started in the ’70s under Allan Blakeney when 
he stole . . . took, took, took. He took from businesses, 
businesses that had invested in this province, had brought 
money here, had brought things here and took it from them. It’s 
called nationalization. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member on his feet? 
The member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite used some 
language with regards to Allan Blakeney, former premier of this 
province, that was clearly unparliamentary, and I would ask the 
Speaker to rule accordingly. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member’s point is well taken. The 
member had used the words . . . language that was 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

unparliamentary. I give him the opportunity to withdraw that 
one particular word. The member for Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to withdraw 
the word that they stole from that company. But I will carry on 
that they nationalize the potash — nationalize it. For people that 
don’t understand what nationalize means, they took it from 
them. They took it without their permission. 
 
The Speaker: — On a point of order, the Chair recognizes the 
member for . . . Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
member for Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Given the Speaker’s previous ruling in 
this debate, I’m sure that he will want to direct the member to 
seek some relevance and to stick to the issue under debate. 
Clearly the Speaker’s already ruled that the Crowns are not a 
topic for discussion. 
 
The Speaker: — Point of order is well taken. The member for 
Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The debate was going 
on about some debt, but I can move on to this particular motion 
because it does go at that. The motion deals with revenue 
sharing. A cutback to towns, villages, and cities that have 
happened over a number of years . . . I was a councillor under 
this NDP government when they cut back revenue sharing year 
after year after year, when towns are already struggling under a 
heavy tax burden and infrastructure problems, and things were 
brought in by this government at that end of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and this government has constantly cut back over 
the 80 . . . or ’90s support to towns and villages and cities. And 
now that they have . . . they talk about how great the province 
and what a great job they’re doing and how much extra money 
they’ve brought in, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and yet what do 
they do? Do they increase revenue sharing? No, they don’t 
increase revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t. So then is 
that false . . . is what they’re saying about how they have all this 
extra money, this extra oil revenue. 
 
Why don’t they send it to the towns and villages and the cities 
to lessen the tax burden out there that these people are 
struggling under, so they don’t have to raise taxes, Mr. Speaker, 
out there? And they are going to have to raise taxes. I think 
there was a thing put in there that, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
thing put in there that they’ve . . . Saskatoon, if I remember 
right, Saskatoon has the highest . . . is going to have the highest 
tax hike in four years. And I know some of the other towns out 
there are going to . . . aren’t going to have to raise taxes out 
there, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to have to raise taxes. 
 
And another thing, when it comes to it, I can’t believe that the 
NDP voted against 100 Ideas on that. We have the ideas 21, 27, 
33, and 70 that talk with revenue sharing at that, that talk about 
that. You know why, because this government has no ideas. 
They haven’t had ideas for years, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been 
bereft of ideas, and they’re constantly been hollering over here. 
Well we’ve supplied ideas. We’ve supplied that to the people of 
Saskatchewan on how to improve this province, and how it’s 
going to be improved under Saskatchewan Party government. 
 

Because under this government, it has shrunken, Mr. Speaker, 
these towns, villages, and cities have shrunken. And they will 
continue to keep shrinking year after year after year because 
this government has provided no support for the people of this 
province for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, because it doesn’t 
care about the people of Saskatchewan. It doesn’t care about 
anything. 
 
All it cares is about its state-owned businesses and how many 
more state-owned businesses can it take over, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s all this government cares about is state-owned 
businesses, as long as it’s what’s for the state, not for the good 
of the people, Mr. Speaker, the people that are struggling out 
there of it. 
 
Some of the ideas out there, Mr. Speaker, that we put out there, 
is increased funding for K-12 education, provide short and 
long-term property tax relief. Another one is commit all 
provincial fuel tax revenues as a minimum annual investment 
. . . provincial and municipal transportation, construction, and 
renewal out there, Mr. Speaker, on that. 
 
You know we got up today, there was the member that talked 
about the problems in the North, Mr. Speaker. And there are 
problems in the North. Have they increased the funding to the 
northern part of the province? No, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t 
because that deals in revenue sharing because there’s also . . . 
there’s a northern revenue sharing. There’s a southern revenue 
sharing, Mr. Speaker, and they haven’t increased that at the end 
of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saltcoats made a good point 
when he talks that this government wants to use somebody 
else’s money. It’s always wanting to blame somebody else. It 
wants to blame the previous administration that was in there. 
But it doesn’t want to go back to the ’70s. You know, it doesn’t 
want to blame that previous administration for the problems that 
were out here, that were caused under that government that 
started nationalizing things, that started chasing away 
businesses, that started chasing away people when the move 
went. The businesses aren’t coming back. And they still talk 
about in the ’70s, Mr. Speaker, when things were nationalized 
here. 
 
But this government wants to blame, blame people. They want 
to blame the federal government — well they’re not giving us 
enough money. If only the feds would give us more money. 
Well why isn’t the Premier working on the Prime Minister right 
now to get a better equalizing deal? No, no. He’s more worried 
about the Jack Layton making a deal for Ontario, helping 
Ontario and helping the East. 
 
That’s all our Premier is more worried about because all they 
care about is their party, Mr. Speaker. They don’t care about the 
people of this province. They haven’t cared for them for a 
number of years, Mr. Speaker. That’s all they care about is their 
party, the future of their party, whether it’s down east. And if 
their fortunes are down east that’s where their Premier will go 
and help, Mr. Speaker, and while this province is suffering 
under revenue sharing. 
 
We all know the costs of infrastructure have gone up to deliver 
good quality, clean drinking water out there. There’s pressure 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

on towns and on villages to do that, Mr. Speaker. And is this 
government helping with increased infrastructure money? No, 
no they’re not. 
 
You know towns out there that have to build a water treatment 
plant are trying to do it on their own. There’s a town outside of 
Saskatoon. The town of Osler has been trying to build a water 
storage tank, Mr. Speaker, a water storage tank. You know, and 
they have their share of the money. They have it in place, Mr. 
Speaker, but this government won’t fund it. They have less 
water now for less than a half a day. If they fight a fire there, 
the fire department says they won’t be able to put out that fire in 
that town, Mr. Speaker. That endangers people’s lives. 
 
That’s how much this government cares about helping the 
towns and the villages and the cities out there, Mr. Speaker. 
They just sit back and watch as the towns and villages put up 
taxes, and they just say, well it’s not our fault. You know, 
we’ve got all this . . . we have extra money here, but we want to 
invest it outside of Saskatchewan. We don’t want to invest it 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn’t want to invest 
it here in Saskatchewan to help the infrastructure here. No, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to help. We want to help some outside 
company somewhere else. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s wrong, and that’s why this 
government is on its way out, Mr. Speaker. For that I support 
the motion that was brought forth from the member from Wood 
River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, the 10-minute 
question/comment period will begin, but . . . Order. But last 
Friday there was a point of order on how the Speaker should be 
dealing with the 10-minute question/comment period. And there 
was some discussion, and the ruling is that at exactly 10 
minutes the clock will be called even if you’ve only had the 
floor for 4 seconds and you’re in the middle of a very good 
question. 
 
So with those clarified rules I will now open the floor to 
question/comment periods. And I recognize the member for 
Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My question is in fact to the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. I would like him to explain to the House 
why he thinks that there should be a sales tax placed on 
restaurant meals as is suggested by the Boughen Commission. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, that question indicates the 
narrow-mindedness and the lack of vision of that government, 
Mr. Speaker. That question comes from the Minister of 
Learning and that is the sum total of his effort to address the 
property tax issue. 
 
What I had said in this House, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll repeat it, 
that if that government isn’t prepared to deal with the issue, 
they should take some advice from this side of the House. And 

what my suggestion was, and the suggestion from this side of 
the House is, to deal with this issue — call the members of 
SARM, SUMA, and the School Boards Association, and the 
government, and sit down with that group and start working on 
a long-term solution. But all that member can see is a very 
small part of one report, Mr. Speaker. And he has no vision and 
no idea as to how to solve this problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, 
the government took the Boughen report and then cherry-picked 
from it what they wanted. Unfortunately all they got was the 
pits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They chose to raise the PST [provincial sales tax] which was 
recommended in the Boughen report, but Boughen also 
recommended a long-term reduction in property taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately this government chose to ignore that 
part and simply take the pits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amalgamation issue in education deals with . . . 
Amalgamation of school divisions was simply a diversion from 
the property tax issue, Mr. Speaker. When will real long-term 
property tax reductions take place to move education property 
taxes closer to the 40 per cent rather than the 60 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker? When will the government finally implement some 
real long-term property tax reductions from municipalities in 
education? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
feel like I might use up all the time answering this wonderful 
question. The very first and very simple answer to the 
member’s question is that we’re in the process of doing exactly 
what he’s asking us to do. And we’re doing it in conjunction 
with the municipalities and the school boards. 
 
We have a working group that was established prior to the 
Premier’s successfully negotiated equalization matter. We took 
a discussion that was developing a long-term solution and 
applied it to a short-term interim arrangement that gets us into 
the long-term plan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, specifically this government is not 
supportive of transferring property taxes to the restaurant meals 
in this province. That was a choice we had to make, and it was a 
choice that we made very clearly. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I want to give the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood a chance to answer the last question I 
asked him. Why is it he supports putting the sales tax on 
restaurant meals? Why is it he supports that? And what is his 



April 29, 2005 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

vision for long-term property tax relief other than increasing 
taxes on businesses? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, what we see here is a pretty pathetic 
sight, Mr. Speaker. We have the Minister of Learning and the 
only thing he can ask, Mr. Speaker, is on PST on restaurant 
meals. He is not prepared. He has no ability, no vision, Mr. 
Speaker, to address the major question, the global question of 
property taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the people of the province should see what kind of a 
Learning minister we have, who goes out to Balgonie and 
throws up a smokescreen of forced amalgamation because he 
has no ability or no desire to address the real issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is for the Minister of Government Relations, the member for 
North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government refuses to take seriously its 
obligation to properly fund municipalities so that the line can be 
held on property taxes, will it as a minimum give the legislature 
the assurance that it will stop off-loading costs on 
municipalities in the following areas: for instance, municipal 
policing agreements; in the area of water testing costs; in the 
delivery of water via SaskWater pipelines; in the escalating 
utility costs; in recreational facilities; in municipal regional 
garbage collection agreements; in heavy-haul road agreements 
instead of fixing the highways properly; and in any future new 
emergency communications system that may replace FleetNet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again there’s a short answer and a long answer. And I’d love to 
give the member the long answer because this government’s 
commitment to everything that he put on the table in his 
preamble is absolutely . . . There’s a commitment from this 
government that’s unparalleled. 
 
But the short answer, Mr. Speaker, is this government’s 
commitment to the municipal sector, with increases in 
infrastructure funding, with increases in policing dollars from 
the province to the municipalities, with increases to regional 
waste management facilities showed in this budget 
demonstrates the long-term commitment that this government 
has to support those very programs he talks about. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Wood River was so pleased to be able to talk 
about his little pamphlet, the 100-and-something ideas. One of 
those ideas, Mr. Speaker, specifically says he would, “Negotiate 
a new Municipal Revenue Sharing Agreement based in part on 
provincial own source revenues and the municipalities’ ability 
to raise local property tax revenues.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the member from Wood 
River — because we know that this government is currently in 
the process of discussing the options for additional 
revenue-sharing matters with the municipalities — what advice 
does the member opposite have to help us conclude a new 
revenue-sharing agreement with the municipalities? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One 
thing we would do is we’d sure listen to the municipalities and 
discuss it with them. But I’ll tell you what we wouldn’t do, Mr. 
Speaker. We wouldn’t stand up in front of this Assembly and 
say that we would give more money to municipalities, but not 
do anything in revenue sharing. 
 
And I quoted the figures when I spoke — 44,109 last year, 
44,109 this year. I would say that’s zero per cent increase. 
When we’ve got a $1.2 billion extra revenue last year, and we 
put zero, zero into urban revenue sharing, zero into rural 
revenue sharing, zero into northern revenue sharing — zap, 
you’re froze — at a time when we’ve got $1.2 billion extra 
money and put zero into revenue sharing, we would not do that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question is for the member for Regina 
South. And as he kicked off his leadership campaign for the 
NDP this morning, I noticed he forgot to acknowledge the 
revenue-sharing cuts that I’d talked about, the unconditional 
grant cuts, conditional grant cuts to municipalities. 
 
Should he ever get to the point where he’s sitting in the 
Premier’s chair, would he return that money to the 
municipalities and would he restore the funding to where it 
should be, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I want to say that I appreciate the vote of confidence from the 
member for Saltcoats. I suspect that he’ll be sitting in his 
leader’s chair much sooner than I’ll be sitting in ours, but only 
because of the nature of the party opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me say this. We have made a 
commitment to return $55 million to property tax payers this 
year. Last year we put $54 million back in rebates through the 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2005 

Crown corporations. We will have another $55 million worth of 
property tax cuts next year. We are continuing to make 
investments in infrastructure. We are continuing to make 
investments in our communities. And we are continuing to try 
and shift the balance, shift the burden of education cost back on 
to provincial coffers. 
 
I would note this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if 
municipalities hold the line, if school boards hold the line, that 
we will see that education portion shift from 42 per cent to 47 
per cent funding, and I think that that is progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
since 1992 this government has paid in the neighbourhood of 
$9.9 billion in interest on the provincial debt that was in no 
small way amassed by the former administration of the 1980s of 
which the Leader of the Opposition was an integral part as 
adviser to the minister for Economic Development. 
 
I want to ask the member for Arm River what he believes that 
the former Devine administration, in concert with the Leader of 
the Opposition, could have done differently. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired and 
that is the . . . Order. The 75-minute debate has expired. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
. . . Order. The Government House Leader has moved that the 
House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until 1:30 p.m. Monday. Have a pleasant weekend, 
members. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:07.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2745 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2745 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................2745 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2745 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2745 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2745 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2746 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................2746 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2746 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2746 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................2746 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Power of Pink Fundraiser 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................2746 
 Erindale-Arbor Creek Community Association Citizen Patrol 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................2747 
 Saskatchewan Métis Wagon Adventures 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2747 
 ArtsSmarts Awards 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2747 
 SaskEnergy Volunteer Challenge 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................2748 
 Biggar Residents Receive Volunteer Recognition Awards 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................2748 
 French for the Future Conference 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2748 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Negotiations with Federal Government Regarding an Energy Accord 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2749 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................2749 
 Behaviour of Health Official 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2750 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2750 
 Legislation for Treatment of Drug Addicted Youth 
  Bakken Lackey........................................................................................................................................................................2751 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2751 
 Housing Conditions in Northern Saskatchewan 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................2752 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2752 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2752 
 Financial Assistance for Farmers 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2753 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................2753 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................2754 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................2754 
  Gantefoer (point of order)......................................................................................................................................................2754 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................2754 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Funding of Municipal Agreements 
  Huyghebaert ..................................................................................................................................................................2754, 2765 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................2756, 2765 
  Taylor.............................................................................................................................................................................2758, 2764 
  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................2759, 2764 
  Thomson ........................................................................................................................................................................2761, 2764 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................2762 
  McCall (point of order) ..........................................................................................................................................................2762 
  The Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................2762 



 

  Thomson (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................2763 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2764 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................2765 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................2766 
 
 
 
 



CABINET MINISTERS 
 

Hon. L. Calvert 
Premier 

 
Hon. P. Atkinson 

Minister of Crown Management Board 
Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 

 
Hon. J. Beatty 

Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Provincial Secretary 

 
Hon. B. Belanger 

Minister of Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. E. Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

 
Hon. J. Crofford 

Minister of Community Resources and Employment 
Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 

Minister Responsible for Gaming 
 

Hon. D. Forbes 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of Energy Conservation 
 

Hon. D. Higgins 
Minister of Labour 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. J. Nilson 
Minister of Health 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. P. Prebble 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. F. Quennell 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
 

Hon. C. Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Rural Development 
 

Hon. M. Sonntag 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister of Highways and Transportation 
 

Hon. L. Taylor 
Minister of Government Relations 

 
Hon. A. Thomson 

Minister of Learning 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

 
Hon. H. Van Mulligen 

Minister of Finance 
 

Hon. M. Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 




