
















































Hansard: November 09, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 10A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 297 
 November 9, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
highways continue to be an important issue to the people of 
Cypress Hills. I read the prayer concerning repairs to Highway 
18 as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by residents of the 
community of Maple Creek as well as Robsart. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are concerned about Highway No. 49: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Lintlaw, 
Kelvington, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Punnichy, Lintlaw, Odessa, and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from the 
communities of Carnduff, Glen Ewen, and Oxbow. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the 

prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Carnduff, Glen Ewen, and Alida. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned with this 
government’s plan for gravel highways in our province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and provide dust suppression on the 
gravel portion of Highway No. 99 between Junction 6 and 
Craven. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition come from a variety of 
communities: Southey, Cupar, Regina, Buena Vista, Lumsden, 
and Raymore. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise 
and I have four pages of a petition of citizens concerned with 
the safety of when driving on Highway No. 5. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And to demonstrate, Mr. Speaker, how this is a main corridor, 
on these four pages the signatures are from Saskatoon, 
Archerwill, Cudworth, Rose Valley, Melfort, Humboldt, 
Watson, St. Denis, Waskesiu, Colonsay, Regina, Spalding, 
Quill Lake, Codette, Wadena, and Prud’homme. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who have concerns regarding the Estevan Daycare 
Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Bienfait, Midale, and 
Estevan. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again present a 
petition from the citizens of Wilkie who are concerned about 
their health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps and ensure that the Wilkie Health 
Centre and special care home maintain at the very least 
their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Rockhaven, Wilkie and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of people across the 
Saskatchewan who, for the past seven years, have been 
lobbying this government for a dedicated children’s hospital 
within a hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 

The signatures come from the communities of Warman, 
Vanscoy, Leask, and Blaine Lake. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Sakimay First 
Nation and Grenfell. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens that have been concerned about all the cuts that 
have been happening to rural Saskatchewan. This particular 
petition deals with section shops in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists, Saskatchewan Highways 
employees who would be affected by such possible 
closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a privilege to rise today and present a petition that this is the 
first time in the province’s history that the government has 
denied coverage of the cancer drug recommended by the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Carnduff, Oxbow, Gainsborough, and 
Maryfield. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today on behalf of a constituent at Carnduff: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the communities of Grenfell, 
Alameda, Carnduff, Redvers, Gainsborough, Carievale, and 
Glen Ewen. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 15 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: what is the 
projected start date for the La Ronge natural gas project? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: how many employees are permanently 
stationed at the satellite section shop facilities in Gull 
Lake, Meath Park, and Shellbrook? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 15 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: has the 
department signed an exclusive agreement with the 
Philippines regarding immigration? If so, what is the 
length of the agreement? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management: when is the projected completion date for 
the construction at the front of the legislature? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Provincial 
Secretary, the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, November 2006 has been designated War Brides 
Month in Saskatchewan. In 1975 Saskatchewan became the first 
home to a provincial association for war brides in all of Canada. 
And to honour the association and their contributions, Mr. 
Speaker, we are privileged today to have several war brides 
joining us here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
It is my pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, the war brides who are 
with us here today. And as I introduce them, I would ask that 
you just give us a wave so that we know who you are. And then 
when we’ve completed, then we’ll show our appreciation to all 
of you together. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if I may introduce in order: Mrs. Zena Allen, 
Mrs. Ruby Apperley, Mrs. Barbara Brandt, Mrs. Gloria Brock 
— and you may be interested to know, Mr. Speaker, that Mrs. 
Brock was the founder of the first War Brides Association here 
in Saskatchewan — Mrs. Heather Galenzoski, Mrs. Kay 
Garside — and Mrs. Garside was the secretary treasurer of that 
first War Brides Association — Mrs. Beryl Gould, Mrs. Doris 
Hammill, Mrs. Madge Kiel, Mrs. Betty Last, Mrs. Maisie 

Lees-Dodman, Mrs. Eileen Malm, Mrs. Pat Orton, Mrs. Joyce 
Pinnow, Mrs. Pat Reslein, Mrs. Mary Taylor, and Mrs. Jean 
Thompson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to show their appreciation 
to all that these war brides have done for Saskatchewan since 
coming to our nation as new brides of those who are veterans in 
our Saskatchewan and our Canada. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you it is my privilege on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition to welcome the war brides to their legislature. 
 
My three sisters and two brothers and I always believe we were 
fortunate because our dad was a veteran and our mother was an 
English war bride. Some of my earliest memories were of Mom 
waiting for letters from home and her beloved Daily Mirrors 
that came in the mail. 
 
She hid her loneliness from us and I know, like many of you, 
she only went home once in 26 years. As kids there was only 
one other family in our town that had their set of grandparents 
on the other side of the ocean, and we used to visit with that 
family very often. And I know that my mother shared memories 
and maternity clothes with that lady. 
 
[10:15] 
 
It’s sad but as kids we never realized what mom had left behind 
to follow her heart to Canada. Mom was one of the 48,000 war 
brides and my sister was one of the children —the 22,000 
children — that came on the two-week journey to Pier 21 at 
Halifax. I think you know that there was 8,000 war brides here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s only now that those of us who care take time to understand 
the culture shock that you must have gone through to come here 
in Canada. Most war brides left cities. They left homes with 
central heat and fireplaces and running water and you came to a 
place where there was a wood stove and a well and cold 
winters. 
 
But as you celebrate the 60th anniversary of the war brides, on 
behalf of my leader and my colleagues we thank you not only 
for coming to Canada but for enriching our country and our 
culture. I hope you have pride when you know that one person 
in 30 in Canada can relate directly back to a war bride. So to 
use mom’s words when she’s finished her phone calls to 
England, I say, until we meet the next time, cheerio. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations, the member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all of the members of the Legislative Assembly, 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

His Excellency, Otto Ditz, the ambassador of Austria. And I 
wonder if he . . he is standing. His Excellency took up his 
appointment as ambassador of the Republic of Austria to 
Canada in January 2004. 
 
This is his first official visit to Saskatchewan. This trip will 
provide an opportunity for His Excellency to meet several 
government officials and explore mutual interests between 
Austria and Saskatchewan. And I wonder if members would 
recognize His Excellency for attending here today. 
 
And with him is a person who is no stranger to this Assembly 
and who’s more accustomed to being seated on the floor or 
behind the bar, and this is Mr. Tony Merchant, the Austrian 
honorary consul for Saskatchewan. I would ask all members to 
join me in extending a warm welcome to these distinguished 
visitors. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I too would like to join my colleague from 
the government side in welcoming His Excellency, Otto Ditz, 
the ambassador of Austria to Saskatchewan. We’re pleased that 
he’s been in Canada for a number of years and we’re also very 
pleased that he recognizes the importance of our province. And 
I hope he’s experiencing very warm hospitality from one of 
Canada’s friendliest places. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of visiting Austria in the year 
1999 between Christmas and New Year’s. It was chilly there as 
it’s chilly here, but the people were warm and friendly. And I 
think there is much to be gained if Canadians, particularly 
people from Saskatchewan, work with the people of Austria to 
increase trade and knowledge of one another and perhaps visit 
each other. 
 
So on that basis we thank His Excellency, and we also want to 
thank Mr. Tony Merchant, the honorary consul for 
Saskatchewan to Austria, for attending the legislature this 
morning. We welcome you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Regina-Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister of Ag and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to extend a general welcome to all of the 
war brides. But I also, on behalf of one of them, would like to 
. . . And this I would rarely do, but there was just a slight 
mistake in the House Leader’s introduction. And I know that 
Hansard is accurate and records the mistakes along with the 
corrections. But the final war bride that was introduced, a 
long-time friend of mine who was also the musician this 
morning, is Jean Thomas, not Thompson. Thank you. And so, 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Remembrance Day 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Canadians we are 
truly blessed and live in a land of plenty, free of the horrors of 
daily combat and war. Each November we remember the brave 
Canadians who have willingly placed their lives in jeopardy to 
secure the democratic freedoms and quality of life we now 
enjoy. 
 
We remember in many ways, Mr. Speaker. We recall the lines 
of the poem, “In Flanders Fields,” where poppies grow. We 
wear poppies to our lapels. We gather together in communities 
all across this country and lay wreaths at monuments to the 
fallen and many reflect privately on their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s war memorial bears 10,000 
names from our province alone — women and men of all walks 
of life and all races who fought and died in the name of 
something greater. When we think of war, we always remember 
the brave men but, Mr. Speaker, during the Second World War 
alone over 50,000 women served, 8,000 of them overseas. 
 
On Saturday we’ll honour the thousands of Canadians who have 
died in the name of our freedom, and we’ll hold a special place 
in our hearts for those who have lost their lives in recent weeks 
and months and for those Canadians fighting on foreign soil 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gustav Mahler once said, “Tradition is not the 
worship of ashes, but the preservation of fire.” We will 
remember them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saturday 
is Remembrance Day. It is a day dedicated to honour the men 
and women who at a desperate time of need left their farms, 
their families, and their friends to fight for freedom in strange 
countries. Many thousands gave their lives in armed conflict. 
They fought for liberty, for freedom, for each other, and for 
their country. Many of these young men and women were as 
young as 16 and lied about their age to fight for something they 
believed was right. They wanted to extinguish the flame of 
tyranny that was growing in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has an exemplary record of 
answering this call to service. Over 140,000 men and women 
from Saskatchewan have served our country with pride and 
honour. Our province’s war memorial bears the names of the 
10,000 Saskatchewan men and women who gave the ultimate 
sacrifice, their life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan soldiers fought in World War I, 
World War II, and the Korean War. They have participated in 
peacekeeping conflicts and are currently serving in Afghanistan. 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

Mr. Speaker, November is also War Brides Month. We would 
like to recognize the 48,000 war brides that left their homes for 
Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, my mother-in-law was one of those. 
 
With great courage they left their families and friends for a 
foreign land. They have contributed greatly to Canada and we 
thank them. 
 
We remember the 232,000 killed or wounded in World War I. 
We remember the 96,000 killed or wounded in World War II. 
We remember the 1,558 killed or wounded in the Korean War. 
We remember the veterans of peacekeeping conflicts. We 
remember their sacrifice, and may we never forget. God bless. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Honouring Saskatchewan War Brides 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we now here all 
know that November of this year has been declared 
Saskatchewan War Brides Month. 
 
It is estimated that some 45,000 women from England, the 
Netherlands, France, Belgium, Germany, and Italy came to 
Canada as war brides during and following the Second World 
War. Of these, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard, approximately 
8,000 settled in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took great courage for these young women to 
leave all that was familiar to them, their country, their homes, 
and their families to come to a new land and face an uncertain 
future. Many were unprepared for the conditions that they 
found in Canada, but most stayed, adjusted to a new way of life, 
and over the last 60 years have not only come to love Canada 
but have contributed to its development in so many significant 
ways. 
 
In 1975 Saskatchewan became the first home to a provincial 
association for war brides, and I want to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge all the members of the Saskatchewan War Brides 
Association, especially current president, Mrs. Terry England. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year as part of the province’s centennial the 
Saskatchewan War Brides Association published a book called 
War Brides: our sentimental journey, a collection of stories 
written by Saskatchewan war brides about their experiences as 
part of one of the most unusual immigrations in the province’s 
history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me again today in 
recognizing the many valuable contributions that war brides 
continue to make to our province and our country. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

Honouring Canadian Armed Forces 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we prepare to 
observe Remembrance Day, we pause to reflect upon the men 
and women who sacrificed so much and to remember in 
gratitude those men and women who are still overseas fighting 
now the war against terror. 
 
In the past week my constituency office in Swift Current had 
the opportunity to fulfill a very unique request from a family in 
Sceptre near Swift Current. Nona Wilkins called with a request 
on behalf of her son, Corporal J.P. Wilkins, who is serving in 
the Canadian Armed Forces in Afghanistan. Corporal Wilkins is 
an avionics technician and takes surveillance with a UAV, an 
unmanned aviation vehicle, for the American military at the 
airfield in Kandahar. 
 
As a Canadian working on an American base he wanted to 
leave a Saskatchewan flag behind as proof that a Prairie boy 
was there, although I would note, Mr. Speaker, that every time a 
young Afghanistan girl goes to school in that country there is 
proof that Canadians are there, that Saskatchewan men and 
women are there fighting the war against terror. 
 
Corporal Wilkins comes from a long line of military men as on 
both sides of his family, from great-grandfathers to the present 
day, they’ve always been men of service. His grandfather 
fought in World War II and was on the beaches of Normandy. 
And his father served as radio operator in Germany. The lore of 
his ancestors and his involvement with cadets led him to serve 
two tours in Bosnia and a tour in Afghanistan. 
 
It is selfless Canadians such as Corporal Wilkins that make us 
very proud of our country and our troops, so we thank all of our 
men and women serving today in the war against terror in 
Afghanistan. We pray God’s blessing and protection upon all of 
them as they are overseas, and we wish them all Godspeed and 
a safe return home to their families and their country. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Regina Branch of the Royal Canadian Legion 
Celebrates Anniversary 

 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Thursday, myself along with several colleagues from both sides 
of the House had the pleasure of attending the Royal Canadian 
Legion, Regina Branch 001, 80th anniversary gala. The title of 
the gala was A Night to Remember, and, Mr. Speaker, it 
certainly was. 
 
A fine dinner was followed by an address from keynote speaker 
Pamela Wallin, daughter of Wadena and famous daughter of 
Saskatchewan. Fine entertainment was provided by Eileen 
Laverty, the Juventus Youth Choir, Marny Duncan-Carry, John 
McDermott, Le Raquette a Claquettes, and our very own 
Canadian Idol, Tyler Lewis. 
 
Regina Branch 001 of the Royal Canadian Legion was the very 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

first of its kind in Canada, Mr. Speaker, a monument to our 
Canadian veterans. Years ago they gave everything for us — 
their youth, their innocence, and very often their lives. 
 
On that Night to Remember, Mr. Speaker, we had the chance to 
give something back to our veterans. The event was sold right 
out; 600 people attended. And I’m very pleased to report that 
$45,000 was raised to help keep alive the memories and 
traditions of those who gave so dearly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude by thanking Mr. Harold 
Hague, the gala Chair, past Chair of the Royal Canadian Legion 
Branch 001 and a veteran of World War II. Thanks also to gala 
organizer Marian Donnelly; gala title sponsor, SaskEnergy; 
CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], the many 
organizations that came together, the supporters, the sponsors, 
and volunteers that put together a gala that was indeed a night 
to remember. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Goodwill Manor at Duck Lake Celebrates Anniversary 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to offer my congratulations to Duck Lake Goodwill Manor 
on the occasion of their 20th anniversary. The special care 
home actually got its beginning in 1982 when the Duck Lake 
Board of Trade looked at the possibility of building a 
swimming pool or a seniors home. Residents supported the 
home, and after a two-year study they raised an impressive 
$340,000. The total cost of the complex was nearly $2 million. 
 
Two years after the nursing home was built, the George 
Gauthier Foundation was created to raise funds to provide 
extras that the government funding did not cover. Fundraising 
over the years has allowed the foundation to purchase such 
things as patient lifts, Broda chairs, outdoor benches, and 
courtyards, a gazebo, and many other things. 
 
Most of the residents of the home are level 4 care who are taken 
care of by the 60 full- and part-time staff. Goodwill Manor is 
the largest employer in Duck Lake. Goodwill Manor is 
affiliated with the Saskatoon Health Region yet retains some of 
its original independence because of its long-standing 
agreement. 
 
Congratulations again to Goodwill Manor of Duck Lake on this 
memorable anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Celebrating Literacy Partnerships in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 
committed to making Saskatchewan the best place for young 
people to live, work, and build strong futures. As part of that 
commitment we have joined the Regina Public Library, Regina 

public schools, and Regina Catholic schools to launch the 
Hand-in-Hand Partners in Literacy project at two inner-city 
schools right here in Regina. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project is about promoting literacy skills at 
the pre-kindergarten level and providing more support for 
vulnerable families with young children. A facilitator will work 
with the parents and children to develop literacy and reading 
readiness and children will be encouraged to use the resources 
of the Regina Public Library. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program and the $2 million this government 
contributes annually through the Saskatchewan Literacy 
Commission is proof positive of our commitment to literacy 
programs and services and proof positive of our commitment to 
ensuring that all Saskatchewan people have the skills necessary 
to participate in and benefit from our strong economy. 
 
Just as surely, Mr. Speaker, the silence of the members opposite 
in the face of federal funding cuts to literacy programs and their 
volunteers — cuts that hurt Saskatchewan people — is indeed 
unnerving. Please join your voices to ours in support of 
programs and services that will be provided for all, 
opportunities to young Saskatchewan people and their families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Response to Requests from Cancer Patient’s Family 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Crystal 
Bonderud, the widow of Doug Bonderud, has spent nearly a 
week in her Legislative Assembly. And I don’t think any 
member of this Assembly on either side would disagree with 
the fact that she has demonstrated amazing courage and 
determination to try to get some answers on behalf of her late 
husband. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday after camping out in the Premier’s 
office, he did finally meet with her. He did finally meet with 
Crystal and they had a chance to talk, I think, about the two 
issues — among other things — but certainly the two issues that 
we’ve been bringing to this Assembly. Number one, will the 
government review its decision not to provide for compensation 
for the family given that Doug received emergency surgery in 
Mayo and should therefore qualify for that help? That would 
have been discussed. Also, what is this government doing to 
ensure that patients and families are communicated with so they 
know all of their options with respect to health care? And in 
answer to those, basically the conclusion was . . . from the 
Premier to her, his advice was go see the Provincial 
Ombudsman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he is the Premier. He is the leader of this 
government. He can make a difference on both of those issues. 
Will he do that this morning, Mr. Speaker? 
 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
opposition has a habit of misconstruing information and 
misrepresenting issues and today is another example of how the 
Leader of the Opposition will misconstrue certain information 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have reviewed the issue with regards to the 
policy relating to out-of-country expenses, Mr. Speaker. We did 
it previously, and certainly during the course of this week we 
have reviewed this issue again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are privacy issues that prevent me from 
answering all of the questions that are being raised here. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we have reviewed this issue, and we have 
concluded that the provincial policy has been followed in this 
case, that communication, adequate communication was made. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we stand by the position that we’ve taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these questions are for the Premier. 
We already know his Minister of Health won’t move on these 
issues. He won’t investigate this situation. He won’t review his 
decision not to provide compensation for emergent care that 
occurred in Mayo in the United States. 
 
The provincial coroner though has decided to do an 
investigation into Doug Bonderud’s death. I wonder if 
government members are yet aware of that. That is the result, 
by the way, of the work of Crystal. That’s a result of the request 
of Doug’s widow, Crystal. This NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government has done nothing. 
 
Now the Premier did meet with Crystal yesterday. There are 
two important things that he can do. There are two important 
issues that he can impact on as the Premier of the province. He 
can commit his government to review the decision not to 
compensate the family for out-of-province travel as a result of 
emergent care that was needed. And he can commit to steps to 
ensure that this doesn’t happen again, that patients are 
communicated with about all of their options when literally 
lives hang in the balance. 
 
He can do those two things. Instead he refers Crystal, and others 
I guess, to the Provincial Ombudsman. Will he show 
leadership? Will he make the decisions that are required, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again I reiterate that citizens of this province when they have a 
complaint or an issue to raise about the quality of care — 
whether it’s delivered at the physician level, at the agency level, 
or within the province — Mr. Speaker, the government has put 

in place procedures, uncomplicated, uncostly, easy-to-access 
procedures for citizens to get answers to very specific questions 
that are not restricting government on privacy or legal matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether or not it’s the coroner, the Ombudsman, 
the provincial quality of care coordinators, or the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, there are easy-to-access investigative 
mechanisms that citizens can use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bonderuds have been directed to use those 
processes. And, Mr. Speaker, we believe, we believe very 
strongly that the family should review those options and 
proceed according to those which they feel are most 
appropriate. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

 
Response to Poverty Study in Saskatoon 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there’s another picture emerging 
this morning involving our Premier, and it’s not a pretty one 
either. A new study published in the Canadian Journal of 
Public Health shows there’s an alarming gap between the health 
status of the rich and the poor in Saskatoon. 
 
This study says that for every baby that dies in an affluent area, 
four babies die in the city’s poorer neighbourhoods. The study 
says that in Saskatoon’s poorest neighbourhood, right in the 
Premier’s backyard, the people are 16 times more likely to try 
and kill themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has had 15 years to deal 
with this issue. How did they let it happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve all had opportunity 
to look at the work that has been done on the west side of 
Saskatoon, work that we are very pleased to see done because 
this is unique in Canada — this kind of a detailed comparison 
of the health status as determined by income or poverty, in this 
case. Mr. Speaker, we do not welcome the results, of course. 
But we are, we are appreciative of the work that has been done. 
 
What this work does, Mr. Speaker, is two things. It confirms 
much of the work that we are doing on the west side of 
Saskatoon and in fact in neighbourhoods across the province to 
endeavour to deal with issues of poverty. At the same time it 
confirms that more needs to be done. 
 
And we will have opportunity, I would expect, in this question 
period or outside of this question period, to talk about some of 
that work. But let me say this. There is work that is being done 
— that work being confirmed by this study — and there’s more 
work that needs to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the author of the study says he 
hopes that politicians will find these results shameful. Well I 
can assure you that members on this side of the House find 
those results shameful. 
 
In Saskatoon’s poorest neighbourhoods, cases of diabetes are 
1,000 times higher than other areas. Suicides are 1,500 times 
higher than in poorer neighbourhoods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the Third World, it’s Saskatchewan. 
Where you live and what your income is should not determine 
whether you live or die in Saskatchewan. The neighbourhood 
we’re talking about right now has been in the care of the NDP 
premier for 15 years. The current Premier who represents that 
constituency was also the minister of Social Services for a 
number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP had the power to change these conditions 
for 15 years. When are they finally going to do something about 
it? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the fundamental issue, the 
fundamental issue which this study has so clearly indicated, Mr. 
Speaker, is the relationship, Mr. Speaker, between poverty and 
health status. In these last 15 years, in these last five years, the 
initiatives and work that we have partnered with the community 
of the west side of Saskatoon is very, very significant — 
specifically, Mr. Speaker, around health care. 
 
We have established, working with young students from the 
University of Saskatchewan, the SWITCH [student wellness 
initiative toward community health] program which is 
providing on-the-street medical attention and advice to residents 
of the west side of Saskatoon. We have established, just very 
recently, the West Winds Health Centre which moves resources 
for health care into the west side of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the issues, Mr. Speaker, are here related to poverty — to 
poverty, Mr. Speaker. And we know those issues are related to 
education, to alcohol and drug abuse, to opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. And when I have a chance again, I will document in 
this question period significant numbers of initiatives that are 
now available. And again I say, more needs and will be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the people that are 
suffering in the Premier’s constituency will feel better when 
they hear the Premier’s words. 
 
I find it very interesting that, on the NDP website, there’s an 
event highlighted at St. Paul’s Hospital tonight that features the 
federal NDP social policy critic. He’s there to talk about . . . a 
forum about poverty in Saskatoon. Some of the stats 
highlighted include, poverty in Saskatoon is real; 39,995 people 
are considered poor. That’s 18 per cent of the population. 
31,472 children live with parents who are on welfare. 
 

Between 2002 and 2003, the number of food bank requests 
increased by . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order please. Order please. I 
would invite the member . . . Order. I would invite the member 
to repeat her question, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question to this Premier is 
simple. Why does the federal wing of the Premier’s own 
political party have to send their social policy critic to discuss 
this NDP’s horrible failures when it comes to poverty in 
Saskatoon? When is this Premier going to do something about 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — On the west side of Saskatoon and in 
neighbourhoods across this province, we have been working 
with communities to improve the lives of Saskatchewan 
families in those neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in the west side of Saskatoon, we’ve 
established the White Buffalo Youth Centre for this purpose. 
We’ve worked with the young people in the west side of 
Saskatoon, with the Core Neighbourhood Youth Co-op, and just 
several days ago we made an announcement of a literacy 
program with the core neighbourhood co-op. Mr. Speaker, in 
the last budget this government put the largest increase to social 
assistance that’s happened in 20 years in this province, and that 
opposition voted against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I became the Premier of this province, the 
minimum wage was at $6. As a result of this Throne Speech, by 
next March this will be closer to $8 — seven dollars and 
eighty-five, ninety-five cents, Mr. Speaker. They vote against it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now the member wants to talk about federal issues. Well 
it’s her Conservative friends that just cut the literacy programs 
in the poorest neighbourhoods in Saskatchewan. It’s her federal 
cousins that cut the child care provisions that we worked out 
with the former government, Mr. Speaker. You bet my federal 
colleagues will be here as members of the New Democratic 
Party and meet with the community to find solutions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the Minister of Community Resources: what capital funding did 
the Oyate Safe House receive from the federal and provincial 
government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe that the federal government and provincial government 
both contributed to capital costs associated with building the 
Oyate facility. I can get those exact figures for that member. 
They are probably documented in the auditor’s report. And 
certainly I don’t have that information handy with me, but I will 
get the information for that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I’ll point out again, Mr. Speaker, once again there we 
have the opposition doom and gloom, creating fear, creating 
confusion. On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re going 
to work on the solutions. The most important thing, Mr. 
Speaker, is the children are being looked after. Mr. Speaker, the 
problems that have been clearly looked at by the auditor and the 
advocate, we’re going to move forward. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
are going to turn our energies on solutions, Mr. Speaker. And 
despite all the doom and gloom and all the fearmongering over 
there, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. We intend to implement 
that plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that 
the Oyate Safe House received $345,000 from the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
knows very well, as indicated by a number of people on our 
side of the Assembly, that the figures have been thoroughly 
discussed at Public Accounts. What I can confirm is that 
through the Sask Housing Corporation is that Oyate has a 
forgivable mortgage, and the premise of the forgivable 
mortgage is the fact that as long as they continue operating 
Oyate house as a house for people that are being exploited, that 
that will certainly diminish the amount owing on the Oyate 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this forgivable mortgage, as I indicated to that 
member, I’ll get the exact figures so he knows. And certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, we intend to be fully . . . 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I would ask members, I 
would just ask members to allow the question period to take 
place. I invite the minister to complete his statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Right, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 
members opposite find the question funny. But the bottom line, 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious matter. And they can laugh 
all they want, they can laugh all they want, they can create fear 
all they want but, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. And we’ll 
provide as much information as required of me as a minister. 
And as I mentioned before, we certainly welcome all the 
scrutiny and will provide as many answers as necessary, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to keep the 
questions very simple. Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious he doesn’t 
know his file. Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain the terms 
of the loan provided to the safe house by the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation? Very simple. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, more than likely that 
member asked a question. And as I’ve indicated in the 
Assembly here not more than 10 seconds ago, I’ll get the very 
specific answer as to the amounts that are owing on that 
particular house, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If that member would have stopped laughing over there for a 
minute and start listening to the answer, I said this is a 
forgivable mortgage as long as the facility’s being used to help 
with the youth that are being exploited on the street. Then as 
each year that the facility is being used for that purpose, of 
course, the mortgage is decreased, Mr. Speaker. So to answer 
the question, I don’t have the specifics as determined what is 
owed today, but I’ll certainly find out, Mr. Speaker, for that 
member and for all members of the Assembly. And I’m very 
willing to share that information and prepared to show that 
information and table it in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, we’re still going to keep them 
simple. Can the minister explain what would happen should the 
Oyate Safe House default on the loan? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated at the 
outset, that as long as the safe house is operational, then as each 
year passes and as each month passes, of course the mortgage 
will be decreased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said I was going to reserve judgment, and 
certainly in the sense of where Oyate is going to be, until the 
14th. At that time, Mr. Speaker, and maybe even prior to that, 
we’ll give the Assembly full information as to what is owed on 
the current facility and what options are being considered for 
the current house. 
 
But I’ll point out at this stage of the game, on the 14th we will 
advise that member and the people of Saskatchewan what our 
intentions are. But until the 14th, he has to wait five more 
sleeps and then he’ll find out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll point out what is really, really important is that we are 
going to be working on the solution. As I mentioned, the 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

children are being looked after, Mr. Speaker. We’re following 
the auditor and the advocate’s advice, and we now need to turn 
our energies on the solutions and the plan that this government 
has for these children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to keep the question 
simple. Yesterday I asked for minutes of the meetings that the 
minister had with the Oyate board. He still hasn’t been able to 
produce them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the minister once again seems to know 
nothing, I would explain to him the terms of the loan. 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will forgive the loan over a 
15-year period if Oyate is not in default. Under the terms of the 
loan agreement, default occurs if Oyate ceases to provide 
shelter to the victims of violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could this be the reason that the minister is 
sticking with the Oyate board despite mountains of evidence on 
the contrary, despite the advice of his own officials? Could it be 
that he just doesn’t give a damn about these kids and it’s really 
all about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Occasionally members tend to cross the line and I believe this is 
one of them. The statement that the member has just made is 
rather personal. I would ask him to withdraw the statement 
before we proceed any further. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — . . . withdraw the word, not the statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member simply withdraw the 
statement unequivocally. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I withdraw the statement. 
 
The Speaker: — All right. I thank the member. The Chair 
recognizes . . . Order please. Order. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On the 14th of this month, we’ll be making a very significant 
report as to whether we’ll be proceeding with Oyate or not, Mr. 
Speaker. At that time we will certainly advise the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’ll advise the opposition. We’ll make sure 
people know exactly what is going to happen. 
 
Until such time, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that number one, the children are being cared for. 
That is really, really important for the people to know. 
Secondly, the Oyate Safe House is shut down. And, Mr. 
Speaker, despite that member’s insistence that there’s all these 
problems that are continuing to occur, I’ve said time and time 
again that the issues that he’s raised are old news; they have 
been resolved. We’ve been working very hard to find 
resolution. And, Mr. Speaker, unless and until all the 
recommendations are met to the satisfaction of myself as the 
minister, Oyate will not open unless those conditions are being 

met — very clear. In the meantime the kids are being cared, and 
work is being done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Assistance to Farmers in Southwest Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
sure it comes to no surprise for people of Saskatchewan, 
especially rural Saskatchewan — and it certainly comes as no 
surprise on this side of the House — that once again it looks 
like the NDP government and that minister is late in heeding the 
call for help in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Last spring if you remember, Mr. Speaker, in the spring session 
we on many occasions had to bring to the forefront the 
problems with flooding in the Northeast, in the Tisdale, 
Porcupine, Hudson Bay areas before that minister and that 
government would pay attention and actually address some part 
of the problem. And, Mr. Speaker, that problem goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now what we see in the Southwest — and we’re 
receiving many calls and many letters — there’s a drought 
problem in the Southwest, and this has gone on from probably 
since June of this year. Mr. Speaker, what is the minister doing 
to address this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I really do have to question the sincerity of the member 
opposite. Mr. Speaker, when the question is asked to the 
member opposite, should government be helping farmers, what 
does the member opposite say, Mr. Speaker? He says, well 
should the government . . . The question is, “Should [the] 
government step in every time there are weather-related . . . 
problems in agriculture?” And the member opposite who raises 
the question answers that in The Four-Town Journal, and I 
quote, “No, I don’t think there would be a need for government 
to step in . . .” 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out to 
the minister that there wouldn’t be need for help every time if 
we hadn’t, number one, cancelled the GRIP [gross revenue 
insurance program] program, if that government hadn’t gutted 
crop insurance. 
 
In the last five or six years we’ve seen nothing but premiums 
increase and coverage drop. And if we had an adequate crop 
insurance program, an adequate CAIS [Canadian agricultural 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

income stabilization] program, these people wouldn’t have to 
come to the legislature every time there was something 
happening in rural Saskatchewan. And that minister could help 
fix the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, this problem has gone on 
since June of this year, and we’ve received letters, we’ve 
received calls, and I’m sure his office has also received calls. 
Now it’s my understanding that that minister was down east and 
talked to the federal department about other issues. 
 
What I want to know: did you raise this issue of drought in the 
Southwest with the federal Minister of Agriculture, and if so 
what are you going to do about this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Ag and 
Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I do have to question the sincerity of the member 
opposite. The Four-Town . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order please. Order please. 
Once again I would ask members not to reflect on items in a 
personal way but to address issues the way they should be 
properly addressed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will let the 
statement speak for itself. The member opposite has raised . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The . . . Order. 
The member ought not to reflect upon the ruling of the Chair 
and I would ask the member at this stage to withdraw his 
remark with respect to the sincerity of any member in this 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw any statement 
that I previously said questioning the sincerity. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like . . . oh, okay. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member. At this stage let us 
proceed with question period. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to quote from The Four-Town Journal regarding a 
statement by the member opposite who raises this issue. When 
asked by The Four-Town Journal, the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats says, and I quote: 
 

My personal view is that government should be out of 
your life and out of your way. Let business do it 
themselves. There’s too much government intervention. 

 
Does he believe that? Mr. Speaker, it is his statement. Does he 
believe it? Mr. Speaker, he said it; it is quoted. Does he believe 
it? 
 

Mr. Speaker, in contrast to that, we are asking . . . I have written 
to the federal minister. We are trying to get a resolution to the 
situation in the Southwest because, Mr. Speaker, we care. I 
have met with the group. I have met with the farmers. We are 
working on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the first 
thing I’ll have to do is buy a subscription to The Four-Town 
Journal for every farmer and rancher in southwest 
Saskatchewan. It seems to be the only way we find out what is 
going on in this province. 
 
I don’t think they really give a hoot if that minister is not really 
all that fond of me. What they really are worried about is 
buying groceries and paying their bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And that farmer . . . that minister, I mean, 
doesn’t seem to care what is going on out there. The problem up 
in the North has not gone away. Now we have another problem 
in the Southwest. We have 17 RMs [rural municipality] that are 
declared a disaster area and that minister has the nerve to stand 
here and belittle me and ignore the problem that’s going on out 
there. They want an answer today; they can’t wait for another 
six or eight months or a year. They’re in trouble out there, Mr. 
Speaker. Will the minister actually address the question that I 
asked? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I want 
to know is, does the member opposite represent the policy of 
his party or not? He is the Ag critic. I have nothing against the 
member opposite personally. In fact we have spent some good 
times together and I’ve enjoyed his company. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you this clearly and honestly, that if 
that member is representing his party’s policy then it raises 
questions about whether or not that party’s policy would 
provide support and intervention for farmers because, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote from the member opposite from their 
website, Legislative Report May 3, 2006, and I quote. 
 
This is what he says representing his party: “We don’t believe 
in . . . direct investment in business by the taxpayers of this 
province,” Mr. Speaker. That’s what he says. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, because we care, we are providing resources. 
We are challenging the federal government to help us put 
program together that will help the people who are suffering in 
the Southwest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

Income Tax Changes 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
this year’s Throne Speech we made a commitment to the people 
of Saskatchewan that they would feel real benefits from the 
prosperous and growing economy. In this past year alone we 
have reduced taxes by over half a billion dollars. We’ve done 
this by cutting property taxes, corporate taxes, small-business 
taxes, and sales taxes. 
 
Today I am pleased to announce that we will now also cut 
income taxes, starting in January 2007. As such I am pleased to 
announce yet another measure that’ll reduce taxes for average 
Saskatchewan families. I am pleased to inform the Assembly 
that we have increased the brackets and credits for 
Saskatchewan families on Saskatchewan income tax by the rate 
of national inflation. This indexation measure will save $28.1 
million for average Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This $28.1 million in tax saving is 
another real benefit that will provide Saskatchewan taxpayers 
with protection from inflation, protection from bracket creep. 
It’ll help maintain the buying power of wage earners and 
pensioners. These changes provide Saskatchewan families with 
real tax savings next year and they build on our commitment to 
ensure Saskatchewan people will continue to share in the 
prosperity we’re enjoying today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these changes and the other work of this 
NDP government we’re continuing to make life better for 
ordinary Saskatchewan families and in so doing we will help 
ensure Saskatchewan remains the best place in Canada to live, 
to work, and to raise a family. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s about time. People, people, people across 
Saskatchewan, people across Saskatchewan have been asking 
for automatic indexation so they don’t have to wait for the 
government to decide well is it a good year, isn’t it a good year; 
do we have the money to do it, don’t we have the money to do 
it. The least that they could offer is automatic indexation so it 
wouldn’t be at the whim of the particular Finance minister, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s what happens, that’s what happens with this government. 
It’s just too little too late, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy have spoken. Yes, it has initiated some 
changes, Mr. Speaker, but it’s too little too late. Soon, Mr. 
Speaker, people across this province will speak. They will 

speak by casting their ballot for change. They will speak for 
casting their ballot for a different government — a government 
that will come in and give long-term plans to Saskatchewan 
people, long-term affordability. That’s not what we’re getting 
from this government, Mr. Speaker, and again it’s a great day 
because we are one day closer to the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 

Roadway Named Memorial Way 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, every 
year in November we take time to honour our veterans but we 
all know that one day each year is not enough time spent 
remembering the sacrifices that they have made. It’s important 
that we recognize these individuals in a tangible way. Last year 
we renamed Highway 2 as Veterans Memorial Highway, 
complete with appropriate signage. 
 
Together today with Veterans Affairs Canada, the Wascana 
Centre Authority, Saskatchewan Property Management, the 
Premier has announced that the roadway running parallel to 
Albert Street on the west side of the Legislative Building has 
been named Memorial Way. 
 
Memorial Way, Mr. Speaker, is one of the most prominent 
locations on the legislative grounds where the World War I 
memorial, the World War II memorial, the Korean War, and 
peacekeeping operations, and the war brides memorial can be 
found. Each person who walks down this road will be forever 
reminded of the courage and selflessness of Canadian soldiers, 
people who deserve our respect and appreciation. Memorial 
Way is a tangible means for us to keep alive the memory of 
every Canadian soldier who has fought and died. 
 
I ask all of us to take a bit of time, not just today but every day, 
to remember that because of the sacrifices of others, we live in a 
province and in a country that is free. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
minister for the advance notice of his statement today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the official opposition would certainly agree 
with this initiative by the government, by naming this roadway 
Memorial Way. Mr. Speaker, this morning in the service and 
today in the legislature, we’ve heard a number of stories, 
passionate heartfelt stories, and thank yous to the veterans of 
the past. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, we as members of the legislature 
will be attending Remembrance Day services across the 
province. And it’s so important, Mr. Speaker, that we as 
members help in that process of remembering those that have 
served in the past. And also, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
important as not only legislators but as parents, that we tell our 
children and grandchildren about the sacrifice made by 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

veterans. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is one initiative that will help in that 
process to remember the veterans — the people that gave the 
ultimate sacrifice in World War I, World War II, the Korean 
conflict, peacekeeping duties around the world. And today, Mr. 
Speaker, as we know, we must not forget that we have troops 
fighting the war on terror in Afghanistan, and certainly must 
remember those people and keep those people in our thoughts 
every day. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 3 – The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise today to move first reading of The Fuel Tax 
Accountability Act, Bill No. 3. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 3, The Fuel Tax Accountability Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 201 – The Bio-diesel Fuel Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
201, An Act respecting Bio-diesel be introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that Bill No. 201, The Bio-diesel Fuel Act be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
request leave of the House to introduce a motion to create a 
sessional order. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Sessional Order 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce a motion to create a sessional order which will be 
seconded by the Hon. House Leader of the opposition to 
achieve an understanding that we’ve had regarding the rotation 
on private members’ days in weeks subsequent to this week. 
And the motion would read as such, Mr. Speaker: 
 

By leave of the Assembly 
 
That notwithstanding rule 6(1), the time of adjournment of 
the sitting of the Assembly on Thursday November 23, 
2006, shall be at 11:30 a.m., and; 
 
That the 75-minute debate under rule 22 shall be 
suspended on November 23, 2006, with the effect that the 
rotation and ranking of government and opposition private 
members’ day business for the remainder of the fall period 
of the parliamentary calendar shall be as follows: 
 

It refers to the dates of November 16, 23, and 30, Mr. Speaker. 
And it has a chart which shall be posted and has been agreed to 
by both House leaders. 

 
And further, 
 
That the regular rotation and ranking of private members’ 
day business shall be initiated at the commencement of the 
spring period of the parliamentary calendar as follows: 
 

And then reference to the same thing for March 8, 2007. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the House Leader of the 
opposition, the hon. member for Melfort. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — There’s a motion by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by . . . pardon me, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader. Will the members take the statement 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

as tabled? As tabled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 

Economic Growth in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will be moving the 
following motion: 

 
That this Assembly recognize that the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s new initiatives on immigration, skills 
training, public infrastructure renewal, northern initiatives, 
workplace safety, minimum wage increases, corporate and 
personal tax cuts, and occupational health and safety 
constitute a complete growth agenda that is creating both 
increased economic growth and new jobs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to speak to this motion. The 
Saskatchewan economy is on a roll, Mr. Speaker, and this 
government has a plan for continuing that economic 
momentum. 
 
One of the major ways in which we’re doing that is investing in 
a innovative workforce that will drive growth in this new 
economy, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll be speaking to that in more 
detail in a moment. 
 
But let me begin by providing some information, on the public 
record, on the latest numbers with respect to jobs growth and 
economic growth in the province, Mr. Speaker. Because the 
exciting thing is that we have more people working in 
Saskatchewan than we’ve ever had before — more than 
500,000 people, Mr. Speaker, working in the province. And 
jobs for the month of October just past are up 21,800 over the 
year before. 
 
Saskatchewan now has the lowest unemployment rate since 
1979, Mr. Speaker. That, Mr. Speaker, is a major achievement. 
And of course the last time, Mr. Speaker, that we had those 
kinds of job numbers was when the Blakeney government, the 
NDP government that I was privileged to be a part of, was 
governing the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, after years of economic decline under the 
Grant Devine administration, under the Conservative 
administration, we have now rebuilt our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m proud that our NDP government has achieved that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the record in the last few years couldn’t be better. 
Manufacturing shipments up, urban housing starts up, 
international exports up, value of building permits up, retail 
sales up, Mr. Speaker. All the key economic indicators are 
heading in the right direction. 
 
Now this hasn’t come about by accident, Mr. Speaker. I would 
point out first of all that we have created a climate of economic 
growth. And we have dealt with the provincial debt which was 
key to providing economic momentum in this economy. We’ve 
driven debt down, Madam Deputy Speaker, by more than $3 
billion. And we have very substantially improved the 
relationship between gross domestic product and debt, to take it, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, from the worst in all of Canada, to the 
third best. And I think we can be very proud of that. 
 
And that has allowed for tax cuts in all sectors of our economy, 
significant cuts to personal income tax. And the average family 
between 1999 and 2003, the average family of four had a 
personal tax cut of over $1,000 per year. And we’ve had a 
significant reduction in the small-business tax, and it’s been cut 
by almost half. And now, of course, a 2 per cent reduction in 
the PST [provincial sales tax] which has benefited everyone in 
Saskatchewan — benefiting families, benefiting small and large 
business, benefiting municipalities and public institutions. And 
this is going to be another important economic driver in terms 
of stimulating economic growth in our economy, and ensuring 
that all families benefit from the improved economy, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve also created the right environment for business, contrary 
to what members opposite talk about, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
And this can be clearly seen when looking at the business 
surveys that are done across North America. One of the best 
known ones, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that done by KPMG, 
an international accounting and consulting firm. And they rank 
cities across North America and across the world with respect 
to competitiveness. 
 
And the results are very interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatoon, my own home city, ranked the lowest-cost 
jurisdiction among the 21 featured cities from the North 
American Midwest, moving up from a rank of second place in 
2004. Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
ranked sixth and seventh respectively out of 128 cities surveyed 
by KPMG. Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that puts to 
. . . that clearly contradicts the claim by the Saskatchewan Party 
that we’re not creating a competitive business environment, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Now our economy is strong on all cylinders, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Outside of agriculture, we are booming in many 
sectors. And of course agriculture is the very important 
exception. And that’s why, Madam Deputy Speaker, we are 
fully funding CAIS and have done so, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
for the last several years since the program was established. 
 
But let me give you some of the statistics with respect to 
economic growth in other sectors. In potash, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we see a record $2.7 billion of potash sales. Our 
manufacturing sector in last year, Madam Deputy Speaker, 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

grew by 8.7 per cent so that manufacturing shipments now total 
$10.4 billion. 
 
Another key sector of our economy, Madam Deputy Speaker, is 
our Crowns. And our Crown corporations, now the big four 
Crowns — SaskEnergy, SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] — have business 
relationships, contractual relationships with 12,000 businesses 
in this province, Madam Deputy Speaker, making sure that 
when people pay their utilities, not only is it the lowest utility 
bundle in the country but those dollars, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, stay in our economy and circulate around for the 
benefit of local Saskatchewan businesses instead of going 
outside of the province, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We are strong in terms of the export sector. And our export 
sector is rapidly growing. In 2005 Saskatchewan exported $29.7 
billion in goods and services. And we have significant growth 
in the beverage processing and food processing sector, which is 
now a $2 billion sector, Madam Deputy Speaker, with 6,100 
people working in it. 
 
We’ve had significant growth in our machinery and 
transportation sector which is now employing 6,400 people. 
And we are continuing to be strong in the farm equipment 
sector with $275 million in export sales last year. 
 
We now have 70 companies that are involved in the electronics 
and instrumentation field in Saskatchewan, which is an area that 
many listening may not be familiar with. So there has been 
substantial growth there, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have now more than 300 companies that are working in the 
information and communication technology sector, and this is 
now generating more than $1 billion a year in gross revenues 
for our economy. 
 
We have new economic growth developing around the 
Canadian Light Source synchrotron in Saskatoon, one of the 
most important public infrastructure investments that this 
government has made. 
 
We have new growth, Madam Deputy Speaker, in wind power 
and in biofuels. And of course wind power is now contributing 
5 per cent of the electrical generation capacity of this province. 
And we have three successful wind farms operating and a 
fourth being planned for Broadview, Saskatchewan, near 
Moosomin. 
 
And we now have three operating ethanol plants in the 
province, Madam Deputy Speaker, located at Weyburn and 
Lanigan and Lloydminster. And that industry will continue to 
strengthen in the years ahead. 
 
Our tourism sector is continuing to grow, and we now have one 
in eight Saskatchewan workers employed in this important 
sector, generating $1.4 billion a year. 
 
We have a growing and vital set of cultural industries in our 
province. More than 40 independent publishers are now 
operating in Saskatchewan. More than 30 recording studios are 
now operating in our province. And our film and video industry 
is now creating 1,300 full-time jobs with 32 production 

companies. Mr. Speaker, this is an example of the growth in the 
cultural sector. And of course we now have a state-of-the art 
production facility, the Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage in 
Regina, which is attracting much additional cultural activity in 
our province, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So the result is that we have facilitated growth in many, many 
sectors outside of oil and gas. And this is the key point I want to 
make, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that the growth is happening 
not just in oil and gas but right across our economy, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And it is a result of sound government 
planning, working with the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s a 
result of the industrious efforts of our people. And it’s that 
combination that is creating a growth agenda, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, regardless of the negativity of members opposite in the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re going to continue this 
agenda. We have plans for expanded immigration in our 
province, and we are on track this year, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to bring in 800 new immigrant nominees. And that 
will mean more than 2,400 immigrants in all this year, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, when you include family members. 
 
We are continuing to strengthen our post-secondary sector. 
We’re continuing our freeze on university tuition. We are 
growing our training spaces, Madam Deputy Speaker. Another 
2,750 new training spaces created this year alone. We are 
continuing to work with our First Nations and Métis partners in 
terms of strengthening training in that sector as well, and I’m 
very pleased with the relationship that we have established with 
the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. 
 
We have established a new SaskJobs program, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, which is providing an important service to employers 
across our province. And we are continuing to strengthen our 
initiatives in occupational health and safety and minimum 
wage. Minimum wage will go up again in April to $7.95 an 
hour. 
 
We are strengthening our efforts in terms of workplace 
inspections. This, I think, is key. We have reduced workplace 
injury, down 14 per cent since 2002. We have increased the 
number of workplace inspections and, Mr. Speaker, all of this is 
key in terms of not only ensuring that we have a strong 
economy but also good quality of life. 
 
And it stands in sharp contradiction, Madam Deputy Speaker, to 
the policies that are promoted by members of the opposition 
who have defined a growth economy as being an economy 
where there’s different kinds of labour legislation, different 
kinds of environmental legislation. That’s what they’ve talked 
about when they talk about a growth economy. 
 
And the members opposite, the member for Estevan says well 
that’s not right. But I remind her that her leader openly declared 
war on working people on the John Gormley show in October 
3, 2005. I would remind her that her Leader of the Opposition 
called labour legislation, and I quote, “hurtful, unfair, 
paternalistic, and needless policies that harm our economic 
future and kill jobs.” 
 
I would remind her that the member for Biggar on April 10 of 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

this year in this Assembly said, “It seems that creating a 
competitive labour legislative environment, limiting 
government intervention in the economy, these things are very 
critical . . . ” to an economic growth agenda. 

 
What did the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook say, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. He said, and I quote: 
 

But the tax reductions are only part of the overall growth 
agenda. 
 
They should have went further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
some of the things that must be included in this growth 
agenda must include creating a competitive labour 
legislative environment. 
 

Well let me close by saying, Madam Deputy Speaker, we want 
none of that kind of policy that erodes occupational health and 
safety, that erodes environmental standards, that erodes 
workers’ rights to a safe working environment and good labour 
standards. That’s why we’re going with things like our new 
statutory holiday and I’m pleased, Madam Deputy Speaker, to 
close and move the motion which I . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I congratulate 
the mover of this fine motion for an excellent job in your 
speech, the hon. member from Saskatoon Greystone university. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the member to come to order for 
a moment. The mover of the motion has the order paper and 
must put into record the motion and pass it forward to the 
Speaker, please. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m ready to send 
forward. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Saskatoon Greystone and seconded by the member from 
Regina Coronation Park: 
 

That this Assembly recognize that the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s new initiatives on immigration, skills 
training, public infrastructure renewal, northern initiatives, 
workplace safety, minimum wage increases, corporate and 
personal tax cuts, and occupational health and safety 
constitute a complete growth agenda that is creating both 
increased economic growth and new jobs. 
 

I recognize the member for Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I congratulate 
my colleague from Saskatoon university on a terrific motion — 
outstanding — and a great job he did in his speech. Indeed the 
proof is in the pudding when it comes to economic growth and 
jobs, Madam Speaker. 
 
You look at the latest numbers for Saskatchewan and it shows 
things like in October this year, 21,800 more Saskatchewan 

women and men and young people working in Saskatchewan 
today than a year ago. It shows that we have the second lowest 
unemployment in all of Canada. And get this, we have the 
lowest unemployment rate that we’ve had in Saskatchewan. 
We’re enjoying the lowest unemployment rate we’ve ever had 
since 1979, which was when Allan Blakeney and the NDP were 
in power in the ’70s. All of the Tories on the other side, all of 
the nine and a half years of Grant Devine, they never came 
close to that, Madam Speaker. All of their old recycled ideas 
that they’re now bringing up drove Saskatchewan in a 
downward trend. 
 
We have youth employment this year up more than 8,000 — up 
8,100 people — the second lowest youth unemployment rate in 
all of Canada. We’ve got all kinds of good news in 
manufacturing shipments that are up; natural gas, oil 
production, urban housing starts, international exports, value of 
building permits, retail sales — all of those areas, Madam 
Speaker, up — all of them. 
 
Our economy in Saskatchewan is on a roll, and there’s reasons 
for it. And part of it is, in no small part, some of the things we 
have done. When this Premier was merely a member of the 
government, indeed when he was a minister in the Roy 
Romanow NDP, he coined the phrase, we have to pay the bills, 
cut the . . . He says, cut the frills and pay the bills. And that’s 
exactly what we have done consistently, and we’re reaping the 
benefits of that here in Saskatchewan now. 
 
We have enjoyed a record number of successive balanced 
surplus budgets. We enjoy, we enjoy . . . Madam Speaker, you 
compare Regina or Saskatoon to any other capital city or major 
city in Canada, any of them, and if you compare provincial 
income tax rates, credit rebates, health care premiums, retail 
sales tax, gas tax, mortgage costs, property taxes, home heating 
— and you can include energy rebate if you like — telephone, 
electricity, and auto insurance, combine that whole package and 
Regina and Saskatoon are one and two of the cheapest places in 
Canada to live, work, and build a strong future. 
 
We have just this year reduced the PST from 7 per cent to 5 per 
cent. The last time the PST was at 5 per cent . . . It was the 
Grant Devine government that raised it from 5 to 7 per cent. I 
think it was 1989 when it was . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
No, Grant Devine had it at 5 and raised it to 7, the hon. former 
leader of the opposition. The last time the rate was 5 per cent, 
Grant Devine raised it. We have now lowered it to 5. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Personal income tax this year, as announced by the Minister of 
Finance, indexed to inflation, Madam Speaker, for the fourth 
year in a row. Working women, working men, young people see 
things like that and they say, yes Saskatchewan has its tax rate 
for people in a clear downward trend.  
 
They have a government that cares for people. We have a 
government that is trying to make Saskatchewan a good place 
to raise your family and build a strong future. And, Madam 
Speaker, the proof is that we are working. 
 
Saskatchewan is one of, notably one of two provinces in 
Canada that has more than 3 per cent growth each year for five 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

consecutive years — one of only two provinces in Canada. 
That’s hardly an argument that we should quit what we’re doing 
when we are one or two in each of the last five years for growth 
in Canada. It’s absolutely outstanding. 
 
I want to turn, Madam Speaker, a bit to . . . We have an 
immigration policy. We’re targeting to bring in 5,000 
immigrants to Saskatchewan by the year 2008. The minister 
responsible assures me we are on target. We’ve said this 
publicly. This year alone, for example, our immigrant, our 
immigrant numbers are doubling over what they were last year. 
We expect them to be double or very, very near double this year 
over last. And we continue to be confident we are on target to 
attain 5,000 new immigrants into Saskatchewan in the year 
2008. 
 
Our economic growth has turned the corner. I want to say, 
Madam Speaker, that it was pretty difficult. We’ve painted the 
picture, tried to explain as best we can how difficult things were 
when Roy Romanow and the NDP took office from Grant 
Devine and the Conservatives. Things were desperate. I know 
that we had not one, not two, but three serious discussions about 
what happens if Saskatchewan declares bankruptcy. It’s 
absolutely unheard of for cabinet or government to have to 
enter into that kind of discussion. 
 
And now, now we hear the opposition saying, oh, but we’re the 
ones that are old. We’re the ones that are devoid of new ideas. 
This is what they say. Well I want to say that in our worst year, 
our worst year, in terms of net . . . We want to talk about net 
out-migration, Madam Speaker. In our worst year — in fact our 
worst two years — we weren’t as bad as the former government 
was in its worst year. 
 
Let me phrase that a different way. When the Leader of the 
Opposition was a senior advisor to the Conservative 
government, the Grant Devine government, out-migration in 
1989 hit 18,589 people — 1989, while the Leader of the 
Opposition was a senior ministerial assistant to the government 
of Grant Devine and the Conservatives. In the year counting 
1989 and the year each side of it, the total net out-migration in 
Saskatchewan totalled more than 50,000 people. And he has the 
audacity to tell us that now he’s got the fresh idea, the new 
ideas that are somehow going to lead us to the promised land. 
Well, Madam Speaker, I remind everyone that it is tired, old, 
recycled Grant Devine promises. 
 
And we’ve heard quotes earlier today, get government out of 
the way. They say, Tories and Sask Party say, government 
doesn’t work; let’s get government out of the way so that 
business and people can get on with their lives. Well why is it 
they’re so determined to get elected and prove that they can’t do 
the job, that government doesn’t work? 
 
I say elect people that say government does work; people that 
every day they get up and they say, what can we do for 
Saskatchewan people today? What can we do to make our 
province a better place today? What can we do to build a 
stronger future in Saskatchewan? What a wonderful province 
we have. 
 
I again say you can cherry-pick any two of our years of 
out-migration. You cherry-pick them, any two, the worst two 

you can. We do not equal the out-migration you had in one 
year. Any two of our worst years and we don’t equal the 
out-migration. 
 
And now, Madam Speaker, they have the audacity to say, but 
they’ve now got the new, fresh ideas. Well they say, they say, 
cut taxes. I remember Grant Devine saying there’s so much 
more we can be. He said effective midnight — midnight — 
election night, gas tax is gone. Well we saw the record then. It 
was a record number of deficit budgets. The deficit started with 
Grant Devine and the deficit grew, the debt grew. The debt 
grew until it was a millstone around our necks, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
I am delighted to say we’ve turned the page. We’re on a bright 
future in Saskatchewan. We have turned the corner. We’re 
sharing things. The Minister of Finance’s announcement today 
indexing personal income tax for the fourth year in a row. 
We’ve cut the PST from 7 to 5. We’re sharing the good news 
with the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve turned the corner on 
the Conservatives and the tired, old Grant Devine era. We are 
on a roll. We are making Saskatchewan a better place to work, 
live, and build a strong future. I support this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to be able to enter into 
this debate and talk about the members’ opposite motion. They 
talk about a complete growth agenda. And after 15 years, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, now they are finally talking about a 
complete agenda. And you know what? The people of this 
province are saying it’s about time. 
 
After 15 years, it took you this long. After we’ve lost some over 
60,000 people from this province, and now this government, 
this tired, old government is going to put forth a complete 
growth agenda to create the environment that will create jobs 
and keep young families and young people in our province. I 
don’t think so. I don’t think the people are buying it. They 
didn’t buy it in Weyburn-Big Muddy, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and they’re not going to buy it in the next general election, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
They like to stand up and talk about all the great things that are 
happening in this province, and there are some great things 
happening in this province. But the truth is that they’re 
happening in spite of the policies of that government, not 
because of those policies, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
They remind me of farms that we have throughout this 
province, farms that I think we all know that are productive, 
have great resources, but really aren’t managed all that well. 
But those farms and those families seem to get by. I think 
everybody has at least one in their area that you can point to. 
But because of the strength of the resource base and the climate 
and those sorts of things, those farms seem to manage. And 
that’s what’s happening in this province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

We have tremendous resources. We have tremendous people in 
this province, but what we don’t have is leadership. We don’t 
have leadership from that government in the last 15 years. And 
in spite of them, in spite of their bungling and their 
mismanagement and their ill-conceived ideas like SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] and 
Channel Lake and those sorts of things, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, this province continues to get by, and in fact it 
continues to grow in peaks of growth. 
 
But all we need to do is look at some of the facts, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Let’s look at population decline in this 
province in the last 15 years. We’ve lost over 62,000 people. So 
what does that mean — that 62,000 people? It’s a large number, 
but let’s try and put it in a bit of context so the average person 
can understand that. It’s the equivalent of losing all the people 
from Moose Jaw, North Battleford, and Swift Current. Under 
this government, we’ve lost those three cities, Madam Deputy 
Speaker — the equivalent of that. In the last year we’ve lost 
4,500 people. That’s like taking a town of Nipawin and 
depopulating it. That’s the record of this government. 
 
And now they’re talking about a complete . . . They’re finally 
arrived at a complete growth agenda. Well I don’t think that 
they’re there. They haven’t been there in the last 15 years, and I 
certainly don’t think that we’re going to get there. They’re 
putting a few ideas together, ideas that they have looked around 
and seen the policies we’ve put forward. And they’re saying, 
ho, I mean, that’s a good idea. Let’s adopt it, and we’ll call it 
our own, Madam Deputy Speaker. But the people see through 
that sort of strategy. 
 
So who are these people that we are losing? Well the 
statisticians tell us that the bulk of the people that we are losing 
are between the ages of 15 and 45. Now if you think about that, 
those are our young people, our young families, the people who 
are starting their careers, are building their careers, and 
continuing in their careers. And they are a good chunk of our 
tax base. And that’s part of the people, and that’s the biggest 
segment that we’re losing. 
 
You go talk to young people, to graduating students and you 
ask them where they see themselves working after graduation. 
The vast majority of them say that it won’t be in this province, 
and that’s a real sad commentary on that government’s growth 
agenda and policy. 
 
Another group of people that we are losing, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, are people who have completed their careers, their 
work life, and they’re looking at retiring. And many of those 
people are leaving this province to be with their children and 
their grandchildren, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
In our own extended family, we have a father and a mother who 
will be retiring in the next 12 months from their careers. And 
they’ve already bought a condo in Calgary so they can be with 
their son and his family and their two grandchildren. So what 
they’re doing is they’re taking their retirement earnings that 
they’ve earned here in this province and they’re going to 
another province and paying their taxes there. 
 
That’s serious enough. But if you look at something even more 
serious, I’m told by accountants that there are untold number of 

business people who make arrangements to set up a residence in 
another province — and quite often that province happens to be 
Alberta — before they liquidate their businesses, and they pay 
all their tax upon retirement and upon liquidation of their 
businesses in another province. And why are they doing that? 
Because of the policies that that government has put in place 
over the last number of years. 
 
And now finally at the eleventh hour, when they’re down in the 
polls and they wake up every morning and they say, what can 
we do to improve our political future, they finally are making 
some adjustments that we on this side of the House have been 
talking about for a long period of time, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, we don’t need to always compare 
this province to Alberta. Alberta has a number of things going 
for it that no other province in this country have. 
 
So why don’t we see how our neighbour to the east — 
Manitoba — is doing? So what has happened with Manitoba’s 
population, Madam Deputy Speaker? While we are losing 
population, our neighbours to the east, who have fewer 
resources and coincidentally also have an NDP government, but 
their population is growing. And there are some reasons for 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
One of the reasons is the immigration policy. The members 
opposite, they like to stand in their place and talk about this new 
initiative in immigration. Well how did we do last year? Did we 
have 1,000 new immigrants come and live in this province? The 
minister is shaking her head and saying yes. 
 
Although I haven’t seen the statistic, it seems to me more in the 
hundreds, not in the thousands. We are significantly behind 
what Manitoba has done in this area, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
So this government can’t even compete with their Manitoba 
cousins, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And here at the eleventh hour they say, well we finally got it 
right. We finally got all the pieces of the puzzle together. Now 
we finally at the eleventh hour, we have a complete growth 
agenda. And part of their growth agenda, they said, well we’re 
going to . . . we need to look at infrastructure and renew 
infrastructure — something that we on this side of the House 
have been talking about for a long time. 
 
Today we see the Minister of Highways introduce a Bill that 
talks about dedicating all the fuel tax toward the transportation 
system. Something that we on this side of the House have called 
for, for many years, now finally they are deciding that they 
should do this to improve those key highways that lead to 
economic growth. 
 
Hopefully this will mean perhaps that the people of St. Brieux 
and Bourgault Industries — who’s a world-class manufacturer 
— may finally get a primary highway although we haven’t seen 
any plans. Let’s hope that perhaps in their wisdom and at this 
eleventh hour that they may see fit to start providing the people 
of St. Brieux and Bourgault Industries with a primary highway 
so that they can bring in the supplies that they need, and export 
their products and create more economic growth and employ 
more people in that area of the province. 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

[11:45] 
 
What about Highway 5? The member from Humboldt has been 
calling for, on behalf of her constituents, to widen that section 
of Highway 5 and improve that section of Highway 5 from 
Saskatoon to Humboldt, particularly that section from 
Saskatoon to Junction No. 2. I’ve driven that highway recently 
and with the amount of traffic, the amount of trucks that are 
supplying the manufacturers in that central part of our province, 
and it’s narrow, it’s hilly, and it’s certainly a very dangerous 
part of our highways system. Hopefully, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that’ll be part of their plan. 
 
What this government has done in the last number of months, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, because they are out of ideas, they’ve 
looked at what we’ve done and they’ve adopted many of our 
ideas . . . to name a couple, most recently, mandatory 
retirement. A mere coincidence? I don’t think so, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition announced it, 
and then later in the afternoon they say, oh I think that’s a pretty 
good idea; we’re going to do the same. Thank you, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It gives 
me great pleasure to rise in the Assembly and speak to the 
motion that was moved by the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. This motion articulates some of the initiatives of our 
government’s bold and positive vision for Saskatchewan 
families and young people. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I can’t tell you how proud I am to be 
part of the political tradition that we are heir to on this side of 
the Assembly, a political tradition that Saskatchewan people 
know they can trust to be there for them. 
 
One of such strong NDP legacies is occupational and health 
safety legislation. In 1972 under the leadership of Premier Allan 
Blakeney, the NDP government passed the occupational health 
Act, the first legislation of its kind in North America which 
became the template for other jurisdictions to follow. 
 
This Act known as The Occupational Health and Safety Act has 
seen regular updates to the legislation since its inception, except 
for the years when the Grant Devine Conservatives ran 
roughshod over the working people of Saskatchewan. A labour 
history book, entitled On the Side of the People, describes this 
period of time as the nine lost years. To quote from the chapter 
“Nine Lost Years” from On the Side of People, quote: 
 

The Devine government never bothered to tamper with 
occupational health and safety (OHS) legislation or 
regulations put in place by the Blakeney government. It 
simply neglected to enforce them in a meaningful way. 
Following the 1982 election, Lorne McLaren explained the 
government’s rationale: “Management is saying to us: 
‘Get off our backs, let us do the job’. So my response to 

them is okay we’ll get off your backs.” McLaren argued 
that administering occupational health and safety was a 
management prerogative . . . 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, our NDP political tradition firmly 
believes that every working person in this province has a right 
to a safe and secure workplace. Our NDP political tradition 
firmly believes that every worker in the province of 
Saskatchewan has the right to know that they will come home 
safely to their families at the end of the workday, and in the 
event that something does occur through their work experience, 
that there is a decent system in place to provide them with the 
supports they require. 
 
Our NDP political tradition does not believe that occupational 
health and safety is simply a luxury issue that can be dealt with 
as a management prerogative, but rather that it is a basic 
working standard that can be expected by workers in 
Saskatchewan, that will be properly monitored and enforced. 
This is an NDP political tradition that we are proud to continue 
on with. 
 
This NDP government knows that Saskatchewan’s social and 
economic well-being depends on healthy and safe workplaces. 
We have worked with employers, workers, and students to raise 
awareness about workplace health and safety. We have 
increased the number of workplace inspections, and we have 
tripled the number of prosecutions for occupational health and 
safety violations by bringing in a dedicated prosecutor. As a 
result, Saskatchewan has experienced one of the highest 
reductions in injury rates in all of Canada — a 14 per cent 
reduction since 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — The action plan for healthy and safe 
workplaces, which is in its third year of a four-year plan, has 
the unique distinction of being supported by both business and 
labour. Some of its successes to date include 2,800 fewer 
workers being injured while the number of workers covered by 
WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] has increased by 11 per 
cent; $28 million reduction in WC [workers’ compensation] 
compensation costs; $13 million savings to Saskatchewan 
businesses through a decrease of 10 per cent in WCB 
premiums; 22 per cent decline in youth injury rate over the past 
five years. 
 
The members opposite have repeatedly denigrated labour 
legislation and regulations that are good for working people. 
Occupational health and safety, labour standards, and the 
workers’ compensation system protect workers. This 
government knows that. Saskatchewan people know that. 
Saskatchewan business owners know that. It is time for the 
Saskatchewan Party to recognize that and stop attacking the 
working people. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, this government believes that the 
occupational health and safety protections for workers are 
absolutely essential. This NDP government will continue to 
build on the legacy responding to the recommendations from 
the Occupational Health and Safety Council which is made up 
of both business and labour representatives. 
 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

In addition to responding to the council’s recommendations, our 
government will continue to identify initiatives for reduction to 
the injury rate. Continue to support the over 4,500 current 
occupational health and safety committees to increase their 
effectiveness and add up to 325 new committees and provide 
over 200 training opportunities. Conduct a total of 4,500 on-site 
workplace inspections, including targeting of higher-risk 
workplaces with the highest number of illnesses or injuries. 
Enhance the support to initiate prosecutions more often for 
serious or repeated non-compliance with occupational health 
and safety standards. Help young people make the transition 
from school to work by developing more ready-for-work 
resources for use by teachers in high school courses, 
middle-year courses, and post-secondary institutions. Provide 
health and safety services for workplaces to reduce hazards by 
research projects and technical services in such areas as 
hygiene, toxicology, ergonomics, and radiation. Increase health 
and safe work practices as part of the community and workplace 
cultures through such partnerships as WorkSafe Saskatchewan 
and Safe Saskatchewan. 
 
Any time someone questions the occupational health and safety 
requirements that this NDP political tradition has put in place, I 
simply point them to Esterhazy and suggest that they ask the 
miners about cutting safety regulations. When those 72 potash 
miners at Esterhazy emerged safely after having been trapped, 
there were no questions in anyone’s minds about how crucial 
strict health and safety regulations are. 
 
Thanks to the NDP government’s progressive and aggressive 
approach to workplace safety, to mine safety, thanks to the 
dedication and skill of the mine rescue workers, lives were 
saved, families remained whole, and no one was left mourning 
for a loved one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — The safe return of each and every potash miner 
placed Saskatchewan at the centre stage as the world leader in 
the protection of its workforce. Media the world over cited our 
regulations, and our mine safety inspectors have been asked by 
both the United States and China to share what we know about 
keeping miners safe. We can be extremely proud of that. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what does the Leader of the 
Opposition have to say? On April 22, 2005, the Leader of the 
Sask Party said, quote, “We don’t want to have, we don’t need 
to have anything unique here . . . We don’t need to have in 
legislation a different balance here between worker and 
employer than there is anywhere else.” 

 
I seriously doubt that the opinion of the Esterhazy miners would 
be the same as his. Is this the value that he places on the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers whose productivity levels are touted as 
ones to be measured against? Or how about the Leader of the 
Sask Party referring to occupational health and safety reg 
protections as, and I quote, “Red tape and regulations that have 
been hoisted onto the business community by this government,” 
and then went on to state that occupational health and safety 
protections hurt the economy. 
 
Of course this is not surprising given the fact that the Sask Party 
leader has openly declared war on working people on a radio 

show in October 2005. It is also not surprising that the Leader 
of the Sask Party would denigrate the critical importance of 
occupational health and safety protections given his long 
history of opposing labour legislation that is good for working 
people. And I quote, “hurtful, unfair, paternalistic and needless 
policies that harm our economic future and kill jobs.” 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, decent labour standards hasn’t hurt 
our economic future. And I am wondering what policies does 
the Leader of the Sask Party take issue with, and at what cost to 
the Saskatchewan workers? It is time for the Sask Party to be 
clear about exactly what they would cut in terms of labour 
legislation instead of speaking in code as was described in a 
Leader-Post editorial entitled, “Business crowd got Wall’s 
coded message” dated November 4, 2006. Or as my colleague 
from Regina Rosemont so accurately described as, what do they 
have hiding in the weeds? 
 
Madam Speaker, I consider the Sask Party to be an even scarier 
proposition than the Devine Conservatives of the 1980s. 
Misguided as the Devine Tories were, even they never talked 
about tearing down everything that the province had 
accomplished in the previous 60 years, throwing it out and 
starting it over. Under this leader the Sask Party do. They do it 
all the time. Under this leader the Sask Party has become so 
disingenuous and so slick and so slippery that some kind of 
overarching descriptor is needed, and scary fits the bill. The 
Sask Party often expresses outrage at our using so-called scare 
tactics in our political battles with them. So I will make them 
this promise. I’ll stop saying scary things about them just as 
soon as they stop being so scary. Come clean and articulate the 
Sask Party version of a growth agenda by “creating a 
competitive labour legislative environment.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Leader of the Opposition’s enterprise 
friendly plan? I’ll tell you what the Sask Party rhetoric is, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. It is an attack on the working people 
in the province of Saskatchewan It is clear from their rhetoric 
that if ever given an opportunity to sit on this side of the House 
they would gut labour legislation. Thankfully Saskatchewan 
people know that the members opposite cannot be trusted. They 
know that the risks of cuts to labour legislation is real and 
would hurt working families. This NDP government believes 
that decent labour legislation is essential to the well-being of 
working people and the businesses of this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise today and speak to 
this 75-minute debate. I’ve listened to the members opposite, 
their comments. I was quite interested in them, in particular 
when the member — I believe it was for Coronation Park — 
talked about 1979 was the last time that we’ve had similar low 
unemployment numbers. And I’ve got to say, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, 1979 was a real good year, not only for that, but it’s 
the year that I was born, so it was a good year. 
 
But you know, I want to say there are a few similarities between 
1979 and 2006, and I’m not talking about the fact that the 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

member for Greystone is still in this Chamber. But if you look 
at our resources, Madam Deputy Speaker, if you look at our 
resources, the motion that was put forward by the government 
says that it’s what this government has done that is creating 
both increased economic growth and new jobs. 
 
And I have to say, you know, I don’t think it’s so much what 
this government’s doing. It’s what $60-a-barrel oil is doing for 
our province, and what record high potash and uranium prices 
are doing for our province. 
 
And I just had a quick look. I googled it up on the Internet. I 
dialed it up, and if you look back and compare 2006 with 1979, 
it’s very much the same situation. Prices in these resources 
which we’re so dependent on are at near record highs. 1979 was 
a good year for oil prices, certainly for potash prices. And 
uranium prices I note too were also quite high. So I think it’s 
not so much what this government has done and what our 
industries have done. 
 
And I do want to say . . . While I’m on my feet, I want to take 
this time — especially for me from the constituency that I 
represent and part of my family background — I want to thank 
the people that work in the oil industry and that work in the 
potash industry and the uranium industry and forestry — it’s 
difficult times right now — and our producers. 
 
You know I laugh a bit when I see government members. I 
know the Minister for Finance and to a lesser extent the 
Minister for Industry, and they seem like they’re going to strain 
a muscle patting themselves on the back for the work that 
they’ve done. 
 
And, you know, I’m sure the Minister of Finance is busy. You 
know, he’s cutting taxes left and right. Their numbers are going 
down, but I didn’t realize he had time to go out and survey the 
land and build the pad for the drilling rig and put the drilling rig 
up and then go service it. I didn’t realize he had all that time to 
do it. But I do want to say thank you to the workers out there 
and, you know, people like my father who’s driving his truck 
right now and the employees that he works with. 
 
[12:00] 
 
I do want to go on . . . I didn’t realize how fast the time goes. I 
do want to say that it’s pretty obvious — and we’ve talked 
about it a lot — that this government is old and tired. And you 
really see that in how many of the ideas that they like to borrow 
from this side of the House. And that’s fine. I mean, we’re 
pretty upfront in saying that we’re not only going to oppose this 
government but we’re also going to offer our own ideas. And if 
they want to steal them, I guess that shows how desperate they 
are. 
 
But I think it’s real telling, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you 
look at our population, not only our population but the party 
opposite’s, their attitude towards population numbers. You 
know, before, they used to . . . Population wasn’t a big thing. 
And I remember a time when Roy Romanow said we shouldn’t 
use population as a benchmark for determining how well our 
province is doing. And we’ve had it from the member, the 
Minister for Highways who said, you know, we know what it is 
that when people leave the province, there’s more for the rest of 

us. And there’s others like that. 
 
And we found the same thing on youth, on out-migration of our 
youth. Before, they never talked about it. In fact, in the last 
Throne Speech, they promised — it wasn’t a major thing — but 
the government promised a new award for youth, the 
Saskatchewan Youth Award. And a year later, they still haven’t 
delivered on that. It’s not a big thing, but it does show that they 
really didn’t take the issue seriously until Weyburn-Big Muddy 
came along. And we all know what happened there. And I’m 
very pleased to represent the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
and certainly grateful for this opportunity. 
 
And I can’t believe I’m at halftime, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
I’m just getting started. 
 
But it’s the same thing with the idea of a growth agenda. Last 
night I went on Google and I googled in Saskatchewan NDP 
and growth agenda. And I went into the Hansard record and 
looked for it and I found one reference to a growth agenda. 
 
In all the time in the last number of years that this side’s been 
speaking about it . . . And the Leader of the Opposition likes to 
ask questions in question period on the lack of a growth agenda. 
And they could barely even say the words. They couldn’t even 
say the words, growth agenda, and now all of a sudden they got 
to put a motion out saying that they’re all for a growth agenda 
and this is what they’re doing for it. 
 
And it just goes to show that they’re on to the last legs of this 
government, and they see what’s successful on this side of the 
House. They see the numbers and see which way this party’s 
going and which way that party’s going, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And you know, I really notice this, I really notice this. About a 
year ago, about a year ago in February 2005 the Saskatchewan 
Party had our annual convention. We passed a resolution and I 
want to read part of it for you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
making Saskatchewan the energy heart of North America. And 
it’s: 
 

Be it resolved that a Saskatchewan Party government will 
set the goal of making Saskatchewan the energy heart of 
North America within ten years . . . 
 

Now a month and three days later, this is what the Premier had 
to say at his business dinner. And listen to the wording; it’s 
pretty interesting. He said, and I quote: 
 

In this our new century, I believe that Saskatchewan has 
all the potential to become that jurisdiction in North 
America where energy is at the heart of our future. 
 

Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve got to say that it’s a bit, it’s 
a bit telling for my age, but I grew up in a generation where the 
big movies of the time were Star Wars. And you know I 
remember a character, with all due respect to the Premier, a 
character . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A sasquatch? 
 
Mr. Duncan: — No it wasn’t, but it was a guy named Yoda 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

and he liked to speak in reverse. And you know this is exactly 
what the Premier did. He took our resolution and just reversed it 
and tried to make it his own. And you know it’s a shame I don’t 
have enough time. I could go through a whole list of areas. 
 
But I do want to speak about the Saskatchewan Party’s growth 
agenda. And you know this. The Saskatchewan Party, we 
believe that we have a plan for a real growth agenda. And it’s 
not just a buzzword that the government likes to pick up from 
this side because they see that it’s successful. But it talks about 
creating Enterprise Saskatchewan, which I think is going to be a 
really good, new initiative by a new Saskatchewan Party 
government whenever that government decides to call an 
election. 
 
And we talk about removing barriers to growth, not only taxes 
which we’ve seen in the dying days of a government. You 
know, they’re how many months away from the next budget 
and they’re already starting to cut taxes. They’re trying to see if 
their numbers will go up and I don’t think they will. And also 
the old economy infrastructure barriers — reducing those, roads 
and . . . especially places like my constituency where highways 
are a real big problem. 
 
This government doesn’t seem to want to invest any money in 
rural Saskatchewan, especially in things like high-speed 
Internet and especially cell coverage in my area. 
 
I see my time is winding down and I’m just getting started here, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And so that being said, you know, it’s 
real telling and I can’t get through all of these right now but, 
you know, I think as we see, we get closer to the next election 
we’ll see more of the ideas that come from this side of the 
House. They’re going to take more of those ideas and . . . But, 
you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think when we finally get 
the next provincial election then we’ll see a real, a real growth 
agenda being implemented by a Saskatchewan Party 
government. And I, you know, I’m very pleased to say that I 
will not be supporting the motion. And thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased today to join in the debate that this government, the 
NDP government across, has put forward on the idea of a 
growth agenda. 
 
As some of my colleagues have said just before me, this is the 
first time the government has even talked about, acknowledged 
that there is such an issue and how important it is. And the only 
thing it is the basis of a government need in their position. I 
want to . . . While listening to the members opposite, we would 
have to believe in their mind that life is absolutely wonderful in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to them or my questions to them are simple. With 
all the wonderful good news that this government has put 
forward in the last little while, and with the Throne Speech and 
the budget that they are talking about, the question is, why are 
people still tired of the NDP government? Why is your political 

numbers still falling like a rock? Why, every time we answer 
the phone in our constituency, are people saying, is this 
government ever going to call an election? They don’t have a 
clue what’s going on in Saskatchewan. They’re living in a little 
bubble where they like to believe that everything is great and 
we know it’s not. 
 
I can tell you that the government didn’t get the bump that they 
expected in all their good news announcements because people 
don’t trust this government. They don’t trust in the words that 
they’re saying and they say that actions are clearer than words. I 
guess the best example we have of that lately is the election in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. The fact that this government came in 
third in that election is absolutely . . . should have been 
bewildering to them. But to us it wasn’t surprising at all. 
Weyburn-Big Muddy is an example of how all the people in 
Saskatchewan feel about this NDP government and exactly 
what’s going to happen to them. 
 
And then when we stand in the House in the last two weeks and 
talk about issues like Oyate, and the people of the province 
know exactly what’s going on. They know the truth and they 
know that there is denial going on, but they know that this 
government isn’t standing by their word and they can’t trust 
them. 
 
For as much as people would like to believe that there’s going 
to be a change in this government and a focus on the economy, 
the people in my constituency — in Kelvington-Wadena — 
know it’s not true because they know the government doesn’t 
understand the whole concept. 
 
The best example I have of that is the member from Sask Rivers 
a couple of years ago got up in the House and talked about our 
leaders and a growth agenda. And he said, I don’t understand 
what you’re talking about; what do you mean by growth 
agenda? Talk about growth, all you want to talk about is grow, 
grow, grow. The Leader of the Opposition not too long after 
that had to stand in the House and say, he understands you don’t 
know about a growth agenda. We know that. The people of the 
province know that because you don’t get the whole concept. 
 
Everything that’s happening from that side of the House is 
nothing more than words and it’s a list of foreign concepts that 
you don’t understand because there’s no recognition. There’s a 
concept between the social economy and the financial economy 
that you have to have a growing agenda before you have money 
for programs like health care and education and social services. 
They don’t understand it. 
 
And I guess today in the House, the Premier himself didn’t 
define that. He couldn’t bring it to words when we asked 
questions about the problems in his own constituency. We 
talked about the fact that in his constituency that the latest study 
that was done shows that in that area four babies die in that 
constituency compared to one in another constituency at the 
same time. The people are 16 times more likely to try and 
commit suicide in the Premier’s constituency than in another 
one. The poverty in Saskatoon is . . . There are 39,995 people 
considered in poverty in Saskatoon. That’s 18 per cent of the 
population and most of them are in the Premier’s riding. That 
31,472 children live in homes where the parents are on welfare. 
 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

And what does that tell you about a government with an agenda 
that’s based on growth and jobs? It’s not happening. It’s a 
figment of their imaginations. And people know that the only 
way they can make it happen is to dump those guys over there 
and get some ideas that are coming from the people who will 
put forward ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, just to clarify something that one 
of the members opposite talked about and I think she spent most 
of her speech on safety regulations. And I have to tell her that 
whatever kind of concept she was trying to put forward that the 
Sask Party doesn’t believe in safety regulations is false. 
 
But I do want to tell you that none of the employers in 
Saskatchewan understand why you don’t believe, why this 
government doesn’t believe. Employers care about safety. It is 
not just the government. You don’t have to put forward every 
rule and regulation, because employers know if you don’t look 
after your employees, they’re not going to be there. They won’t 
want to come to work. They like their employees. You don’t 
have to trust government to tell them what to do. 
 
I, unlike most of the members on that side, have been an 
employer, and I know the importance of having a good 
employee. And the only way you can do it is by making sure 
they know how valuable they are. That’s our job. That’s how 
employers gain their employees in this province. And that’s 
what they know about a good employer, is that they look after 
them. We don’t need government to tell us to do that. 
 
I just want to make sure that the people that are listening today 
understand that three out of the last five years, this government 
has posted a deficit budget — deficit. For as much as they’d 
like to tell everybody they’ve had balanced budgets, it is not 
true. If I could choose between the members opposite or the 
Provincial Auditor, any day, I will tell you, I believe the 
Provincial Auditor. He’s says . . . [inaudible] . . . are not true. 
 
We also know that we have our population out-migration is 
huge. We’ve lost 18,000 people under this Premier, and I think 
that is absolutely disgusting in a province with all the natural 
resources that we have. We have one-third of the world’s 
supply of uranium, one-third of the world’s supply of potash. 
We’re the second highest producer of oil in Canada, the third 
highest producer of gas. Our forest industry is where BC 
[British Columbia] was 40 years ago. Our agriculture is 
unlimited. 
 
And today the minister, instead of answering the questions we 
had about the people who are living in and really dire 
circumstances because of some of the issues around agriculture, 
chose to attack the member rather than addressing the issue. 
That really, really helps. That helps people. That really helped 
the people who have problems in agriculture, listening to our 
minister talk about it. 
 
Let’s talk about what you could do, what you could be doing as 
a minister. But no, they’d just rather blame it. You’ve spent the 
last 15 years blaming and looking through the rear-view mirror. 
And there’s never been anything that you can do without help 
from somebody like this party. 

The 100 ideas that we put forward last year, a lot of them have 
been implemented — thank you very much — but only because 
we gave them to you. And you could not have come up with 
most of those ideas at all. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there is so many things that this 
province has to be proud of. The one thing that we’re not proud 
of is this current government. And I can assure you, as soon as 
the Premier has the nerve to call an election, he will show that 
quickly. 
 
I’m very pleased to stand here today and say that I will not be 
supporting this ridiculous motion put forward by the NDP 
government, and that the people who know about this growth 
agenda is this party. And we’ll be doing it right after the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition has often taken the Premier to task for affectionately 
calling Saskatchewan the wee province. He claims this hurts 
our image. How does the Leader of the Opposition . . . This is a 
question to the member for Kelvington-Wadena. How does the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Saskatchewan Party think that 
constantly referring to Saskatchewan as, quote, “dead last”, 
telling people that our economy is hooked up to a, quote, 
“suicide machine,” and telling people that all the, quote, “best 
and brightest have already left,” will help Saskatchewan’s 
image and attract workers here? 
 
[12:15] 
 
Ms. Draude: — Somebody said a while ago that the only way 
that you can solve a problem is to recognize that you have one. 
And this government has not recognized that there is a province 
in here. When our Premier will refer to our province as a wee 
province, he’s got the problem. Our leader, the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party, the next premier of Saskatchewan, will be 
telling the people of the province of all the possibilities we 
have. 
 
So I thank you very much for the question, and I’m sure some 
day you’ll have the chance to sit over here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Saskatchewan Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Saskatoon Greystone. In light 
of the fact that the Saskatchewan Party campaigned on tax cuts 
in the last election and in light of the fact that the Saskatchewan 
Party have repeatedly said that corporate capital tax is one of 
the most insidious taxes in our province and in light of the fact 
that the NDP told the people of Saskatchewan that if you cut 
taxes you can’t afford health care and social programs, does that 
member support his Finance minister’s announcement of 
corporate capital tax cuts and corporate income tax cuts? Does 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

he agree with the Saskatchewan Party that some tax cuts will 
trigger growth in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Some tax cuts do trigger growth in this province and a 
good example is the PST cuts that we have just brought in. 
Another good example is the small-business tax cut that we 
have consistently implemented in phases until we halved the 
small-business tax cut. We’ve taken the PST, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and we have cut it two points just, Mr. Speaker, in the 
last two years. 
 
Now let me say that tax cuts will stimulate the economy if 
they’re well thought out, they’re well placed, and if they’re 
sustainable and affordable. And what we saw from members of 
the opposition when they were in government, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, is that they made unsustainable tax cuts. They spent $1 
billion more than they took in each year and they drove this 
province into debt. We’ve introduced tax cuts after years of 
driving down debt and then making those cuts sustainable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
My question is to the member from Coronation Park. The 
member from Coronation Park talked a lot about the debt from 
the previous administration but after 15 years of government — 
his government — he still can’t accept any responsibility for the 
actions of those 15 years. 
 
I would like to read a quote to him. And this is from the Hon. 
Ed Tchorzewski who was the minister of Finance, and this 
quote comes from 1992, Mr. Speaker, from Hansard. It says in 
talking about the debt, “Every single cent of it except the 3.5 
billion, which . . . [is] a very modest debt, all in the Crown . . .” 
He was talking, Madam Deputy Speaker, about the debt of the 
province, $3.5 billion which was Allen Blakeney debt plus over 
top of that, Madam Deputy Chair, is the almost $3 billion at that 
time of unfunded pension liabilities. Now, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, my question to the minister is: why do we now have 
4.3 billion of unfunded pension liabilities and $21.3 billion of 
total debt according to the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. 
member for the question. I happily accept the responsibility for 
the actions of this NDP government for the last 15 years. We’ve 
got the lowest unemployment rate we’ve had since 1979. Taxes 
are on the way down for people — $325 million tax cut this 
session with the announcement of a two point cut in the sales 
tax — in the PST. 
 
With respect to pensions, I’m delighted with the moves that we 
are making and about to make. I am delighted that not one 
single pension cheque has bounced. We backstop pensions. 
That is the responsibility of government and we’re growing the 
economy so that we are able to backstop. And we are able to 
make sure that every single Crown corporation employee 

retired and every single civil servant retired, their pension 
cheque is going to be good and it’s going to grow well into the 
future. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
While I’m on my feet I’d like to ask a question to get back into 
the cycle. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Even though I had not recognized 
you before, I recognize the member for Regina Coronation 
Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is for 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena who spoke about social 
services and the numbers of people you were referring to in the 
Premier’s constituency. Let me remind that hon. member that 
the number of social services recipients in Saskatchewan in 
1990 exceeded 60,000 people — 60,000. It is approaching half 
of that today and we’re enjoying absolute all-time record 
employment. Does the member accept and agree that many of 
the people who had been reduced to receiving social services 
benefits, many who wanted to work, now have employment? 
Does the member agree that things are working in that regard? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
comment to the member opposite is when the member from this 
side of the House asked in estimates about the number of people 
on the provincial training allowance and on social services and 
moving back and forth and if they had kept track of them, the 
answer was no. Nobody knows who was on the PTA [provincial 
training allowance] and who was on social services and the 
numbers back and forth. This government has never kept track 
of. 
 
And also I will remind this member that his government, being 
there for 15 years, never once looked at people on social 
services and gave them an increase until this side of the House 
suggested it had to be done. The social conscience over there is 
nil. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This is a 
question for the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government has made a lot of 
noise and a lot of announcements about the importance of 
immigration into this province. The minister has travelled 
around the world promoting immigration. But unfortunately, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this minister is only bent on cutting 
out the consultants, the immigration consultants who is so 
necessary to attract immigrants into this province. As we know, 
Star-7 had 85 applications given to the government and all 85 
were rejected. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to ask the member, will her 
government stop interfering with the private consultants and 
stick to the job that the department should be doing, and that is 
processing applications? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Well our 
initiatives in terms of immigration are proving themselves. We 
are well beyond our numbers in terms of what we wanted to 
bring into this province, and we are going to probably exceed 
those numbers, Madam Deputy Speaker. And that’s something 
that we are very, very proud of. 
 
But having said that, you know, it’s interesting that they are 
wanting to switch sides in terms of the different persona that 
they want to portray. And interestingly enough, if you look at 
the quote from Regina Leader-Post from January 19 of last 
year, the quote says, “Wall’s stances in the past year — no 
Crown Corporation investment, no gay marriage, and, most 
recently, no additional hours regulations for part-time workers 
— have left you with the impression that his leadership is no 
less socially and economically conservative than that of his 
predecessor, Elwin Hermanson.” 

 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, the cat has not changed its spots. 
And, quite frankly, we are continuing on the path that we’ve 
started on. We are well onto the successes that we’ve laid out 
with respect to the immigration policy. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow 
Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Given that education is often identified as a key in a 
successful economy, and given that many First Nations and 
Métis communities clearly identify education as a key in 
economic development in their own communities, and also 
given that Saskatchewan’s future clearly, clearly relies on 
well-educated young, Aboriginal people, I would like to ask the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena — coincidentally also the 
critic for First Nations and Métis relations — whether or not she 
agrees with the federal government’s decision to cut the literacy 
program that I know has affected many, many First Nations and 
Métis communities so acutely? Does she agree with that, yes or 
no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. Time has elapsed for the 75-minute 
debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair . . . Speaker, 
I’m sorry. This has been a very interesting day. This has been 
an interesting debate. But I’m in . . . have the opportunity here, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to speak to a motion of 
non-confidence that I will be moving a little later on. And I 
guess one of the things I appreciated about the 75-minute 
debate that just transpired was that much of that informs the 
discussion that I hope to bring to this debate in the next little 
while. 

Madam Deputy Speaker, this Assembly has lost confidence in 
this Premier and his government. Worse, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in 
this Premier and his government. But maybe most devastating 
of all, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that some of the Premier’s 
own caucus and cabinet colleagues have lost confidence in the 
leadership this Premier is providing through his government. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is an important discussion because 
I believe that rather than talking like the social democrats that 
this government proposes and espouses to be, members have 
stood in their place, time after time in the last number of weeks 
and talked like Wall Street bankers. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is obviously creating confusion; 
not only in their ranks, but among the party faithful and, more 
importantly, among the many people of this province who have 
come to expect a certain level of debate and a certain position of 
advocacy that this government has traditionally held. But in 
recent days, in recent debates in this House, in recent 
announcements made by this government, you would think that 
they were the captains of capitalism. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would say that this government 
is uncertain of itself. It’s off track. It’s off message. And it’s in 
a desperate ploy to hang onto power that this government has 
decided to disregard its ideology and do what it feels it has to, 
to cling to the reigns of power. That, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
is a recipe for a loss of confidence, both inside and outside of 
this House. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there are a couple of areas that this 
government traditionally has held on to as evidence of its 
concern for the general public, for its social conscience, and for 
its history. And I would refer, Madam Deputy Speaker, to first 
of all, health care. And secondly, I’m going to talk about some 
social issues that have afflicted this particular government in its 
tenure — most recently in the last half dozen years, but it goes 
back to the time this government first took power in the early 
1990s. 
 
When the Romanow government was elected, one of the very 
first things it did was closed 52 rural hospitals. Also, the Plains 
hospital in Regina came under the axe as a part of that 
decision-making process. The problem with that particular 
decision, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that it not only closed 
rural hospitals; it cut to the heart of this government’s 
responsibility and its advocacy of health care, of equality 
delivery for everybody in Saskatchewan. And cutting those 
hospitals was symptomatic of a change in mindset that would 
affect this government in the years to come. 
 
And if we look at the more recent record of this government, we 
can talk specifically about the problems that are affecting rural 
hospitals today. We’ve heard just recently of several hospitals 
that have been closed in the constituency of Canora-Pelly. I 
think that Canora is closed. Preeceville is threatening closure 
because of some problems in delivering services there. I think 
that they’ve had hospital closures at various times in that 
particular constituency, which has been hardest hit most 
recently. But as of last summer the hospital in Maple Creek was 
under some threat of closure for a lack of qualified people. 
 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

[12:30] 
 
We’ve heard of hospital closures, although they may be 
temporary, in Spiritwood. There was a hospital closure 
announced for Arcola. The community of Central Butte had 
their hospital close down because of a shortage of registered 
nurses. Big River, they had emergency and acute in-patient 
services unavailable to that community since August. 
 
Now I want to quote, if I may, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
mayor of Big River. Sandra Gilbert says, “The town has been 
dealing with shortages for the past six years. It’s rather 
exasperating.” 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, these rural hospital closures are 
symptomatic of a much larger problem. We have raised in this 
House many times over the last number of years, in fact, the 
problem with the shortage of physicians both in urban and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In urban Saskatchewan, when there’s a shortage there might be 
somebody there to help cover the load or take some of the load. 
But in rural Saskatchewan there’s a doctor shortage, most times 
there’s nobody there. And the consequence is that the people of 
the community are without service and the hospital is closed 
until that doctor or physician shortage is revisited. 
 
We’ve talked time and time again about the shortage of nurses 
in the health care system. And as of last count, I believe the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses suggested a shortage of 600 
nursing positions that require filling in the next little while to 
keep our hospitals operating on an effective and timely basis. 
 
And 600 nurses, Madam Deputy Speaker, is a cumulative 
number, because that shortage didn’t occur this last summer. It 
didn’t occur in the last couple of weeks. That’s a number that 
has been accumulating over the last half a dozen years or more. 
 
This is not a short-term problem. This is a long-term problem. 
And this government has failed in its responsibility to provide 
the resources necessary and the people necessary to fill those 
nursing positions. And hospitals all across the province are 
affected by that failure to do diligent duty in that area of 
responsibility. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re aware of the term code blue, 
which has been not heard quite so frequently in urban hospitals, 
but it was a fairly common occurrence over the previous few 
years. As a matter of fact, I was a patient in one of these urban 
hospitals when a code burgundy was announced as a need or as 
a course of the issues that were developing there, in terms of 
shortage of bed space and shortage of people available to deal 
with the patients that were coming in on an emergency basis. 
 
So what we’ve got, Madam Deputy Speaker, is a government 
that talks about and takes some pride in its history of public 
health care, stands in the House day after day and says we’re 
the, not just the proponents; we’re the authors of public health 
care. Our party has a proud tradition in the delivery of health 
care. And yet we see it’s starting to crumble around us. 
 
One other thing that I’d like to address in terms of health care 
and that is the waiting lists that have been created by the 

shortage of doctors, nurses, and other health care professionals. 
The waiting list at one time in this province was the worst in the 
country — the worst. In the home of health care we had the 
worst waiting list — longest waiting list in the country. And 
you know that’s academic and it’s just numbers until you start 
talking to the people who are on that waiting list; until you start 
identifying with the individuals who are at home waiting 
months and months for the opportunity to have a medical 
procedure performed on them. 
 
It might not seem too important as long as we’re talking about 
numbers but when you talk to an individual who is sitting at 
home taking morphine to address the pain, that number 
suddenly has a very painful face. And for this government to 
have shirked its responsibility in that area is just unconscionable 
and it speaks very clearly to the loss of importance that this 
issue has taken. 
 
When we hear the Minister of Health stand in this House day 
after day and talk about processes and procedures and never 
once talk about individuals and how the loss of applicable and 
appropriate care affects them, then we start to understand where 
this government has gone off track. When processes become 
more important than people, the government has lost its way. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would say that that’s one of the 
reasons why the people of this province have lost confidence in 
this government. They no longer live up to the reputation that 
they thought this government had for health care propriety. 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think the issue goes right to the 
heart of this government, right to the heart of its public 
conscience, its social conscience. And I think it speaks very 
clearly to how this government has got so far off of message 
and so far off track that they don’t really know who they are or 
what they stand for any longer. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s other issues that I’d like to 
address. This government has historically had a reputation for 
being very deliberate and focused on social issues. And when I 
was first elected, I think I saw more of that from this 
government. But in recent years we’ve seen a lot less. And there 
are some issues that have come to our attention that make this 
apparent loss of conscience in this area very clear, very evident, 
not just to the members of the House but to the people of this 
province. 
 
I’d like to refer to the Oyate Safe House debacle that we 
witnessed in this particular Assembly — the questions, the lack 
of answers, the issues. Madam Deputy Speaker, there have been 
problems with this particular house which was supposed to 
provide safe harbour for teenagers who are under extremely 
difficult circumstances, who are often sexually abused and were 
forced into the sex trade. This house was supposed to provide 
safe harbour for those young ladies. 
 
But problems developed early. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
the government’s response to the problems that developed has 
been to obfuscate, to hide, to run from its responsibility. 
 
The minister of DCRE, the minister responsible for Social 
Services in this government, is by law the individual who is 
responsible personally on behalf of the government for the 
welfare of those children. That minister has parental obligations 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

to those children. 
 
Have I heard him stand here and admit that or accept that 
responsibility? No, ma’am. I’ve heard him hide from the facts. 
I’ve heard him distort the response of the government. I’ve 
heard him defer to the report by the Children’s Advocate and 
the Provincial Auditor when they in fact were holding him 
responsible for an abdication of authority. And I think, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, he’s hidden behind those reports when those 
reports in fact were the origin of some of the most damning 
condemnation of this minister and his lack of responsibility. 
 
So when it comes to the social conscience this government is so 
proud of, they have abdicated their responsibilities pretty 
clearly. And that’s no way to build confidence in the people of 
the province. 
 
The effects of poverty in this province. I think that if I recall, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this government talking about 
eliminating the need for food banks in their elected lifetime. I 
think I remember them talking about eradicating poverty among 
children in their elected lifetime. And today in the news, in the 
printed and electronic media, we’re hearing some very, very 
discouraging reports about what’s happening in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The report is based particularly and specifically 
on research work done in the city of Saskatoon, comparing 
health outcomes and conditions in individuals on the west side 
of the city with those on the east side of the city. 
 
The curious thing about this, even though it’s a very damning 
and devastating report, is that the constituency that is most 
specifically identified is the Premier’s own constituency. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t know how much more, how 
much more condemnation this Premier and this government 
needs to hear than the results of this particular report. Because it 
points clearly to the failure of this government to address the 
very issues that their social conscience insists that they address. 
I’m going to read some of the report’s results into the record 
today, Madam Deputy Speaker, because I think this speaks 
more loudly than anything I can say today. 
 
In terms of suicide attempts, the people in the low-income areas 
of Saskatoon are 16 times more likely to attempt suicide than 
people in the rest of the city. In terms of mental disorders, the 
people in this study are 4.3 times more likely to suffer mental 
disorders than those in the wealthier parts of the city. In terms 
of diabetes, almost 13 times greater rate of diabetes in the 
people who were studied on the west side compared to the east; 
coronary heart disease, 1.7 times greater in these people than on 
the wealthier part of the city; doctor visits, 2.4 times higher; in 
terms of chlamydia, 14.9 times higher; hepatitis C, 35 times 
higher; infant mortality, 3.2 times higher. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I don’t know how the government 
members sleep at night. I don’t know how the Premier can 
stand in this House and talk about the record of his government 
in terms of social conscience issues and have reports and 
statistics like this arrive for public review as a result of a study. 
It’s just unbelievable and it’s unacceptable. And it speaks, it 
speaks directly to the issue of this government not knowing 
who it is, where it’s going, or what’s important to it any longer. 
 
When I hear member after member after member stand up and 

talk about job numbers and investment increases and all the 
good things that a growing economy produces but no references 
to the tragedy of the lives of these people, I think this 
government is missing the mark. 
 
This government also has failed in terms of its social 
conscience in other areas. I recall, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
Salvation Army, a well-respected community-based 
organization, faith-based organization, had a program operating 
in this city that did very good work. But the government 
decided it would no longer fund it because it wanted to remove 
itself from the faith-based activities of the Salvation Army. 
What did it do? It removed the funding to that group and turned 
around and created another government agency, moved all the 
funding to that government agency. We cancelled 23 jobs at the 
Salvation Army, put 23 additional government jobs in this new 
facility and chose to go that way. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there was no need to make that 
decision. No organization is better respected for the work it 
does among the poor and the indigent and the hurting than the 
Salvation Army. There was no reason to discontinue funding to 
that organization and create another government agency to do 
the very same job. 
 
This government has no respect for those types of 
community-based organizations, and I think that there are other 
examples of it. In fact most recently we’ve heard about Teen 
Challenge and the great work it’s been able to do for drug 
addicts in this province, particularly those who’ve been 
addicted to crystal meth, whose addiction produces such an 
erratic and difficult experience for the individual who’s 
addicted that they’re completely unpredictable. And Teen 
Challenge has stepped into the breach there and taken these 
young men and worked with them and produced some 
tremendous results. 
 
And instead of supporting the work or encouraging the work 
that that agency does on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, 
the government decided to just move on with their own 
programs and ignore and almost disavow the work of Teen 
Challenge. And in fact I believe, Madam Deputy Speaker, there 
have been obstacles placed in the way of Teen Challenge and 
their ability to expand and increase their program in the 
Saskatoon area. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, with these instances and many 
others that I would like to have addressed, I think we’ve got a 
problem here in that this government has lost its way. It’s 
wandering around in the wilderness. It doesn’t know exactly 
what its focus is. It doesn’t know where it’s going. It’s lost its 
attachment to its roots, and it’s created a situation where it 
looks like the government is making announcement after 
announcement on a daily basis as an effort to detract people 
from the record and try to establish enough credibility coming 
up to the next election that they would have an opportunity to 
be re-elected. 
 
[12:45] 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 
starting to see through this. They’re not easily bought with their 
own money any more. They’re not convinced that this 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

government represents the very important issues that people 
hold important in their lives any longer. 
 
And the interesting thing, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that when 
the government focuses more attention on economic issues than 
it does the very important social issues for which it’s been 
known, it creates the very brand problem that this government 
has. 
 
And even though it’s made very important strides to look 
business-friendly, even though it’s done some tax reduction — 
and I would say some of it’s been important tax reduction — 
even though it’s changed royalty rates for oil companies, even 
though it’s provided incentives for development in other 
countries, this government still has a brand problem because it’s 
not known to be a business-friendly government. It’s a social 
democratic government. Social first, democratic maybe, but it’s 
not a business-friendly government. 
 
And if the government members can’t understand why they’ve 
done all these good things for business — reducing this tax and 
that tax and this royalty and that incentive — it’s because the 
people of the province simply don’t trust the motives of the 
government. They don’t trust this government to make smart 
business decisions that will have long-term benefit to their 
particular business. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, a leopard cannot change its spots. And 
I make that reference in regard to this particular government 
because this is the genesis of the brand problem that is so 
important to this particular province. If you’re going to move in 
a business-friendly way, the businesses that you want to attract 
to your province need to be convinced, need to be certain, need 
to be able to look back on your track record and say, we can 
trust this government to move in this direction and honour its 
commitments. 
 
But the business community cannot trust this government. 
They’ve done what they’ve had to do not because they wanted 
to but because they felt obligated to or were being forced to do 
it because of disenchantment with their particular party. And I 
think that we’ll probably see more of this as we move forward, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. But people will say, is this genuine? Is 
this real? Or is this just something that the government’s doing 
for re-election purposes? It’s that concern in the minds of the 
people of Saskatchewan that causes a lack of confidence. And 
so, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a government in trouble. 
This is a government in trouble with this Assembly, with the 
people of the province, and within its own membership 
province-wide. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to address some rural issues at 
this point. I think the fact that we haven’t talked about rural 
issues much in this House is a pretty clear indication of the 
government’s lack of interest in this particular topic. I want to 
talk about crop insurance. That kind of came up in the 75 . . . 
no, I’m sorry, question period earlier today, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
There is a drought happening in large areas of southwest 
Saskatchewan. And the Minister of Agriculture would have us 
believe that the government’s crop insurance program is 
adequate to meet the needs of the people who are affected by 

that. Well if it was true, Madam Deputy Speaker, that crop 
insurance was adequate, I wouldn’t have had the 15 or 16 RMs 
afflicted by drought contacting my office after having declared 
themselves a disaster area. I wouldn’t have had dozens of letters 
and phone calls from producers in my constituency who are 
wondering where they’re going to get the money to pay their 
bills. If crop insurance was adequate, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
we wouldn’t be in the legislature addressing the problems posed 
by this drought on the producers of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
I need to tell you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that crop insurance 
started out as a very good program. But with the wilful attention 
of this particular government, crop insurance has been reduced 
to a Mickey Mouse program. There are increasing premiums 
every year and reducing coverage at the same time. 
 
I have a young man who farms, who’s put his entire life into 
farming, is one of my friends and one of my constituents, come 
to my office a week or two ago and say he bought what he 
could afford in crop insurance. He bought the 70 per cent 
coverage. That was affordable. It really wasn’t adequate, but it 
was affordable. The 80 per cent coverage of crop insurance was 
so out of line financially, he just couldn’t afford to go there. 
 
But when he had a crop failure this year due to the drought, his 
guarantee was 21 bushels to the acre. He produced just enough 
to reach the minimum, the guarantee, but the dollar value for 
each bushel that he actually harvested was so low that he wasn’t 
left with enough money to cover his fixed costs — his fuel, his 
fertilizer, his chemicals. He wasn’t left with enough money to 
cover his additional administrative costs, his unfixed costs, or 
his business cost, and he certainly wasn’t left with anything for 
a living. 
 
So for the government to intimate that crop insurance should 
cover this kind of a problem, is simply a situation where the 
government either deliberately has not made itself aware of the 
implications of the changes they’ve made or is completely 
ignorant to the reality of farming — one or the other. 
 
And I just don’t see where this government can hope to attain 
any credibility in rural Saskatchewan if they’re going to 
perpetuate these kinds of programs for the producers of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a situation where there is no confidence or 
no attempt to build confidence among the producers of the 
province. 
 
There’s forage insurance. I want to address this just for half a 
minute if I may, Madam Deputy Speaker, because forage 
insurance was designed to protect ranchers and individuals who 
grew forage for feed. And we had the driest year in southwest 
Saskatchewan, in most of the areas, since the dirty thirties — 
since the 1930s. And yet the individuals in our area who had 
forage insurance, when they expected a payment, were told they 
wouldn’t receive anything at all. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the reason they’re not going to 
receive anything is that government has decided to impose a 
very strict recording of moisture that fell in the area. The 
weather stations now record moisture in the one-tenth of one 
millimetre amounts. Now anybody who knows anything about 
growing forage, if you’ve got a dry 10 inches of soil, it’s going 
to take three- to four-tenths of rain to make any difference in 



November 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

that forage crop. The government is saying if you collect 
one-tenth of one millimetre, that has to be counted toward . . . 
That’s less than the dew. That’s less than the average dew 
would produce. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you get 
programs that put strictures on producers of that type — that are 
just completely unreasonable — it’s hard to generate confidence 
in the public. 
 
And as an official opposition, it’s our duty to represent the 
concerns of those constituents, and even those individuals who 
aren’t our constituents, who are having these problems with this 
government. They just do not see this government as being 
aware of the issues that face them. Whether they’re in urban 
Saskatchewan and dealing with street crime or if they’re in rural 
Saskatchewan dealing with drought, there is no confidence in 
this government. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s my privilege to move this 
motion, and I do so now: 
 

That this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 
Premier and his government. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seconded by . . . 
 
Mr. Elhard: — The motion is seconded by the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member . . . Well I 
have to have the motion before me. Thank you. It’s been moved 
by the member for Cypress Hills and seconded by the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That this Assembly no longer has confidence in the 
Premier and his government. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to get into the debate and talk about this motion and 
seconding the motion of non-confidence in this government. 
 
It certainly isn’t just the number of people on our side of the 
bench that do not have confidence in this government. We 
know that thousands and hundreds of thousands of people 
across this province don’t have confidence in this provincial 
government. And I can tell you why they don’t have any 
confidence in this government and especially to the member 
from Regina Victoria. I know that people don’t have confidence 
in his government because his government is acting exactly the 
way the Conservatives did in the end of their tenure. I don’t see 
any difference between their government and the Grant Devine 
government at the end of its tenure. 
 
The Grant Devine government, the Grant Devine government, 
at the end of its tenure, knew that the time was up but didn’t 

want to face the reality that they were going to get kicked out 
after the next provincial election. So what that government did 
at that time was, in order to get votes, they would start passing 
freebies out. They’d start handing out all these gifts thinking 
that that would get them elected. It’s nothing different than 
what this government is doing right now. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s just interesting the timing this 
government is doing it. We know that it’s to salvage the 
leadership of a Premier that, quite frankly, doesn’t have the 
support within his own caucus. We know that members on that 
side of the House do not support the Premier. So what the 
Premier has done is he’s gone and thought of some giveaways. 
 
I mean there’s the family holiday that they’ve all of a sudden 
decided, after 15 years, they should present to the people of 
Saskatchewan because they don’t have . . . people in 
Saskatchewan don’t have confidence in this government. 
There’s the one Family Day holiday. And now, the two points 
on the PST. 
 
I mean it’s like the deathbed confession. They know their time 
is up. They’re no different than what the Conservatives were at 
the end of their tenure, trying to buy votes back so they can 
cling on to power. And it’s nothing more than that. It’s to save 
the leadership of a Premier. It’s simply to cling on to the power 
that they could be government for another four years. 
 
But it’s interesting because why this is all coming about right 
now is because not only do we not have confidence in this 
government and this Premier, members on that side of the 
House do not have confidence in their leader. 
 
We know that of course the member from Regina Dewdney 
spoke out and because of that he was kicked out of cabinet. But 
we know that there was three or four others on that side of the 
House, at least, that were supporting that member for speaking 
up against the Premier. And one of them was the member from 
Regina Victoria. We know for a fact that that member was 
feeling that their leader could not lead them into the next 
election and really felt that they needed to make a change. 
 
But unfortunately one person spoke out on that side and we 
know what happened to him. He was made an example of. That 
member was simply made an example of. He was kicked out of 
cabinet, and the other people that were backing him thought 
well we better just keep our mouths quiet because what’s going 
to happen, is if we speak up, if we speak up, we may lose our 
cabinet position. And that’s exactly what has happened on that 
side of the House. 
 
And now the Premier, in order to salvage not only the support 
from within his own caucus but the leadership of this province 
as Premier, is on the eleventh hour doing nothing more than 
trying to buy votes leading into the next provincial election. 
 
When I had the opportunity to reply to the Speech from the 
Throne, I was talking about a number of the similarities 
between this NDP government and what went on in the ’80s, 
and there are a number of striking similarities, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The issue of non-confidence rings true throughout the province, 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2006 

and nowhere was it more evident than the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. Weyburn-Big Muddy was an example 
where the once strong NDP under Tommy Douglas ruled that 
constituency. They ruled that constituency. And under the 
leadership of this Premier they have gone from ruling that 
constituency to finishing third in that constituency. That is a 
shocking testament to the leadership of this Premier. And we 
know, as I said before, not only is there a lack of confidence in 
this government from this side of the House, we know by 
watching the faces on that side of the House there is a huge lack 
of confidence in the Premier. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Riversdale, which we heard some 
very interesting news coming out of his constituency today in 
question period — and the member from Cypress Hills talked 
about it — about, you know, the health of the people in that 
area and about how this government stands and talks about how 
it protects the poor and stands up for the poor. And then when 
you get a report like this, it just tells you they are interested in 
talking about it, but they’re sure not interested in doing 
anything about it. 
 
Well I just heard the member from Regina Qu’Appelle having a 
few words to say. I was very interested in question period when 
he was asked a few questions about agriculture, and he decided 
to talk about our critic and what he has said. 
 
I remember not too many years ago, I remember not too many 
years ago when that member stood on his feet. He yelled from 
his seat and talked about it was a right thing to do to raise 
long-term care fees to 90 per cent. And I would be very 
interested if that member still thinks it is time to raise long-term 
care fees to 90 per cent. Is that what he believes in? Because he 
sure had no problem yelling from his seat that it was the right 
thing to do. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the right thing to do for this 
government is to realize the ghost is up; it’s time for a change. 
Because people around this province know that it’s time for a 
change. People within his own caucus, within that NDP caucus, 
know it’s time for a change. It was nothing more than clinging 
on to power. That is why this government is making the moves 
that it’s making now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being the hour of 1 o’clock, I 
wish everyone safe journeys and Remembrance Day 
ceremonies in their own constituencies well attended. And I do 
now adjourn this House until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................297 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................298 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................298 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................298 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................298 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................298 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................298 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................298 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................299 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................299 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................299 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................299 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................299 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................299 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................300 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................300 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Remembrance Day 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................300 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................300 
 Honouring Saskatchewan War Brides 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................301 
 Honouring Canadian Armed Forces 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................301 
 Regina Branch of the Royal Canadian Legion Celebrates Anniversary 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................301 
 Goodwill Manor at Duck Lake Celebrates Anniversary 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................302 
 Celebrating Literacy Partnerships in Saskatchewan 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................302 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Response to Requests from Cancer Patient’s Family 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................302 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................303 
 Response to Poverty Study in Saskatoon 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................303 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................303 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................304 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................305 
 Assistance to Farmers in Southwest Saskatchewan 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................306 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................306 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Income Tax Changes 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................308 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................308 
 Roadway Named Memorial Way 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................308 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................308 
 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 3 – The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................309 
 Bill No. 201 – The Bio-diesel Fuel Act 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................309 
MOTIONS 
 Sessional Order 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................309 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Economic Growth in Saskatchewan 
  Prebble ...............................................................................................................................................................................310, 320 
  Trew ...................................................................................................................................................................................312, 320 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................313 
  Morin .................................................................................................................................................................................315, 319 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................316 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................318 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................319 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................320 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................320 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................321 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Loss of Confidence in the Government 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................321 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................325 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


