






















































Hansard: May 09, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 56B  TUESDAY, MAY 9, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1587 
 May 9, 2006 
 
[The committee resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — Before the committee this evening is Committee 
of Finance, vote 32, the Department of Health. I welcome the 
minister and his officials. If he would like to introduce the 
officials with him this evening, and we’ll begin from there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
With me tonight, as we discuss Health estimates, deputy 
minister, John Wright; Lauren Donnelly, assistant deputy 
minister; Bonnie Blakley, executive director, workforce 
planning branch; Ted Warawa, executive director, finance and 
administration branch; Max Hendricks, assistant deputy 
minister. 
 
Also sitting in the Chamber tonight: Roger Carriere, executive 
director, community care branch; Kevin Wilson, executive 
director, drug plan and extended benefits branch; Donna 
Magnusson, executive director, primary health services branch; 
Rod Wiley, executive director, regional policy branch; Bert 
Linklater, executive director, regional accountability branch; 
Brenda Russell, acting director, finance and administration 
branch; and Leslie Grob, assistant to the deputy minister. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Minister. I would recognize the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone on vote 32, Department of 
Health. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have a 
number of questions in a bunch of different areas. And I also 
have a number of colleagues, who may not all be here yet, but 
they’re all going to be here to ask questions that will take us 
definitely till 9 o’clock, the time that we have allotted, the two 
hours. 
 
What I would like to ask first of all, some questions regarding 
the drug Visudyne. There was an issue a couple years ago . . . or 
no, a couple months ago, sorry, when we were asking questions 
on that. We had a gentleman come in and talk about the 
situation that he was going through. We certainly know what 
other provinces are doing. 
 
But before I get into what other provinces are doing, I’d like to 
know where the department is on that drug. I think at one point 
they had covered it for this gentleman, but not retroactive. And 
I don’t know where the department is going forward. So if you 
could just lay out . . . And I’d like to welcome all the officials 
too. But if you could just lay out where the department is right 
now please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much for the question. 
The simple answer is coverage is available for the wet or 

age-related macular degeneration with classic lesions and for 
various other conditions where the clinical evidence is available 
to show that the drug is effective. Under these circumstances, 
coverage is provided at no cost to the patient. 
 
The Saskatchewan drug review committee have completed a 
review of Visudyne in the treatment of the occult form of AMD 
[age-related macular degeneration]. They have considered 
clinical information submitted by Saskatchewan 
ophthalmologists as well as documentation submitted by the 
drug manufacturer, which is Novartis Ophthalmics, and have 
recommended that coverage for the occult form of AMD not be 
approved. 
 
All provinces currently provide coverage for Visudyne for 
classic AMD. Seven provinces currently provide coverage for 
the occult form of macular degeneration. In most provinces, 
coverage of Visudyne is provided outside of the provincial drug 
program, and the provincial drug review committees have not 
been involved in reviewing the evidence or determining 
coverage criteria. 
 
I might add, Saskatchewan relies on the expertise of the drug 
review committee and, to ensure that listed products are 
cost-effective, the committee’s review of the cost-benefit 
factors of a drug in relation to its clinical benefit. The estimated 
annual cost impact to the drug plan of providing coverage to 
Visudyne for the occult form of AMD would be about 
$800,000. The cost of additional services, i.e., physician 
services related to the treatment, is estimated to be about 
$140,000 annually. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you for that answer. It’s interesting 
that you had mentioned that we knew the department was 
covering for wet macular degeneration but not the dry or occult. 
When you look at other provinces that are covering this drug for 
both wet and dry, you mentioned that seven other provinces are 
covering the full cost of this. It really begs the question then 
why Saskatchewan isn’t, when seven out of 10 provinces are 
covering it and we have decided not to. 
 
You mentioned that the drug review committee in 
Saskatchewan has determined that that wasn’t cost-effective. 
Then it begs the question, why in seven provinces is it 
cost-effective and it isn’t here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I had indicated in my original 
remarks, Saskatchewan’s decision was based on the report of 
the drug review committee that was looking at documentation 
submitted. In a majority of the other provinces that do fund it, 
they step outside of their review committee recommendations in 
providing probably block funding. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan continues to respect the work of 
the drug review committee. It was established to do this work of 
making recommendations or recommending not funding it. So 
our decision is basically made in respect of the work of the 
committee. 
 
Provinces that do not provide coverage for occult as of March 1 
of this year outside of Saskatchewan are Ontario and Prince 
Edward Island. I can tell the member opposite and the public 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

that’s listening or reading this material, BC [British Columbia], 
New Brunswick, Alberta, Quebec and Manitoba do provide 
coverage for occult. But of these provinces, New Brunswick 
and Manitoba have indicated they were given blanket funding 
to a certain cap on Visudyne. Nova Scotia’s review committee 
did not approve Visudyne for occult, but their funding 
mechanism did not allow them a way to exclude payment. And 
Newfoundland provides restricted coverage for occult AMD 
outside of their pharmacare program. 
 
So by and large, those provinces that have relied on a review 
committee like Saskatchewan has recommended against 
funding. Those who’ve stepped outside of it have recommended 
funding or were unable to not fund because of their funding 
formulas. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So in other 
words, there were seven provinces that funded, two because of 
policy or they can’t back out of it. But five provinces have 
stepped away from the review committee — if that’s the case 
— to fund it. 
 
In other words the province or the Department of Health has 
determined that it prevents blindness. And that’s what these 
people are up against with occult macular degeneration is that if 
they’re not treated . . . And I realize after talking to a couple of 
the people from Novartis that it may not be 100 per cent cure 
rate, but other provinces have believed that it’s effective enough 
that they would step out of their review committee to cover it. 
In other words it’s effective enough to help enough people 
prevent the onset of blindness. 
 
And I don’t know what the price tag of that would be. You’re 
saying that it’s $800,000 a cost to a province. Well you can 
imagine . . . And I don’t know how many people would be 
eligible for this, but if you had a dozen people that it prevented 
the onset of blindness, now what is the cost of that? 
 
Now I think the cost-effectiveness . . . I guess you’d have to 
study back then, what are the costs to society to have some of 
these people go blind when the medication is there? And other 
provinces have agreed that it’s effective enough that they’d step 
away from the review committee and cover the drug. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This is a very good question to allow us 
to take a look at the overall way in which Saskatchewan 
approaches additions to the provincial formulary. I think as the 
member knows, the formulary in the province is quite large, and 
in fact we have one of the best drug coverage programs 
generally in Canada. There’s probably 3,500 products that are 
listed on the formulary and the Saskatchewan drug plan 
consistently funded by this government with ever-increasing 
dollar values. 
 
If I’m not mistaken, the drug plan — correct me if I’m wrong 
— is about 14 per cent increase this year alone, under the drug 
plan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh 9 per cent. I am 
corrected; 9 per cent this year. But the history is 14 per cent a 
year increase in funding. 
 
The province continues to respect the work of the review 
committee. That’s why it was set up. The review committee is 
constantly reviewing additional clinical information, not just on 

this product but on other products that are brought forward. And 
any time there is additional information to be brought forward, 
the committee will examine that evidence and move forward. 
 
So I indicate again to those who are interested tonight or in 
reading this material that the government have not closed the 
door on this particular product. In fact they are reviewing the 
clinical information. And as more clinical information becomes 
available . . . I guess what I am saying is this decision is not 
based on financing alone. It’s based on the clinical review and 
the recommendation of the committee. And I think I can say 
that should the committee recommend this, that indeed the 
government would be prepared to fund it under the formulary 
which is the normal practice. 
 
I should just add to the record the Saskatchewan formulary 
committee has reviewed Visudyne for occult macular 
degeneration in the past; has not recommended coverage 
because, and I indicated earlier, there was insufficient clinical 
evidence to support the use of the drug for this indication. The 
committees have recently reviewed the results of a new study 
that has been designed to look specifically at Visudyne in this 
indication and have again recommended that coverage not be 
approved for the occult form of age-related macular 
degeneration. 
 
So what the committee is telling us is that the evidence at this 
point does not suggest all of the conclusions. They will continue 
to look at new clinical evidence as it comes forward, and the 
door is not closed to Visudyne. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well that’s 
certainly interesting. And I would be very interested in hearing 
from . . . well not that I would be, but I am sure the Novartis 
would be interested in hearing from the committee as to what 
they feel is insufficient to recommend this drug, what clinical 
studies are insufficient when you think that other provinces 
have this covered in their drug formulary — or yes, drug 
formulary — and why we aren’t at that point. 
 
[19:15] 
 
But one question I did have, when you were talking about the 
drug formulary and the fact that it increased by 9 per cent this 
year and I heard that it was 14 per cent over the last couple of 
years. I guess if we had been to 14 per cent this year, there’d be 
no question in covering it. 
 
But with the drug formulary, it’s always easy to add and 
certainly we’re asking the government to look at adding new 
drugs. Is the formulary looked at? Are they looking at 3,500 
products, or whatever you had mentioned? Do any drop off? 
Does the formulary delist some as you go forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much. The formulary 
committee can and does delist products. I guess the formulary 
committee’s work can be considered as almost a living entity in 
that it will review products that are not on the list for inclusion. 
It’ll review products that are on the list for exclusion or 
delisting depending on how evidence comes forward, or any 
number of other reasons for delisting. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Minister, I have questions in a different 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

area, although it’s an area that we talked about a little bit today, 
earlier in question period, about endocrinologists. My first 
question is, how many pediatric endocrinologists do we have 
currently practising in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We have one practising in the province. 
That one is located in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — If we look back over the last number of 
years, what was the province up to at one point regarding 
pediatric endocrinologists, because what we’re hearing from 
families with children that suffer from diabetes . . . One family 
talks about the situation with their child who was able to have 
up to four appointments in a year depending on the severity and 
how they were coping with their diabetes. And now they’re 
lucky to see a pediatric endocrinologist once a year because of 
the fact that we only have one in the province. 
 
It would kind of tell me that obviously previously we’d had a 
number, and I don’t know what that number is. But we’ve 
obviously dropped, I would say, from a level of two or three or 
perhaps four down to one. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In answer to the member’s question with 
regards to pediatric endocrinologists, to our knowledge the 
number of designated pediatric endocrinologists has always 
been one. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well that’s an interesting answer because 
certainly when I talked to when — actually it was another 
member who has given me this information — talked to the 
family, who is from Estevan and now has to travel to Saskatoon 
to see this one pediatric endocrinologist . . . It certainly implies 
that at one point . . . And maybe it was the people that we had 
here in Regina would deal with that, but it doesn’t sound like 
that’s the case now, and they’re having to travel to Saskatoon 
and only accessing one appointment per year. 
 
So I guess that is a concern but I guess the bigger concern is, is 
the province right now looking at recruiting more pediatric 
endocrinologists or is one for the province sufficient? Which I 
would really question because when you look at the projections 
going forward on the diabetes rates in our province, it’s not a 
positive story; it can be quite scary. And so I guess I’m asking: 
what is the province doing to, number one, attract another 
pediatric endocrinologist, or does the department think we need 
one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member will recall that during 
question period today I talked about endocrinology generally as 
being a very competitive sector of the health field. In fact, the 
recruitment of endocrinologists generally, not just in this 
province but throughout North America, is intense in all 
jurisdictions. Endocrinologists are in great demand. 
 
We recognize that the number of people coming out of 
programs with specialty in pediatric endocrinology is an even 
smaller field to draw from. Pretty much every person who 
serves as an adult endocrinologist can deal with pediatric cases. 
We have not noticed any challenges in the Regina Health 
Region with regards to referrals to Saskatoon for the pediatric 
care that exists there. 
 

However, the regions are constantly reviewing their needs for 
specialists and specialist care, but the province in this field and 
others in these specialties often rely on referrals from one 
region to another when the need exists. 
 
That having been said — and the fact that this is a very 
competitive field — the Saskatoon Health Region, also in 
conjunction with Sask Health, the College of Medicine, and 
support from the Saskatchewan Medical Association, are 
working very hard to increase the number of endocrinologists 
generally in the Saskatoon Health Region. We are positive in 
our prognosis with regards to our ability to do that. But only 
time will tell how successful we will be at the end of the day. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well I would certainly urge the department, 
when you take into consideration the projections of the diabetic 
rates going forward in this province, that the number of 
endocrinologists we have right now, and in particularly 
pediatrics, will not fit the bill, will not be sufficient. When you 
hear from a family that they’re having to wait a whole year for 
one appointment and then when the numbers increase going 
forward, that just won’t be acceptable. 
 
And so whatever the department is doing to recruit . . . or the 
health authorities, I think they’re going to have to work on 
stepping it up because I would hope that the department has 
projections on the rate and the increased rate of diabetics in our 
province going forward. Because certainly talking to the 
different associations, they’ve done that and they have a pretty 
good idea of the demand going forward. And I mean it’s only 
proper that the department work on meeting those demands 
moving forward. 
 
I have one other question from this family who talks about their 
child. And he’s having to do finger pokes four to eight times a 
day. The test strips are about $1 per test strip — $1 dollar per 
test strip as I said. And they’re wondering, is there any 
programs that would cover this? It can amount to over . . . up to 
$200 per month just for test strips alone for this family. Are 
there any programs available or is this all borne by the parents? 
Is this all . . . have to be covered just by the parents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — A couple of questions raised, so I hope 
the member will allow me a little bit of time to respond. First 
and foremost, it would not be correct to argue that the 
department or the region is not concerned about the number of 
endocrinologists in the province. The region and the province 
are very much concerned about the shortage that exists here and 
we will do whatever it takes to ensure that the number increases 
and that the people who require the care are served by 
practising endocrinologists with offices in Saskatchewan. 
 
The circumstances in Regina appear to be relatively stable. 
We’d like to bring some stability to the Saskatoon region as 
well. As I think the region described it in the newspaper 
yesterday or today, the specialty was hit by the perfect storm, 
where you have retirements, maternity leaves, and personal 
decisions made to leave the province happening all at the same 
time. This is an unusual circumstance. The region is taking all 
the necessary steps to provide a response to Saskatchewan 
residents in the meantime and are actively recruiting to fill 
those positions. 
 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

Secondly, I think it’s very important for those who are watching 
again to understand that endocrinologists are just one part of the 
diabetes plan in the province of Saskatchewan. We certainly 
have taken the issue of diabetes very seriously and have 
launched a number of initiatives over the years. And as I said, 
endocrinology is simply one part of diabetes attention, which 
includes programs related to prevention, care, and of course 
treatment. 
 
If the member will allow, I’d simply like to put on the record 
some of the things that we are doing with regards to 
Saskatchewan’s provincial diabetes plan, because I think it’s a 
very important part of what we are doing. 
 
[19:30] 
 
The plan consists of four key areas of focus and activity: 
prevention of course, providing optimum care for diabetes, 
education, and surveillance. Under prevention, the population 
health promotion strategy report, Healthier Places to Live, 
Work, and Play, aims to decrease the risk of developing many 
chronic conditions like diabetes by addressing the root causes of 
these, and again, through four issues: active communities, 
accessible, nutritious foods, prevention of substance abuse, and 
mental well-being. 
 
We are also targeting prevention at the regional level. Primary 
health care and diabetes team members are working 
collaboratively to identify individuals who are at the highest 
risk of developing diabetes, encouraging lifestyle changes for 
healthier eating, and increased physical activity to prevent or 
delay the onset of type 2 diabetes. 
 
Secondly, when we’re talking about optimum care and 
treatment for the prevention of diabetes complications, we’re 
looking at enhanced screening and appropriate intervention. 
Primary health care teams and diabetes teams are taking a 
proactive approach to the prevention and management of 
diabetes by screening individuals earlier, providing 
self-management education, and monitoring disease progression 
to prevent or delay the onset of complications. At-risk 
individuals are referred to the most appropriate care provider 
for intervention. 
 
There’s also self-management support programs. The Saskatoon 
Health Region, for example, will coordinate the delivery of the 
Stanford self-management model, living a healthy life with a 
chronic condition, in each regional health authority over the 
next three years. This program is designed to teach individuals 
with a chronic disease the skills necessary to manage their 
condition on a day-to-day basis. 
 
When we talk about drugs and supplies, in July 2003 coverage 
of the drug plan was expanded to include diabetic supplies — 
needles, syringes, lancets, swabs — with coverage of these 
supplies subject to the usual drug plan patient copayments. 
Previously only children less than 18 years of age under family 
health benefits and supplementary health beneficiaries received 
coverage for diabetic supplies. So in answer to the member’s 
question, the test strips he’s talking about, they are covered 
subject to the usual deductibles that all drugs under the 
prescription drug plan — the same rules apply. 
 

Certain newer drugs for treatment of diabetes have been 
recommended for coverage under the exception drug status 
program according to specific medical criteria. New therapies 
are added based on the advice of the Canadian expert drug 
advisory committee under the national common drug review 
process. 
 
In 2005, the drug plan spent almost $13 million on diabetic 
supplies, blood glucose testing strips, insulin, and oral 
medications, representing 52 per cent of the total cost of these 
products. In 2005, there were 42,756 families who received at 
least one insulin oral hypoglycemic or test agent through the 
Saskatchewan drug plan. 
 
I might also add some comments about renal care. Dialysis 
centres in Regina and Saskatoon service about 80 per cent of 
hemodialysis patients. Satellite operations have been 
established in Prince Albert, Lloydminster, Yorkton, Swift 
Current, North Battleford, and Tisdale, and work is under way 
to expand hemodialysis services to Estevan. 
 
As of March 31 of this year, there were 978 patients attending 
chronic renal insufficiency clinics operating in Saskatoon and 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Regions, 651 patients on dialysis, 
and 392 patients living with a kidney transplant. 
 
Education for health providers is also a part of the program to 
ensure that front line care providers who interact with persons 
with diabetes are knowledgeable about prevention and care. 
 
The following provincial education initiatives have been 
developed or are under development. Two diabetes programs 
offered by SIAST’s [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology] distance delivery program to meet educational 
needs of a wide range of front line care providers. Risk 
identification of the foot in diabetes presentation and training 
materials for the ongoing delivery of workshops in health 
regions. The diabetic foot program, clinical practice guidelines 
for the screening and management of complications associated 
with the diabetic foot. Insulin adjustment learning module to 
support the educational needs for the adjustment of insulin 
through transfer of medical functions by a nurse for a person 
with diabetes on behalf of their family physician. And risk 
factor and complication assessment which is under development 
to train care providers on how to screen and undertake a 
comprehensive risk assessment for diabetes and other 
preventable chronic conditions. 
 
And lastly, surveillance — the fourth part, surveillance. 
Through the national diabetes surveillance system, a 
mechanism is in place to profile the prevalence of diabetes. The 
population health branch has developed a Saskatchewan 
diabetes profile which describes diabetes trends in the province 
and in regional health authorities over a five-year period. This 
profile is currently being updated and is used to provide a 
mechanism to use data to support program planning and track 
progress in reducing the incidence of diabetes over the long 
term. 
 
So I hope the member opposite and members of the public 
watching or reading will recognize that diabetes care, treatment, 
prevention, and surveillance is a priority of Saskatchewan 
Health. We are addressing the issue through a considerable 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

number of programs and well we certainly have made it a 
priority. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Minister, could 
you tell me the status of services provided in the Biggar 
Hospital to the people of Biggar and district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Perhaps I need to ask the member to be a 
little more specific in the question. For all intents and purposes 
I am not aware of any dramatic changes that are affecting or 
will affect the delivery of service at the Biggar Hospital. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, what I am 
getting at is I’ve been told that the ultrasound service has been 
withdrawn from the Biggar Hospital and patients now have to 
go to either Rosetown or Saskatoon to receive that service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, thanks the member opposite for 
the question and the additional information. It’s been helpful to 
help to look at this very specific issue. 
 
The services providing ultrasound in Biggar as well as in the 
communities of Unity, Kindersley, and Rosetown, the services 
are provided by Associated Radiologists from Saskatoon. ARS 
[Associated Radiologists of Saskatoon] as they’re known — 
Associated Radiologists; they’re out of Saskatoon — provide a 
referral service. They come out to various facilities to provide 
that service when there are physician referrals for that. 
 
Associated Radiologists recently advised us that in an effort to 
limit their travel, they are reducing ultrasound tech services. 
Currently they are providing these services, as I indicated, to 
Unity, Biggar, Kindersley, and Rosetown. They have indicated 
that effective May 1, which is a day just past, technical services 
will no longer be available in Unity, Biggar, and Kindersley. 
However, services in Rosetown will be increased from one day 
every two weeks to one day per week with two technicians. 
 
The region is currently analyzing ultrasound services to 
determine how the reduction will impact on service delivery. 
The region has attempted to secure ultrasound tech services 
from other regions to come into these locations but so far have 
been unsuccessful in doing so. The health region is continuing 
to look for ways to provide alternative services. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Madam Chair. This 
company, it’s a privately owned company that’s providing these 
services to these various communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The service is provided by a group of 
radiologists who are practising together. It would be a private 
service contracted by the health region. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Are there any other services that 
are in a similar situation that may be cut back in these 
communities because of lack of technicians or other concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Nothing that we are aware of. I wouldn’t 
think there are too many other services like this that are 
provided. X-ray and ultrasound services are certainly one of the 
few areas in which the private sector is involved in contracting 

of services to our regions. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The concern to the 
people in Biggar and the other communities you had mentioned, 
that it’s really a self-fulfilling prophecy as to the closure of a 
hospital. As services are withdrawn for whatever reason, 
eventually the people in that community will continue to go to 
other communities for their health care services and eventually 
the hospital will close. And that is a real serious concern, I 
know, to the people in Biggar when they’ve heard about this 
cutback. And I certainly . . . We have three doctors now in 
Biggar again and certainly the people of Biggar would 
appreciate keeping those doctors and the hospital in the same 
status that it has been in recent years. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let me just say first of all that Heartland 
Health Region is very committed to providing services in 
Biggar and at the other hospitals throughout the region. There’s 
no direct desire to see any lack of, or any less attention provided 
to services like this. And I think it would be fair to say that 
Heartland which is responsible for the day-to-day operations 
and management of the regions at the health region, is 
continuing to look at ways of providing this particular service in 
Biggar and the other communities that I indicated. 
 
At the same time I think that it’s fair to describe the radiology 
sector as another one where technologists . . . there’s a shortage 
of technologists in the province. The private sector has the same 
challenges that the public sector does in finding the technicians 
necessary to fulfill all of the needs of the regions across the 
province. And as a result, they’re taking steps that the private 
sector is often called upon to do. If they have a shortage of 
people, they withdraw their services in order to ensure they can 
continue to provide the services from their core area. 
 
That having been said, the province continues to try to address 
the technology issues whether it be the radiologists or others. 
The province continues to address this issue through its 
workforce action plan. We’ve recently met with radiologists 
and sonographers association, and we’re trying to find ways to 
ensure that the services that are needed in this province are able 
to be supported by the human resources necessary to provide 
the services. 
 
So I simply want the member to know that the health region is 
committed to providing these services, and if there’s an 
alternative, they will work hard at contracting to ensure that 
that’s available. And the department will continue to work on 
the technology side of this to ensure that the human resources 
ultimately are available to provide the needs. 
 
The Chair: — The member from Elrose-Rosetown. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Chair, and good 
evening to the minister and your officials. I have a few 
questions that again would relate to the Heartland Regional 
Health Authority which is the health authority that serves the 
Rosetown-Elrose constituency. 
 
Just first of all, two or three questions regarding spending in the 
authority. I notice from the latest budget document that the 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

estimates for 2005-2006 were $55.785 million and the estimate 
for the current year was $61.116 million. Can the minister tell 
me whether or not the actual expenditures for the authority was 
$55.785 million for the past fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again to answer the member’s question 
— and thank you very much — he is absolutely correct. The 
dollar value this year is 61.1. It’s an increase of about 9.6 per 
cent over last year’s budgeted value. 
 
He is also correct that the actual expenditure in the health 
region would be for the year above the figure quoted in the 
budget. That would take into account additional salaries that 
were paid as a result of mid-year adjustments. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I’m just 
wondering then, do you have the total numbers for the 
2005-2006 fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Actually, I meant to say this in my 
answer. We’re actually just in the process of compiling those 
figures for the annual reporting. They aren’t available to us here 
tonight. Take a little bit of work to pull those actuals together, 
but they will eventually be available to us. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Minister. Can you tell me 
what the increase between what was spent in the last fiscal year 
and what is budgeted for the current fiscal year goes toward? 
How much of that is for additional salaries? How much of it 
goes to capital costs within . . . or are there any capital costs 
included in that number? How much of that increase would go 
to the costs of, you know, inflationary costs of keeping the 
facilities and the supplies in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the best way to answer that 
question would be with percentages because that’s the way I 
have the information in front of me. Based on the question that 
was being asked about RHA [regional health authority] 
expenditures and the increase, 80 per cent of base operating 
funding goes to pay salaries and benefits. Eight per cent is 
allocated for drugs, medical and surgical supplies, and 12 per 
cent for all other operating costs including non-medical supplies 
and accommodation charges. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, 
Mr. Minister. Now is that just a global number for all RHAs or 
is that specific to Heartland Regional Health Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The regional health authorities currently 
are in the process of developing their current year budgets. That 
process is not yet complete within all of the health regions. 
However based on past experience, the percentages that I’ve 
outlined is indeed a global application based on past history and 
experience and our expectations for looking ahead. The global 
distribution likely is a pretty close guesstimate of what the 
regional health authorities’ budgets will look like once they’re 
completed. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank the 
minister for that. It doesn’t quite answer all of my questions in 
that regard. I would assume that once the books are closed for 
the final fiscal year that each health authority would know those 
specific numbers. And I would assume then that those numbers 

would become available to the public. If I am wrong in that 
assumption, perhaps the minister could tell me why. Does the 
minister have enough information from the last fiscal year to 
tell me whether he knows which health authorities are in a 
surplus or in a deficit position? And if so, can he tell me 
whether the Heartland Health Authority is in a surplus or a 
deficit position and if so, how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member talked initially about 
reporting the numbers. Indeed the health authorities are required 
to file their annual reports within 90 days after their fiscal year. 
So we would anticipate the submitting of the reports within the 
next month or so. 
 
This is a requirement for all of the health regions. Indeed the 
accounting and the accountability of the health regions is very 
strong. The member opposite is part of Public Accounts, is 
Chair of Public Accounts. Sask Health over the years has, with 
the health regions, developed an accountability process that’s 
very public, very public in its reporting. 
 
Secondly, the member’s question specifically to Heartland and 
specific to a surplus or deficit, preliminary information — and I 
would stress that this is very preliminary at this point — but 
preliminary information would indicate that Heartland would 
show a small surplus this past year. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Chair. When health 
authorities do show a surplus, are they encouraged to put those 
monies into reserves and are they allowed to let those reserves 
grow? Or are they discouraged from putting monies into 
reserve? And are they encouraged to try to come as close to the 
actual number allocated in the budget as they possibly can? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think the member opposite would know 
that managing a health region is a challenging job. The ability 
of regions to meet all of the pressures — whether they be 
human resources, drugs, technologies, or capital — pose a 
significant challenge to CEOs [chief executive officer], 
financial officers, and board members. At the end of the day of 
course we recognize that it’s the health boards that set and 
ultimately approve the budgets. And Sask Health would 
certainly encourage those boards to, through the course of the 
year, manage their accounts so that they come very close to the 
budget that they’ve set for themselves. In other words, we 
would encourage them to finish the year in a slight surplus 
position. 
 
That having been said, when they do finish in a surplus 
position, the board again is given responsibility for determining 
what happens with that surplus. They could use it in any 
number of ways, but again the decision is very local to the 
board. They could put those surplus dollars into a capital 
reserve, into an equipment reserve. They could use it to pay 
down debt. Heartland is probably not in that situation. But they 
could also use it for — well with small surpluses — any 
number of things. Most would probably use it for capital or 
technology reserves. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank the 
minister for those answers. And certainly I understand from his 
answer that he believes the boards are very prudent and cautious 
with the funds that are allocated to them by the department. 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

In light of that I want to move on to a letter written to the 
minister from the Rosetown and District Health Centre, the 
foundation. It is dated March 8, and this letter is one of a string 
of letters that have been going to health ministers in the 
Government of Saskatchewan for a number of years. I believe 
this will be the first letter that the current minister has received. 
But as I’m sure he is aware, the community of Rosetown has for 
quite some time been pressing the provincial government for 
the go-ahead to build a long-term care facility in the 
community. 
 
I have gone over this matter with previous ministers of Health 
in my tenure here in the Legislative Assembly. I don’t think 
there is any debate over the need. I have talked with the deputy 
ministers. I have spoken, as I said, with other ministers. 
Currently citizens in long-term care are in a basement wing of 
the existing hospital. There are certainly concerns about the 
safety of these people in that facility. There is certainly a 
question about quality of life in that kind of a facility. 
 
In light of the latest letter that the minister has received, can he 
tell me what progress is being made as to giving the go-ahead to 
the Heartland Health Authority and in particular the Rosetown 
district health foundation to proceed with a new project that 
they have been working on for quite some time: to build a new 
long-term care facility in the community. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again I thank the member for his 
question and appreciate the opportunity to talk a little bit about 
Heartland, but also the province’s health care capital needs. 
 
Indeed the member is correct. As Minister of Health I haven’t 
been on the receiving end of many of the community letters in 
this regard, but I am aware very much of the history of the 
project and of the member’s support for that project. 
 
I think I should also remind those who are watching and reading 
this debate tonight that Heartland’s capital priority this year is 
included in this budget. That is the new facility in Outlook. The 
facility in Outlook has been brought forward by the region, is 
being funded this year, and is proceeding. 
 
The capital pool available for facilities in the province has 
increased this year by 20 per cent. We are now at $44 million of 
new capital in this budget. In that $44 million, the projects 
funded are almost all previously announced projects in different 
stages of dollars being available to it. So despite the fact that we 
have increased the capital budget with increased costs as well as 
the flow through of projects that have begun and now have to 
be funded on a annual basis over two, three, four years . . . there 
hasn’t been much room for new projects this year. 
 
The Heartland Region has indicated that Rosetown facility is 
certainly a priority within the region. It has been communicated 
to the province in that fashion. And now as the province 
reviews the capital requirements of all twelve regions and 
preparing for the budget allocations next year, we of course put 
Rosetown into the mix with the other priorities, 
dollars-available basis with the priorities identified. 
 
I can indicate that the capital needs of the province for health 

care facilities are quite significant. As we survey all of the 
regions to take a look at what their one, two, three priorities are 
across the province, we find that there are in the hundreds of 
millions of dollars identified projects that need to be funded in 
the very near future. So I see our capital budget requirements 
continuing to increase over the next few years if resources are 
available to us to ensure that we have the ability to meet the 
capital needs across the province. 
 
So the good news is Outlook is being . . . funding has been put 
in place for this year, and Rosetown is now in the queue in a 
significantly . . . is significantly well placed in the queue for 
future capital expenditures. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, 
minister for that update. I would just remind the minister that 
this project in fact wasn’t even in the queue. Sixteen years ago 
it was approved. In 1990 the project was approved as a needed 
project. In 1992 there was a so-called temporary deferral. In 
other words it wasn’t cancelled, but it was temporarily deferred. 
I think that was in a time of fiscal duress in the province, and I 
don’t know what all the reasons were. 
 
But the community of Rosetown has been, I think, too patient in 
waiting for this project to be given the green light. It’s not like 
this has just come into the mix in the last three or four or five 
years. This was a project that was approved. Community 
thought it was going ahead 16 years ago. You can imagine, if it 
was needed 16 years ago, how badly it’s needed in 2006. 
 
So I’m just wondering if you could tell me what I can tell my 
constituents in Rosetown area who have been very reasonable 
and have been talking to me about this for a long time. And as 
you know, Minister, I have been speaking to you and your 
predecessors about it for a long time. 
 
What can they do to get this thing nailed down? Sixteen years is 
a long time. A lot of people have spent a lot of time, you know, 
with already experiencing challenges in life just by nature of the 
fact that they need long-term care and then secondly of course 
to be in a substandard facility with in fact some danger 
associated with it, let alone the substandard quality of facility. 
 
These people are not unreasonable. They have been terribly, 
terribly patient, and they just want to get this thing nailed down. 
They have co-operated. They have gotten the approval and 
support of their own local health authority. The health authority 
has written a letter of support for the project. 
 
I know Outlook is currently undergoing a project, as the 
minister mentioned, but I don’t think there is any rule that says 
that, you know, you have to wait 10 years between project 
approval. You know, we’re hoping to see a health science 
centre go forward that’s going to cost, you know, 100 or $200 
million. 
 
Obviously there’s got to be a way that you can nail with these 
people in Rosetown and say, it’s going to be in next year’s 
budget or it’s going to be in the budget after that or maybe you 
can even do something sooner and say we’re going to make . . . 
Oil and gas royalties and revenues are, you know, higher than 
expected. We’re going to put an extra $100 million into health 
care from those additional revenues. 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

I’m just asking the minister: how can we nail this down? How 
can we nail this down so that these very wonderful people, 
patient people, community leaders, the health foundation, the 
board members of the health authority, can have some 
assurance that there is a timetable in place? And they’re not just 
somewhere in the queue waiting for the gate to open, but they 
actually know when the project is going to proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again I thank the member for his 
question and his direction. I think the people of Rosetown 
should know that the government recognizes this as a very 
legitimate project. It is a project that the government is aware 
has received high recommendations from not just the 
community but the region itself. 
 
As I indicated earlier, the province is continuing to put 
additional dollars into health capital. And one can only assume 
that with additional resources available to us, that there will be 
additional dollars available for health capital in the future. It is a 
challenge to presuppose or predetermine what position we will 
be in when we consider next year’s budget allocation. 
 
That having been said, I had mentioned earlier that the 
Rosetown project could be in a position for consideration in 
next year’s budget deliberations. There are competing priorities 
across the province. And so we will have to take all of that into 
account as we balance out the distribution of capital dollars. I 
think every one of your colleagues could probably rise today 
along with you and cite a project in their constituency that 
requires some capital dollar, whether it’s a replacement or 
rejuvenation or new facility. And we are very much aware of 
that. 
 
We do want to fund the health sciences facility because it’s a 
part of the recruitment and retention strategy for the province as 
well as the development of better care strategies for the people 
of Saskatchewan. But that having been said, we’re also aware 
of the needs from many of the communities across the province. 
 
I think I have to say while I’m on my feet that there have been a 
number of changes in the dollars that the province has had 
available to it for capital over the years. I think we are all aware 
that Saskatchewan Health and Saskatchewan Education and 
other departments took a considerable hit in 1991 when we had 
to finance a per capita debt in this province higher than any 
other province in Canada at that time. All of our budgets took a 
significant hit as we all contributed to help pay down a very 
significant debt. 
 
Secondly, in ’95-96, the federal government changed the way in 
which they provided health and education transfers to the 
provinces. Again in that particular year, the Department of 
Health saw a significant reduction in dollars available to it. We 
are slowly moving back to where we were in the late 1980s in 
our capital program through diligent determination, 
perseverance of putting additional dollars each year into capital. 
 
We have approved the number of projects that are currently in 
the works this year previously that are in the stage where a lot 
of money has to be spent or provided, whether it’s Maidstone, 
Preeceville, or Humboldt. These projects are all previously 
announced, are now coming to the point where significant 
dollars are required to be paid out. They’re added into the $44 

million that is being spent this year on capital. As these projects 
work out and as additional dollars are moved in, there’s a 
greater opportunity for newer projects to be approved and 
funded more quickly than they have in the past. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My colleague from 
Indian Head-Milestone tells me that I’ve used up most of my 
time, but I have another question left. 
 
Just responding to the minister. Obviously we know that there’s 
a huge demand on the provincial treasury. But I would also 
remind the minister that there’s a great deal of revenue comes to 
the treasury from the Rosetown-Elrose constituency, a rich 
agriculture area that also has an oil and gas supply that has 
benefited the province. And in fairness, it’s not a one-way 
street. This part of Saskatchewan has contributed mightily to 
the well-being of the province, and I hope the minister would 
take that into consideration. 
 
Just a final question. I have a memo here that says . . . And this 
is regarding the project in Outlook. I have a memo here that 
says that Saskatchewan Health is committed to supporting 
building space and capital equipment in new projects for 
personal laundry facilities only. 

 
There’s a bit of an uproar in Outlook because the laundry 
services are going to be limited only to personal laundry. And a 
lot of the services that were provided locally are no longer 
going to be provided in the community of Outlook. They’ll be 
sent away I believe to Saskatoon. This new policy will of 
course mean people are laid off, lose their jobs in the local 
community. I’m just wondering what the rationale, what the 
thinking is behind this move. I’m doubting that, with the 
transportation costs involved, it’s going to be cost-efficient. 
Why would the Department of Health make it a policy that only 
personal laundry facilities would be included in the new 
facility? 
 
[20:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — A couple of things in answer to the 
member’s question and response to comments. I think the 
province is aware of how resource revenues are gathered 
throughout the province. Saskatchewan has over the years 
recognized that the resource revenues — whether it’s from 
forestry and uranium, oil and gas, or diamonds — are revenues 
to the benefit of all Saskatchewan residents, and does not have a 
specific policy that dollars earned from the ground in one place 
will be spent on the ground in that area. If that were the case for 
example, the multi-millions of dollars earned from uranium 
mining for example would never be used to the benefit of 
people who live in Rosetown or Saskatoon, etc. 
 
We’ve utilized the benefit of our resources for the benefit of all 
of our citizens, and as a result of that we try to ensure that the 
dollars raised from resource revenues are relatively equally 
divided amongst the citizens through the province. In this 
particular year we are seeing resource revenues contributing to 
about a $1 billion increase in our overall provincial budget. 
Fully one-third of those resources have been applied to 
Saskatchewan Health — the health component. 
 
We believe that the health care which includes not only delivery 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

of treatment and hospital services, but is part of the capital pool 
and other things. So the benefits of uranium, the benefits of 
diamond mining are being used to the benefit of the people in 
Rosetown just as the oil and gas revenues from the west side of 
the province are being used to assist construction and delivery 
of services in other parts of the province. 
 
That having been said, coming back to the question of the 
member with regards to Outlook and laundry, I’ve been 
associated with the member opposite for quite a number of 
years and I’ve heard the member — whether he was in Ottawa 
or in Rosetown or here in Regina — talk an awful lot about the 
need for governments to match expenditures and revenues, be 
fiscally prudent in the way in which services are being 
provided. 
 
As far as laundry is concerned, we have a surplus capacity 
within the system and we have the need to ensure that 
taxpayers’ dollars are being used prudently. In the construction 
of new facilities — recognizing we’ve got excess capacity in 
laundry, particularly in, we’ll say, Regina and Prince Albert not 
so much in Saskatoon but there is some capacity there — we 
are developing a laundry service that, in working with the 
health regions, will ensure that the dollars that are used for that 
expenditure meet up with the facilities that we have available. 
Prudent fiscal management, we believe in the delivery of these 
services. 
 
That having been said, we are also New Democrats who care an 
awful lot about Saskatchewan people and people who work for 
the system. It is our plan to work with the health regions with a 
goal of no job loss in this transfer of responsibility for laundry 
within the regions. We will work very closely with the health 
regions on that policy so that those who are currently involved 
in laundry can reasonably expect their health region and their 
employer to work with them to ensure that they aren’t losing a 
job as a result of this change in delivery. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome to you, Mr. Minister, and to your officials. A few 
areas that I want to explore with you this evening, Mr. Minister, 
are in the constituency of Canora-Pelly and a little bit broader 
than that, of course, is the Sunrise Health Authority which 
makes up a larger area. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the communities of Canora and Kamsack and 
Preeceville, those are the three communities in my constituency 
that still provide acute care services and I’m wondering if the 
Department of Health has a specific policy that it follows in 
recommending to the regional health authority, in this case to 
Sunrise, whether they would be recommending to Sunrise as to 
the number of physicians that should be maintained in each of 
those communities to provide the proper acute care services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I welcome the member to the estimates in 
asking his questions with regards to the region. First and 
foremost, I think the member is aware Sunrise will receive from 
this budget $127.1 million. This is an $11.3 million increase or 
9.7 per cent above last year’s budgeted numbers — pretty much 
on average with regards to the other health regions in the 

province who are in that 9, 10 per cent increase. 
 
The Saskatchewan Health continues to respect the work that is 
being done by the regions, recognizes the autonomy of the 
regions in providing the day-to-day operational authority, and 
therefore we aren’t directly providing them with decisions that 
have to be made. 
 
That having been said, we do provide advice from time to time. 
And in terms of acute care delivery, the advice that we would 
provide is that in an acute care circumstance the minimum 
number of physicians should be three. It is recognized that 
when there are disruptions in service it’s usually a result of 
there being fewer than three physicians available in a acute care 
facility. 
 
So aside from that, the management of the delivery of care is 
the responsibility of the individual region. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Chair, to 
the minister, I’m going to be more specific now. While I’ve 
indicated that both Preeceville and Canora as well as Kamsack 
are very concerned about ensuring that they have the doctors, 
and they’ve been struggling with that for a number of years. As 
doctors come and go to other communities and look for greater 
opportunities, smaller communities are left trying to recruit 
doctors. 
 
But more specifically for the community of Kamsack, it is my 
understanding that over the last year there have been situations 
in Kamsack where the emergency services had to be 
temporarily closed and diverted to other communities. 
 
Can the minister confirm . . . And I’ll pose a number of 
questions so that the minister can answer them all in the same 
time since I know we have a limited amount of time. When a 
community like Kamsack tells the public that the services are 
now being diverted, can the minister indicate in the last fiscal 
year or the last calendar year how many times this has occurred 
in the community of Kamsack? 
 
Secondly, is there an additional cost that the Sunrise Health 
Authority will pick up as a result of emergency services no 
longer being provided in the community of Kamsack? And then 
thirdly, what circumstances come into play when in fact the 
emergency services are no longer being provided? I know you 
indicated that there should be a minimum of three. Is it a 
situation that occurs each and every time that that falls below 
three, or are there other concerns that the community should be 
addressing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’d be happy to provide the member 
opposite with a description of what happens when service is 
disrupted for any reason. In prefacing that comment however, I 
do want to recognize that the regions or the hospitals when they 
experience these circumstances must notify Saskatchewan 
Health of any changes in operations. And there is a very 
specific process that then falls forward to ensure that the public 
is familiar with the circumstances and what they should be 
doing. 
 
These disruptions have occurred in smaller acute care facilities 
for years. There’s lots of things that happen that are beyond our 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

control. For example the most recent case at the Kamsack 
Hospital which was the end of April, beginning of May, that 
just occurred. The Sunrise Regional Health Authority advised 
us that there would be no outpatient physician or emergency 
services for one week between April 28 and May 5. 
 
Although the hospital has a full component of three doctors, one 
was on vacation when another one was involved in a motor 
vehicle accident and was unable to come in. As a result — you 
know you can’t predict some of these things — as a result the 
region had to take steps to ensure that public delivery of 
services or public safety was not jeopardized as a result of the 
reduction in number of physicians available. 
 
In this case as it would be in most cases, the region issued a 
public service announcement with the following information: 
lab and X-ray, physiotherapy continue to function under normal 
operating hours. In-patient services and clinical dressing 
changes would continue to be offered. The transfer of stable 
patients, stable in-patient clients to the Kamsack Hospital would 
continue as usual. Clients requiring emergency services were 
advised to call 911 or access emergency services either in 
Canora or Yorkton or even in Preeceville. 
 
Clients requiring routine physician services were advised to 
access medical clinics. The Kamsack Medical Clinic and the 
Kamsack Mall Clinic remained open to the public and were 
aware of the circumstances at the hospital. And of course the 
HealthLine number was made available to all local residents to 
ensure that they had access to health advice from registered 
nurses on the HealthLine. 
 
So as circumstances occur, the regions who are responsible for 
the day-to-day operation of the facilities put contingency plans 
in place and try to ensure that physician care is replaced as 
quickly as possible. I think in mentioning this, the Sunrise 
Health Region is very much aware that these circumstances can 
occur from time to time and is well prepared to deal with these 
circumstances as they arise. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. An additional 
follow-up to that, and I know you indicated that Saskatchewan 
Health is informed each and every time that something like that 
happens. And I was wondering if you could have your officials 
prepare some information that would indicate the three facilities 
that I have just mentioned to you — Canora, Kamsack, and 
Preeceville — if you could, if your officials could indicate the 
number of times over the last year or 12 months or whatever is 
. . . what is tracked, if it’s a calendar year or a fiscal year, as to 
the number of times that emergency services were removed 
from the community, for whether it be one day or a week. If 
you would agree to have your officials provide that information 
to me at a later date, I can move on to a next series of questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’ll make a commitment to provide the 
member whatever information we can pull together. The 
regions or the facilities are required, as I indicated, to inform 
Sask Health. The purpose of that is to ensure that information 
flows and that policy is followed. 
 
We certainly don’t have any of that information available here. 

And do we maintain an aggregate collection of this? In other 
words, do we track this from year to year by maintaining that 
sort of number of times or dates? The reason they’re required to 
report is to ensure we follow through on ensuring that patient 
safety is not jeopardized and we’re all sort of in the same boat. 
Whether or not we actually have that data collected and 
available to us for years past or even . . . I don’t know that. But 
whatever we have available, we will gather and provide it to the 
member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, all 
I’m looking for is the past year or whether it be a calendar year 
or the fiscal year. Whatever data you have, I’m sure . . . The 
reason I mention that is because you said that Saskatchewan 
Health is informed. So for the past year, you probably have that 
data on each of the three facilities, and that’s what I’m looking 
for. And I acknowledge your agreeing with that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to move on to very specifically the 
Preeceville Hospital. And I know my colleague in his questions 
to you of projects in Outlook, you mentioned Preeceville as 
well. Mr. Minister, on August 16, 1999, just to give you a bit of 
background information, I want to quote from a government 
news release from Executive Council that said this: 
 

Health Minister Pat Atkinson gave the district approval to 
plan the project in the 1999-2000 fiscal year and advised 
district representatives to work with Saskatchewan Health 
officials to define the project’s final scope and cost. 

 
The reason I read that to you is that’s 1999. And at that time, 
when this project was approved for the community of 
Preeceville, the estimated cost of that addition . . . And that 
addition is a renovation at the current hospital, enlarging it to 
ensure that it has a long-term care facility there in that one 
facility and the closure of another one. The estimated cost at 
that time was about $4.5 million. 
 
Based on the 65/35 per cent split of the costs that would be 
involved, the community of Preeceville and area was required 
to put up about 1.6 million. And they did that. They did a large 
number of fundraisers. And I know you have heard me ask the 
former minister of Health a number of questions regarding that 
project. 
 
What has happened, Mr. Minister . . . And I asked a question 
last year of the former minister of Health about where the 
project was as far as its approval. And the minister at that time 
responded to me by telling me that the 18-step capital process 
that is in place, that the Preeceville Hospital was on step 
number eight. And that it was moving forward. 
 
And in fact the suggestion by the former minister was that the 
project would — through its concept planning, design 
development, and schematic design — would actually occur 
within the fiscal year that was, you know, that it was part of, 
which was ’05-06. Well we’re through that, and I’m wondering 
if your officials could inform me today whether the steps 9, 10, 
and 11 which involve the Sunrise Health Authority, more so 
with the Department of Health, whether or not those three steps 
have been completed, and if not, what step is the current 
situation of the Preeceville project? 
 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I thank the member for his question and 
of course his interest in the Preeceville project. I think the 
member should know, and certainly the public I’d like to know, 
that the current budget has assigned from the province $4.1 
million to be expended this year on that project. And we’ve 
tentatively set aside almost $3 million next year in the 
continuing funding of this particular project. So the 
commitment from the province is certainly there to move as 
quickly as we possibly can now through to the completion of 
this important project. 
 
In the short period of time that I’ve been the minister, I’ve been 
fortunate enough to now have met with a number of the 
municipal governments in the Preeceville area, rural 
municipality and town. And in each case, the municipal 
representatives have raised concern over 65/35 spending. And 
in fact the community has said to the province, we’d like to 
have a cap on this spending. We’ve raised as much money as 
we possibly can, and we’d like to put a cap on this spending — 
$10 million total expenditure. 
 
So the department has gone back to the planning table with the 
local communities, the architect, etc., to be able to ensure that 
we can produce a $10 million facility that meets the needs of 
the community, that also contains the ability to expand the 
project should the need exist into the future. 
 
The question that the member asks is, are we in stages 9, 10, 
11? And the answer to the question is we would have been had 
we not had to back up a little bit. We’ve backed up a little bit in 
order to meet the community’s desire to cap the project at $10 
million. That having been said, we are working with them, the 
architect to ensure that we can move this project through as 
quickly as possible. And I’ve identified there are dollars in this 
particular budget to ensure that that can happen. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The original 1.6 
million that was going to be the share for the local community, 
as I indicated to you, was met. And now of course that the 
project is getting closer to $10 million or is being capped at $10 
million, 35 per cent share of that moves that substantially 
higher. And in fact I was in contact with the officials of the 
town of Preeceville today and they’ve indicated to me that they 
already have $2.2 million ready to go, but they’re still going to 
be short, as much as another 1.9 million. 
 
And the concern of course, as you’ve indicated, is that the 
government has allocated resources over a period of two years. 
What difficulty is occurring for, more specifically the town and 
the RM [rural municipality] of Preeceville, because they’re the 
closest municipalities to where this project is occurring . . . 
Other municipalities who were on board for the first splitting of 
the cost of the 4.5 million are not on board for the splitting of 
the cost of 10 million. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m being asked and I want to ask you, what 
are the options that the lead in this case, which is the town of 
Preeceville, what options does that municipality have to ensure 
that they are able to have their share of the $10 million ready to 
go? They are worried about debentures. I understand that 
they’ve even made an application to the municipal board to be 
able to spread that cost out through debentures. And I’ve asked 
you before whether or not there was any possibility that the 

government was going to reconsider a 65/35 formula and 
change that. And if that’s not on, I’m hoping that you can 
understand that a community was told to get ready for a $4.5 
million project and now are being told due to inflation and due 
to seven years going by we now have a $10 million project. 
 
This is a key project for Preeceville, and I want to reinforce that 
for you, Mr. Minister, is that they know. People in the 
Preeceville and area know that this is a big project, and it’s 
probably their only chance at a project, and they don’t want to 
see it dropped by the wayside because there’s $1 million that is 
not there currently or whether or not that can be financed. So 
they’re looking at all their options, and I understand that there’s 
a meeting planned with you as minister for sometime next 
week. And I think they’re going to be exploring all kinds of 
options. 
 
So I’m wondering if you could inform us today as to what 
options does that whole area have to be able to raise their 35 per 
cent share that they require? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again thank you very much for the 
question. The member is right that I have a meeting next week 
with municipal leaders. I have met with others both in the area 
when I toured through there a while ago and at the SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] or SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 
. . . SARM convention I think it was I met with the rural 
municipalities. 
 
That having been said, they’ve made their point very clear. 
They value this project greatly, and they want to see this project 
concluded. I have indicated that that is the province’s desire as 
well. We have committed to the project. The member has 
already indicated how long ago we’ve committed to the project, 
and we want to see this proceed as quickly as possible. 
 
Before specifically discussing the member’s very specific 
questions about options, let me indicate to him that, as he’s 
already aware from questions that were asked tonight and at 
other times during question period, other members opposite and 
even members on this side of the Chamber have asked 
questions publicly and privately with regards to the funding of 
projects, whether it be municipal projects like rinks and 
recreational facilities and cultural facilities, or health or 
education facilities. Construction costs have increased. There 
are increased pressures on communities as well as on provincial 
government for funding these projects, and indeed 
Saskatchewan’s share, 65 per cent share of increasing costs, 
means there are increasing costs on the province as well. We 
will meet those costs; we will meet our share of those 
increasing costs. We’re committed to the projects and those 
dollar values are there to the conclusion of the project. 
 
[20:45] 
 
So more specifically — and I don’t want to split hairs, but I 
have to outline the policy — the requirement of 65/35 is 
between the province and the region. The 35 per cent is the 
region’s component. Region can assign that component to 
foundations, municipalities, other kind of fundraising. The 
region must make a commitment for 35 per cent. 
 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2006 

That having been said, the majority of regions are looking at 
municipalities to assist in that funding because of the ability of 
municipalities to contribute, raise money, work with 
communities, and more importantly to provide input into the 
development of that project. The commitment that’s required is 
not money in the bank. It’s a commitment to fund the project 
around the time of its completion. So if the region has the 
commitment of the municipalities, if that’s what they’ve 
required, simply the commitment to fund the project, to meet 
their commitments, then the project can proceed immediately. 
 
What I will be talking with, if we are talking options with the 
municipalities, indeed there are numbers of ways in which they 
can try to meet their commitments. And it includes utilizing or 
setting aside some of the funding that the government provided 
this year in unconditional capital grants in this budget — $52 
million of unconditional capital grants provided to 
municipalities for exactly this type of thing to meet some of 
their increasing capital costs. 
 
That having been said, there’s not enough money provided 
there to meet all of the capital needs of municipalities. It’s just 
helping them to do that. But debentures, as the member 
mentioned, and any number of other things could be considered, 
and I will discuss that with municipal leaders. 
 
Bottom line is, it’s only the commitment that’s needed, not the 
dollar in the bank, and once the commitment is received we can 
proceed. We are committed to Preeceville. We want to see this 
project completed as quickly as we can, and we will continue to 
work with the community to realize its and our common goal. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials here tonight. I have a couple of 
questions in regarding an incident that happened basically in 
your backyard, Mr. Minister. 
 
A gentleman from Turtle Lake suffered a heart attack here some 
two weeks ago on a Saturday and was rushed to North 
Battleford Hospital. There, they stabilized him. Again this was 
on a Saturday. They stabilized him. And his doctor at that time, 
on Monday, said that he needed an angiogram. He would try 
and get him in for an angiogram as soon as possible. The family 
waited till Friday before they contacted me in regards to this, 
and he still was on oxygen in the North Battleford Hospital 
waiting for an angiogram. 
 
They were sure that he needed an angioplasty. There was phone 
calls between the wife of the victim and your office in North 
Battleford regarding this incident. And on Saturday, the 
daughter in Calgary was advised, and she came out. And the 
mother tried to get a hold of you, the Health minister, regarding 
as to how soon an angiogram could be given to her husband. 
And there was some talk at that time that possibly Tuesday 
would be the quickest to get an angiogram. Unfortunately your 
office phoned this lady and said that it would not be taking 
place this week, and they had no idea when the angiogram 
would take place. 
 
When the lady, or the wife of the victim phoned to see if, when 

she was transferring her husband to Calgary, to the hospital 
there because he had appointment for an angiogram on Monday 
morning, if he required ambulance service, somebody in your 
office said it would only be if it was an emergency. The 
government would not pay for that. 
 
In your mind, Mr. Minister, what do you define as an 
emergency in regarding health care with a heart attack victim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I wonder if the member can clarify when 
he talks about my office, which office is he talking about? My 
constituency office as an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] would have referred all of these calls to the quality 
of care coordinator. That’s the standard operating practice in my 
office. 
 
Most of what the member is quoting somebody else in telling 
him is probably, like I’m saying, it’s all second-hand or 
third-hand information. My office believes very strongly in 
supporting the quality of care coordinators within the region. 
All of these matters are day-to-day operation matters within the 
health region and between health regions for cardiac cath 
services in Saskatoon. 
 
So I’d just like the member to clarify exactly who he’s referring 
to or who he’s talked to in this regard so that I can have a little 
clearer picture of who said what to whom. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe, and this 
is second hand because the lady phoned me and said that the 
office that she was referring to was your MLA office in North 
Battleford because I asked this lady when she phoned me to 
contact your office in North Battleford and get some direction 
from there because they would contact you here in Regina. So I 
know for a fact it was your MLA office in North Battleford. 
 
But again to the minister, what do you . . . Clarify the word 
emergency. If a person suffering from a heart attack and is 
being transferred out of province to another province and 
needing ambulance services, that the government will not pay 
unless it is an emergency . . . What do you classify as an 
emergency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think I do have to ask the member again 
for additional information. And I do stress — not only to the 
member opposite but to every Saskatchewan resident who 
might be watching or reading the transcripts of today’s session 
— that the regions have quality of care coordinators who 
answer these questions and refer and direct people. My 
constituency office, the member’s constituency office, other 
political offices should refer people to the quality of care 
coordinators within the regions. That’s where decisions or 
information will be dispersed and matters dealt with that may 
be of an emergency nature. 
 
Secondly, I’m not fully grasping exactly what the member is 
suggesting. An angiogram is a diagnostic tool. An angiogram 
really is an X-ray of the heart. It’s not something that’s 
necessarily done in an emergency basis. Secondly, ambulance 
care is not assessed on the basis of emergency or not. There are 
contract fees for ambulance services whether it’s emergency or 
not. There’s a copayment structure. There’s a provincial 
subsidy that’s attached and if you are a senior it’s capped at 250 



May 9, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

bucks. If you’re not a senior, there’s a copay fee for ambulance 
care. It’s not tied to emergency use. 
 
So there are some things that the member is suggesting here that 
I’m just not fully understanding and if he’s got additional 
information, I’d be happy to get it. If he doesn’t have additional 
information, I urge that he call the quality of care coordinator or 
have the family call the quality of care coordinator who have 
access to all of the data, all of the data about the specifics of the 
case. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I will 
definitely get the information from the wife of the victim as to 
who she contacted. And like I said, it’s only second-hand 
information to me, but I know for a fact it was in your office as 
MLA in North Battleford. 
 
In regards to an emergency, if a person comes in having a heart 
attack and is stabilized in a hospital and can’t get proper care in 
the province that they live in and they are allowed to go out of 
province and they can get an angiogram in Calgary or out of 
province wherever in a timely fashion, if they go there and they 
need ambulance service, is that not an emergency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again it doesn’t matter. Ambulance 
service is not charged out on the basis of emergency or not. 
There’s standard contract fees in which there’s a copay 
relationship on it. Again emergency doesn’t . . . it’s not used in 
the calculation of whether or not fees are charged or not. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
going to out of province, in this case it’s Calgary for an 
angiogram and possibly other health services. Will that be 
funded by the province of Saskatchewan for this gentleman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Absolutely. The member should be aware 
that provincial Health covers out-of-province services except 
for MRI, bone scans, and cardiac . . . cataract surgery . . . 
getting tongue-tied after two hours. 
 
The provincial government this year opened a new cardiac 
catheterization lab in Saskatoon to improve the services 
provided for heart patients. That new facility opened just about 
a month ago. There are now the waiting lists for both diagnostic 
and other matters relating to the work of cardiac care has helped 
to reduce our waiting lists in this province considerably. So I 
assume that Saskatchewan care will be available to more 
people. 
 
I see the House Leader is signalling that we’re close to or right 
at 9 o’clock, and I would like to take the opportunity then to 
thank my officials for being present here tonight. And I’m 
assuming that the members opposite may have additional 
questions, that we’ll come back on another day. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee rise, 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the committee rise, report progress and ask for leave 

to sit again. Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That is carried. 
 
[21:00] 
 
[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m instructed by the committee to report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Next sitting of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. I recognize 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that the 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House does now stand 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:01.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Health — Vote 32 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1587 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1591 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1591 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1595 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1598 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


