






















































Hansard: November 13, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 11B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 361 
 November 13, 2006 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Securities Transfer Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Securities Transfer Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is new, harmonized legislation that will 
govern the transfer and holding of securities and interests in 
securities. It is important to distinguish this new legislation 
from securities regulatory law which governs how securities are 
issued and traded. That law is contained in The Securities Act, 
1988 and the significant body of regulations under that Act. 
 
This legislation on the other hand is commercial property 
transfer law that deals with only one narrow aspect of a 
securities transaction, the transfer of property that occurs in the 
settlement of a securities transaction. This new legislation will 
repeal outdated provisions in The Business Corporations Act. It 
includes consequential amendments to The Personal Property 
Security Act which govern the use of securities as loan 
collateral. It also includes amendments to The Executions Act 
which govern the manner in which an interest in securities can 
be seized. 
 
The existing law pertaining to salient rules is found in The 
Business Corporations Act and The Personal Property Security 
Act. The provisions in those Acts are based upon the way in 
which securities were traditionally held, transferred, and 
pledged in a direct holding system in which the owners of 
securities had a direct relationship with the issue of the 
securities. 
 
In the past, securities owners typically had share certificates in 
their possession evidencing their interest in a corporation. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, most securities are held through an 
indirect holding system where shareholders do not hold actual 
certificates evidencing their share interest. Instead the interests 
of an investor are recorded on the books of an intermediary 
such as a broker who in turn often has its interests recorded in 
the books of another intermediary, and so on up the chain of 
interests. Virtually all of these transactions are recorded by the 
intermediaries through computerized book entries. At the top of 
this chain is Canadian Depository for Securities Limited, CDS, 
which clears between $100 and 150 billion in gross value trades 
daily and holds nearly $2 trillion worth of securities on deposit. 
 
The problem with current Canadian law is that our securities 
transfer rules are almost entirely based upon old versions of the 
American Uniform Commercial Code. The provisions found in 
the business corporations and personal property legislation in 
each province and territory continue to be based upon a direct 
holding system which accounts for only a small proportion of 
securities held by Canadian investors. The existing provisions 

are not capable of providing an appropriate level of statutory 
support for the indirect holding system which makes up almost 
all securities transactions. 
 
This problem has been addressed on an international basis by 
The Hague Conference on Private International Law which 
adopted a multilateral convention on laws applicable to 
securities held through an intermediary. Article 8 of the 
Uniform Commercial Code in the United States has been 
revised to reflect the provisions of The Hague convention. 
 
To remain current internationally, it is necessary for Canadian 
jurisdictions to adopt legislation consistent with The Hague 
convention and a Uniform Commercial Code. A task force of 
the Canadian Securities Administrators at the request of the 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada has led the development of 
this legislation. A draft uniform Act was adopted by the 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada at its annual meeting in 
Regina in August 2004. 
 
Canadian provinces and territories have worked together to 
maintain uniformity of the legislation in all jurisdictions. 
Ontario and Alberta introduced legislation in the spring of 
2006. All other provinces and territories have indicated a 
willingness to enact harmonized legislation by 2007. Federal 
legislation, which is not critical to the effective operation of the 
provincial-territorial legislation, is anticipated to follow in due 
course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the objective of this legislation is to provide a 
sound legal foundation for existing securities holding and 
transfer systems. It is necessary that this legislation be uniform, 
not only on an interprovincial basis but that it also harmonized 
with revised article 8 of the Uniform Commercial Code in the 
United States and The Hague convention. 
 
This legislation achieves uniformity by removing existing 
securities transfer provisions from provincial corporate statutes 
and placing them in a separate statute, the same scope and effect 
as revised article 8. 
 
The enactment of the proposed legislation will provide a sound 
and modern legal foundation for existing practices. Although 
the individuals and businesses engaged in securities settlement 
activities are not resident in this province, they need to be able 
to conduct transactions impacting Saskatchewan issuers, 
intermediaries, and investors on the basis of the laws of this 
province. The new Act will not require market participants in 
Saskatchewan or any other jurisdictions to change their current 
practices. Rather it will provide legal sanction and support to 
current practices. 
 
Inconsistencies in the clearing of settlement of securities 
transactions carry enormous potential for risk to capital 
markets. This is particularly the case with cross-border 
transactions. With the lack of clear, harmonized laws and 
conflict of law rules creates a risk that can be avoided through 
enactment of this legislation. The overriding policy goal of this 
legislation is to maintain the competitiveness of Canada’s 
capital markets by ensuring that the legislation in each 
jurisdiction has the same substantive effect as the Uniform 
Commercial Code. 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, without appropriate legislation to underpin the 
current activities of the securities settlement industry, systemic 
risks create uncertainty for our capital markets. The failure of 
one institution and the chain of intermediaries to meet its 
obligations when due has the potential for a domino effect in 
the system. This legislation will control this risk by statutorily 
confirming the finality of settlement in a manner that will not 
allow transaction performed according to the legislation to be 
unwound. The minimization of this risk through harmonized 
settlement legislation will not only protect individual investors, 
but it will increase confidence in Canadian capital markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Securities Transfer Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 23, The Securities Transfer Act be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The Chair 
recognizes the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 
able to add my comments to this Bill, transfer of securities Act. 
 
As the minister has outlined, there needs to be some 
readjustment, some recognition of really the new way of doing 
a lot of the securities, the transfers. And I would like to offer 
this observation, that in this particular world that we’re in, 
securities and the transfer of securities becomes ever 
increasingly important because the traditional ways of holding 
equity or debt equity or investments is changing very rapidly. 
And as you know, because it’s not a primary function that 
we’ve seen here in this province — and I wonder why that is — 
these securities are held by our people in Saskatchewan even 
though that they are really regulated in other provinces. 
 
So I’m pleased that the minister is bringing forward this 
particular amendment to the transfers securities Act. My 
question is, why hasn’t it happened sooner? The investing in 
securities has been going on for some time. It’s becoming more 
and more popular as there is becoming more and more choices 
for people. 
 
So it naturally becomes a matter of confidence, confidence in 
both the investor and confidence in the system that there is 
going to be the ability to transfer the securities from one name 
to another name to another name but also in a much more 
increasingly complicated system that we are involved in. And 
therefore we need to make sure that there is proper protection 
for the people that wish to take advantage of the security 
investment opportunity. 
 
This becomes increasingly important as we get into the world of 
globalization and as we actually start trading more and more 
between provinces. This has to be harmonized. The intent of 
this Act is addressed; the element of harmonization is 
addressed. And I’m pleased to see that, not only 
interprovincially within Canada and within our neighbouring 
provinces but also there is consideration for harmonizing the 
regulations into the US [United States] because of course there 
is no borders left when we talk about financial investments, 
securities and so on. With the flow of money, the flow of 

information, the flow of capital, there is no borders any more. 
 
This, I would hope, the government would use as an example of 
trying to get into the next level of interprovincial trade, the next 
level of interprovincial harmonization coordination both in 
regulations and in areas that we could do a lot of joint work 
together from province to province. I know that Alberta and BC 
[British Columbia] are already going down that road quite 
rapidly. I really believe this government has missed an 
opportunity already. And now that it’s in a catch-up mode, if 
they in fact would even consider doing that, in joining with the 
three Western provinces to try to harmonize some of the 
regulations and work collegially toward the objective of moving 
western Canadian interests along now that the provincial 
borders are virtually eliminated except for the physical 
movement of people and commodities across a particular line. 
Information, like I said — finance, securities — all those things 
are virtually borderless at this stage. 
 
I see in this new piece of legislation there are a lot of things that 
I believe, as I mentioned, should have been included earlier are 
now taken into consideration. But because it’s new, I believe 
that we need to consult much more broadly. I would have hoped 
that the government would have given us an indication that they 
too would have consulted broadly. I’m not sure just how 
broadly they have consulted because it is the people in the real 
world that have invested their real money that are the ones that 
have to make their interest known and their concerns, and 
certainly the risks need to be presented to them as well. So it’s a 
technical piece of legislation for sure. I think it really needs 
further research, further review, and at this time I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Lloydminster that debate on second reading of Bill No. 23 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées 
et des jeux de hasard 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister responsible 
for gaming. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to introduce the amendments 
contained in Bill No. 24, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2006. The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Act, 1997 provides a statutory basis upon which the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority regulates gaming 
and the distribution and consumption of alcohol in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide SLGA [Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority] with the legislative authority to 
make grant payments to eligible charitable gaming licensees, 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

and will provide a mechanism for the Department of 
Environment to implement future alcohol bans in provincial and 
regional park campgrounds. 
 
I will first address the amendments related to the charitable 
gaming grant payments to eligible gaming licensees. 
 
As you may be aware, Mr. Speaker, there are more than 2,600 
groups and organizations in Saskatchewan that raise important 
dollars through licensed charitable gaming. Historically 
charitable gaming has included bingos, break-open ticket sales, 
and raffles. These groups and organizations are made up of 
people who care about the communities that they live in. They 
work hard to raise money that makes their communities 
stronger. The list of beneficiaries include friendship centres, 
cadets, Scouts, Girl Guides, 4-H clubs, community associations, 
service clubs, hospital foundations, volunteer fire departments, 
and, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, SLGA launched a charitable gaming review in the 
fall of 2004. The review gave those charitable gaming licensees 
the opportunity to share their opinions with the future direction 
of charitable gaming here in Saskatchewan. What we heard 
from the licensees, Mr. Speaker, is that charitable gaming 
dollars have dwindled through the past decade and something 
needed to be done to help revitalize their gaming-related 
fundraising activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government listened to those concerns and was 
pleased to make changes that will benefit charitable gaming 
licensees and more importantly the people of Saskatchewan. In 
May we announced that Texas hold ’em and Monte Carlo 
fundraising events would be eligible for charitable gaming 
licenses. We also announced a new 25 cent grant for every 
dollar that groups and organizations raise through licensed 
bingos, break-open ticket sales, raffles, and Monte Carlo and 
Texas hold ‘em poker tournaments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments in this Bill will allow SLGA to 
immediately begin issuing those grants. Grants will be based on 
charitable gaming activities that take place on or after April 1, 
2006. Once the first grant payments are made, charities will 
receive grants every quarter in which they report their net 
gaming proceeds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to speak about alcohol bans in 
provincial and regional park campgrounds. Amendments in this 
Bill will ensure that the minister responsible for The Parks Act 
and The Regional Parks Act, 1979 has the authority to issue 
orders banning the possession and consumption of beverage 
alcohol in designated campgrounds for specified periods of 
time. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in recent years we have seen issues 
of over-consumption, violence, and damage to property in 
provincial and regional parks. Generally these incidents have 
occurred during long weekends and have at times jeopardized 
public safety. The recent alcohol ban this past May long 
weekend in Saskatchewan parks has helped to minimize 
over-consumption, violence, and damage to property. 
 

The proposed amendments in this Bill will also make it an 
offence to possess or consume beverage alcohol in a designated 
campground that has an alcohol ban in effect. 
 
So then, Mr. Speaker, the intent of this Bill overall is to provide 
SLGA with the legislative authority to make grant payments to 
eligible charitable gaming licensees and to also formalize 
policies and legislation that will continue to allow for temporary 
alcohol bans in provincial and regional parks. 
 
So I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move that Bill No. 24, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 now be 
read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister of Liquor 
and Gaming that Bill No. 24, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise and 
participate in the debate on this Act to amend the alcohol and 
gaming Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act provides some considerable latitude to the 
minister of Parks and the minister responsible for regional parks 
to make orders banning the consumption and possession of 
alcohol for designated periods of time. This is in response to 
occurrences that have happened in the parks where there’s been 
excessive consumption of alcohol, fighting, damage, assaults on 
police officers, and a variety of other problems. Unfortunately 
this has been a chronic problem in our parks since back 
probably before I was in my teens, because I remember issues 
about it when I was in high school, reading about it in the paper 
that certain parks were becoming problematic. 
 
And we now fortunately have an increased focus on safety in a 
general sense. We have groups like Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving, Students Against Drunk Driving. We have alcohol and 
chem-free graduation events. And I think this Bill is an 
extension of the public’s desire to ensure safety not only on the 
highways but in parks, and to have a responsible use of alcohol. 
 
We’re pleased to hear that there was some degree of 
consultation with park operators. We’re aware that regional 
parks and provincial parks are funded largely by the taxpayer, 
but we have to be cognizant of the fact that there is also private 
vendors of liquor. They may have an adverse effect, but in our 
consultation we have not heard that this is something that’s 
going to be opposed by the public. But we will want to have 
some consultation to determine whether there are people that 
are affected. And if there are people that are affected, we want 
to make sure that there’s some method of compensation or 
some method of them dealing with lost revenue. 
 
This type of legislation goes a long ways to ensure the safety of 
our young people. I can imagine no worse tragedy for a parent 
than to hear that their teenage son or daughter was killed in an 
accident involving alcohol on one of our highways or in one of 
our parks. So this will go somewhat to try and address those 
concerns. And I think it’s of some significance to note that this 
type of legislation is supported by Mothers Against Drunk 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

Driving, Students Against Drunk Driving and, in a general 
sense, by students and by young people. 
The other sector of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is amendments to 
make changes to SLGA granting monies that were raised from 
break-open tickets and lotteries. I think most people in this 
province are not aware of the tens of millions of dollars that are 
raised every year from break-open tickets and bingos. It actually 
is massive amounts of money that are spent. 
 
And when we look at this type of thing, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
probably appropriate to consider the effects that gambling has 
on the citizens of our province. And we should probably be 
considering as well — and it’s the Saskatchewan Party policy 
— to urge that there should be an impact assessment on any 
kinds of new gambling or changes to gambling. So we think 
that that’s something that we want to raise and flag for members 
of the government at this time as something that they should be 
considering as they go forward with this type of legislation. 
 
We’re pleased to see that the monies are going to health 
foundations and to hospital foundations so that there’s some 
significant benefit to the taxpayers of this province. We’re 
supportive of money going back into health care and pleased 
that at least there’s some return on gambling and gaming 
revenue for the province. 
 
It would probably be worthwhile for the members opposite to 
consider a careful assessment of where all of the money goes 
from gaming revenue in the province, that it goes back to the 
charities and determine that there’s legitimate charities that are 
applying for these funds and that the funds are used in the 
manner in which they were intended by way of having periodic 
or random audits on some of the charities that receive the funds. 
When we know when they go to a health foundation or a 
hospital foundation, that they’re in all likelihood used in a very 
careful and prudent manner because we’ve had very good 
success with the hospital foundations in this province. 
 
Coming back briefly in my closing remarks, Mr. Speaker, to the 
issue of alcohol in campgrounds, this Bill addresses and deals 
with our provincial parks and regional parks. It does not deal 
with private facilities, privately owned parks, or campgrounds. 
And it’s possible that some thought should be given or could 
have been given to whether it was appropriate to include those 
in the ban as well, or the right to have bans because there can be 
issues with private campgrounds, private party areas where 
people will go there, consume large amounts of alcohol, and 
then we’ll have those people back on the highways and 
roadways after they’ve finished an evening of partying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will want to have some further discussion with 
the people that are directly affected by this Bill. I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
24 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et 

le Conseil exécutif 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2005 The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 2005 was introduced to consolidate and update the 
allowance in remuneration provisions of The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act. It also set out the powers 
and duties of the Board of Internal Economy so as to better 
recognize its functions as the management board of this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
As members of the Legislative Assembly will recall, that Act 
was a co-operative effort between the government, the 
opposition, the Speaker’s office, the Office of the Clerk, and the 
office of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk. In addition I 
would note that the members of the Board of Internal Economy, 
the all-party management board of this Legislative Assembly, 
played a significant role in the development of that legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2005 the Act was passed unanimously by this 
Legislative Assembly. It was passed on the understanding that a 
bilingual version of this key legislation would follow once the 
French version had been completed. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 
to introduce today a new Bill that replaces the existing English 
Act with a fully bilingual Bill with no substantive changes from 
that previous Act. 
 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 is 
central to the governance of this legislature and therefore the 
province. Accordingly I am sure all members of the Assembly 
will agree that it is appropriate that it be presented to the people 
of Saskatchewan as a bilingual Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of An Act 
respecting the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and the 
Executive Council of Saskatchewan and making a 
consequential amendment to another Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 25, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2006 be now read a second time. The 
Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter into the 
debate and discussion regarding this Bill. This Bill is for the 
highly supported position that we want to ensure that there is a 
bilingual version of this type of legislation available in our 
province. 
 
We note as well, Mr. Speaker, that there is a number of editing 
and other housekeeping changes. As they say, Mr. Speaker, the 
devil can be found in the details. And we will want to go 
through this Bill very carefully and look at its predecessors to 
make sure there is nothing that crept in accidentally or crept in 
through whatever means the government members have to try 
and do some of . . . [inaudible] . . . We will want to check this 



November 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

Bill very carefully to ensure that it fulfills its intent and that it 
doesn’t do something that we don’t want it to. 
 
Whenever there is an update or a change in this type of 
legislation, it’s a worthwhile exercise to review the Bill 
carefully and to ensure that it, even in its former form, met its 
need. It’s this type of Bill that gives need for the legal 
profession and certainly gives many of us a raison d’être so that 
we have a legitimate purpose. And certainly this type of 
legislation is exactly the type of Bill, Mr. Speaker, that gives us 
the reason for existing, the reason for our paycheques. And we 
will, Mr. Speaker, I want to undertake to you, give this Bill very 
careful and very detailed scrutiny. 
 
When I was going through this Bill — and I would urge all 
members to go through this Bill in some detail — there is some 
very interesting things in here. For example, Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill is what creates the Office of the Speaker, the Deputy 
Speaker, indicates how they are to be paid. It also creates the 
Board of Internal Economy. It creates the framework for 
members of the legislature to be paid. It deals with which 
members of the public are not entitled to become members of 
the Legislative Assembly, when they cease to become members 
of the Assembly, and something that probably a lot of members 
weren’t aware of is that the Legislative Assembly can actually 
constitute itself as a court and imprison other members. 
 
Now when I was reading that, I frankly, Mr. Speaker, I gave 
some thought to it. Well maybe that’s a motion that we should 
bring forward sometime. Is there members that we would want 
to see incarcerated? And anyway I say that in pure jest of 
course. But it is an indication of the significant power and trust 
that members of the legislature have, and it’s something that 
members should not take lightly. They should reflect upon what 
they’re doing and consider carefully the position of trust that 
they’re in with the citizens of this province. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be reviewing this Bill in somewhat more 
depth. I will be asking some of our researchers to be burning 
some midnight oil doing a line-by-line, word-by-word analysis 
of this Bill, and want to assure the House that it will be given all 
due deliberation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on Bill No. 25 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I rise again to move a 

second reading of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the passage of The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, 2005 in English only in the previous 
session of this Legislative Assembly, a separate bilingual 
consequential amendment Act was required. With the new 
bilingual Bill now having been introduced — and of significant 
interest to the hon. member opposite, I might note — having 
been introduced to the Legislative Assembly, those bilingual 
consequential amendments may now be included in part 7 of 
the main Bill, while the English-only consequential amendment 
may be moved to The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these consequential amendments for the most part 
reflect the need to change the previous references to the name 
of the Act from 2005 to 2006. In addition there is a correction 
made to the language in a previous amendment to The 
Members’ Conflict of Interest Act and the reference to the Act 
in The Government Organization Act is updated. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 
make consequential amendments to certain Acts arising from 
the enactment of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 26, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act 2006 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is the nature of legislation that 
it is a matrix of interwoven pieces of legislation where one Bill 
is referenced in another and there’s changes to a federal 
legislation as well that makes reference to varieties of pieces of 
provincial legislation, and we have created this complex maze 
and network of legislation where a change in one has a series of 
changes all the way down. So quite frequently when we pass 
legislation, we have to have consequential amendment pieces of 
legislation going with it. In this particular Bill, we have several 
pieces of other legislation —The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Act and a number of others — that will require amendments 
and change for the sake of consistency. 
 
This is a remarkable amount of work for the legislative drafts 
people to stay up and try and link all of the pieces of legislation 
so that when there’s a change in one they have to go through 
each and every other piece of legislation and maintain tables so 
that they know which pieces of legislation are affected so that 
we don’t inadvertently create orphaned pieces of legislation or 
create further and other inconsistencies. We have to have some 
degree of reliance on the legislative drafts people to ensure that 
they are doing their job, following through to make sure that 
they don’t miss things and that they don’t accidentally create 
problems that are elsewhere. 
 
I find it somewhat surprising that with that much depth and 
work that they go to that we actually find typos with all the 
people that look at them, all of the hands that it goes through, 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard November 13, 2006 

that we find misspellings, a mis-year here, here or there, so I 
guess as they say, to err is human and to forgive is legislative. 
 
It is our duty to ensure that we correct and deal with those 
amendments as they are required and as the circumstances arise. 
So this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is one that we will take under 
advisement, as we did the other one, and go through the same 
detailed method of consultation and discussion, line-by-line, 
word-by-word review that our researches I know are looking 
forward to getting into. There is some significant importance to 
this legislation, Mr. Speaker, because this is the legislation is 
the backbone and core of this Assembly, and we want to ensure 
that it’s given due consideration and very careful analysis. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast that debate on second reading of Bill No. 
26 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 19:35.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 23 — The Securities Transfer Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................361 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................362 
 Bill No. 24 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................362 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................363 
 Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................364 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................364 
 Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................365 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................365 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


