






















































Hansard: March 24, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 27A  FRIDAY, MARCH 24, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 767 
 March 24, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The condition of 
Highway 32 has been an ongoing concern for the last several 
years. Today I present a petition again on behalf of constituents 
living in the vicinity of that particular highway. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s signatories to these two pages of petition 
are from the communities of Mendham, Leader, Prelate, 
Estuary. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise to 
present petitions from constituents opposed to reductions of 
health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens calling on the government to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by good citizens from 

Watrous, Prince Albert, and Plunkett. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, continuing the petition that I 
presented yesterday, I will start in the prayer for relief where 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. I would 
just ask the member, caution the member as he’s proceeding 
with his petition to do that in the usual fashion — a brief 
statement, read the preamble, and then carry on to the next 
person. The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendation made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to 
the Saskatchewan Minister of Health, the Hon. John 
Nilson. 
 
“The presentation from Saskatchewan Families for 
Effective Autism treatment concerning issues surrounding 
the support of autistic children and adults that need review, 
one in particular being the availability of behavioural 
therapists . . . ” 
 

The petition calls for a number of sources of relief: 
 

Increase the early diagnosis of children with ASD, have 
respite and family support accessible based on need, 
support regional autism service providers and provincial 
autism organizations, ensure ASD adult services and 
supports are accessible and based on need rather than 
physical disability or mental ability, encourage and 
support autism-related research in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 

A petition concerning effective autism treatment, sessional 
paper no. 638; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 4, 5, 7, 27, 64, and 67. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: did management of 
the department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2001? 

 
Another question for the same day: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: how did 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001? 

 
Another question, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: does management of 
the department have any knowledge of any actual or 
suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2001? If so, what was the nature of this 
activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SGI: what did 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or detect fraud in the year 2001? 

 
To the Minister Responsible for SGI: is management of 
the department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2001 such as information received from employees, 
former employees, customers, clients, suppliers, or others? 
If so, what is the nature of that activity? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I also have questions for SGI for 2002 and for 
SaskEnergy for 2001 and 2002. I so submit. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you in the Speaker’s gallery my 
assistant, Patrick Bundrock, who’s down here today to help me 
on some case files we’re working on. Patrick handles all of the 
social services cases that we work on both for myself and my 
two colleagues in Saskatoon as well as all of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] cabinet ministers on the other side who send 
them to us, and we want to thank them for doing that. And he 
does a terrific job and I certainly appreciate his . . . [inaudible] 
. . . and I would like everybody, including those ministers, to 
welcome him to his Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join the member in welcoming Patrick to the House 

today, particularly to the House where he’s sitting as opposed to 
the House on the floor. Because I got to know Patrick a little bit 
better during the last provincial election — we had a very good 
campaign and I think he ran honourably, as did I, as did the 
Liberal candidate as well. And I’ve had some conversations 
with Patrick since that time, but I’m really pleased to welcome 
him here today but in particular welcome to that gallery as 
opposed to the floor of the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Yorkton Farm Forum 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had the opportunity to attend a farm forum in 
Yorkton put on by Garry Breitkreuz, the MP [Member of 
Parliament] for Yorkton-Melville. And Garry does this, has 
done this on a number of occasions and gives farmers a chance 
to catch up what’s happening in agriculture and vent their views 
on just how bad things actually are. 
 
I also want to commend, though, Eleanor Shumay, Kirsten 
Groeneveld, and the other staff that helped put this on 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, because there was about 850 farmers in 
attendance in one hall and it was a very large crowd to handle. 
Mr. Speaker, they also . . . and I commend the staff at St. 
Mary’s Hall also for feeding 700 people for a lunch where they 
only expected about 450 probably to 500 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the message kept coming through over and over 
again just how bad things are in farming, especially here in 
Saskatchewan. Chuck Strahl gave a presentation, the federal 
Minister of Agriculture. Blair Harris, a farmer from Yorkton, 
gave a presentation on the shortcomings in the CAIS [Canadian 
agricultural income stabilization] program. Lionel La Belle 
gave a presentation on ethanol and the future it could have in 
Saskatchewan. Bill Cooper, a farmer from West Bend, told the 
audience how he has sold the big part of his farm and why, and 
how bad things are in agriculture. Alanna Koch gave a very 
good presentation on the WTO [World Trade Organization] 
talks and how subsidies are hurting our farmers here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the message kept coming through loud and 
clear — things are tough in the agriculture front in 
Saskatchewan. I hope both the federal and provincial ministers 
of Agriculture were paying attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Scott Collegiate First Annual Arts and Music Gala 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I, along 
with a good number of my colleagues, had the great pleasure of 
attending the Scott Collegiate first annual arts and music gala 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

evening. 
 
It was an incredible night, Mr. Speaker. The capacity crowd 
was treated to a remarkable and varied assortment of food and 
music and comedy and poetry and visual arts and dance, much 
of it by Scott students themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The funds raised last night will go towards building the arts and 
music program at Scott. Arts education focuses on developing 
the natural abilities of students and encourages them to find 
their own sense of self. And might I add, Mr. Speaker, a vital 
arts program can play a critical role in keeping at-risk students 
in school. The arts gala is the latest in a string of initiatives and 
success stories coming out of Scott Collegiate, all of which are 
aimed at creating a healthy learning environment and providing 
each and every Scott student with the opportunity to succeed. 
 
It’s working. Initiatives like the arts program and the recently 
rejuvenated sports program are translating into more successful 
students, increasing enrolment numbers, and the largest grade 
12 graduating classes in decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all of the sponsors, artists, and 
performers for an excellent evening of entertainment, and I 
particularly want to thank and congratulate Jennie Davies, 
Susan Bear, and all the fantastic members of the organizing 
committee, Principal Murray Greenwood, and all the Scott staff. 
And finally I want to say a special thank you very much to the 
Scott students — you have a lot to be proud about. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Biggest Single-Day Farm Auction 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on this 
day near Stockholm, Saskatchewan will see its biggest 
single-day farm auction when Mr. Don Gillen puts his farm on 
the auction block. There will be 83 quarter sections of land, or 
roughly 13,280 acres. Mr. Speaker, this amount of land is 12 
times the size of the average Saskatchewan farm. 
 
This auction is taking place at a time when The Western 
Producer is advertising nearly 13 pages of auction sales that 
will be taking place in not the too distant future. Unfortunately 
this has become the by-product of an NDP government that has 
failed to show any leadership in positioning our agricultural 
industry. 
 
This is why we see Saskatchewan leading the nation in farm 
bankruptcies for the last three consecutive years. Now many 
producers are unsure whether they will have a farm to pass on 
to their children, and many farm children are unsure if they can 
make a go of the family farm no matter how hard they work. 
Many farmers’ concerns are echoed in Mr. Gillen’s statement 
that, quote: 
 

. . . “people just think ‘well what’s the bother, what’s the 
hassle?’ . . . They just feel that the government doesn’t 
care about them.” 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Regina & District Labour Council’s Centennial 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a celebration 
in honour of a day very special to the history of Saskatchewan. 
Today we commemorate the centennial of the Regina & District 
Labour Council. For 100 years, the council has been working to 
improve the lives of people in the community. Mr. Speaker, I 
am proud to tell the Assembly that tonight several of my 
colleagues and I will attend the labour council’s centennial 
banquet at the Regina Inn in celebration of the council’s 
anniversary. 
 
The banquet is also a commencement ceremony for the Regina 
& District Labour Council’s annual general meeting. The 
president of the Canadian Labour Congress, Ken Georgetti, is to 
be the guest speaker. The evening will also see the presentation 
of the second annual labour community award, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As an alliance of local trade unionists, the council has been 
extremely active in the community. In December the council, in 
collaboration with the United Way, announced the creation of 
the Janice Bernier Endowment for Food Security, a jointly 
sponsored fund in support of long-term food security programs 
in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite the members to join me in 
congratulating all those involved with the Regina & District 
Labour Council for their achievements in this great community, 
as well as congratulate all of those involved with the 
organization of the centennial banquet and wish them, the 
RDLC [Regina & District Labour Council], the very best for the 
next 100 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 

Race Track Gas Station Burns in Biggar 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
early morning hours of February 5, residents of my home 
community of Biggar arose to an orange-red glow and the 
flashing of red and blue emergency lights. This cold, windy 
winter morning the community’s volunteer fire department was 
called to a fire at Biggar’s oldest filling station. 
 
The next few hours were spent fighting not only the fire but the 
wind and the cold as well. There was also the challenge of 
keeping the fire from getting into the underground storage tanks 
and propane tanks at the exterior of the building. This 
long-established building was not only a filling station offering 
full service as well as some vehicle maintenance, it was a 
convenience store and offered pizzas, subs, doughnuts, rental 
movies, and more, and was a popular stop for students at the 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

school just a block away. 
 
More importantly, Mr. Speaker, Race Track Gas was a family 
business that the owners have been growing and expanding for 
many years. They employed a number of people as well as kept 
family members busy. I can only imagine the effect on the 
family of losing a business that they have spent so long building 
up and the uncertainty as to where to go from here. 
 
I’d like to thank the Biggar Fire Department on a job well done 
in containing the fire and preventing what could have turned 
into something more serious. I’d also like to encourage the 
Buxton family to turn this tragedy into an opportunity for a 
fresh start in developing a new business in the community, 
whether it be rebuilding the service station or exploring a 
different venture. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Pineview Youth Centre 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government is committed to providing Saskatchewan people, 
especially our youth, every possible opportunity for a safe and 
healthy future. 
 
Yesterday as part of that commitment we announced the 
opening of six interim youth treatment beds in Prince Albert 
called the Pineview Youth Centre. The new beds are housed in 
a fourplex close to the Pineview Terrace Lodge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the need to act quickly to provide 
more services. This is an acceleration of goals set forth in the 
Premier’s Project Hope. 
 
It is imperative that Saskatchewan young people who require it 
have a safe place to go for treatment of substance abuse, 
allowing them to heal in body, mind, and spirit. With the 
announcement of these interim spaces in Prince Albert we will 
be able to provide vulnerable Saskatchewan young people with 
detoxification, stabilization, and treatment options more than 
two years earlier than initially announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an educator who has seen the wounds that drug 
addiction can inflict, and as a friend of parents who have 
suffered along with their children as they struggled with 
addiction, I welcome this announcement and all the steps this 
government is taking to meet this ongoing issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Pineview Youth Centre beds and the recently 
announced youth treatment beds in Saskatoon are excellent 
examples of our commitment that every child in Saskatchewan 
has every opportunity to achieve the best possible future. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

Saskatchewan Huskies Player Wins Hockey Awards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of Watson’s 
own has claimed three Canada West hockey awards for the 
2005-06 season. Dean Beuker, fourth-year senior and forward 
for the Saskatchewan Huskies, was voted the conference’s most 
valuable player. He is the seventh Huskie to win this award 
since it was first presented in 1978. 
 
Dean was also named the player who best combined 
sportsmanship and athletic ability, earning him the University 
of British Columbia Hockey Alumni Trophy. 
 
Beuker finished his season with a 47-point career high. It is the 
third time in the last four seasons he owned the conference’s 
leading scorer. His achievement earned him the Dave 
“Sweeney” Schriner Trophy and the distinction of being only 
the fourth player in Canada West hockey history to win the 
scoring title three times. His 47 points also tied Jesse Pyatt of 
the University of Guelph Gryphons and Kevin Baker of Acadia 
University for the Canadian Interuniversity Sport scoring title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to ask the members of the 
legislature to join me in recognizing and congratulating the 
achievements of Dean Beuker and wishing him continued 
records in his hockey career. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Reaction to Nurse’s Letter 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday I read from a letter written by Jennifer 
Hanna-Woodworth, a nurse in North Battleford. The letter was 
highly critical of this health care minister and his comments 
about the crucial shortage of nurses, not only in Saskatchewan 
but in his own backyard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our understanding that shortly after we raised 
the issue, the nurse was told not to speak to the media. Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: is this the standard practice when 
someone tries to speak out about problems in the health care 
system, that a gag order is put out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
unaware of the circumstances that the member opposite raises. 
In fact yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I indicated in the Chamber that I 
was interested in talking to the letter writer and, Mr. Speaker, I 
was interested in meeting with the local, the SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] local in North Battleford, to 
which she belongs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my office is currently trying to set up that 
meeting. And, Mr. Speaker, I am more than happy to listen to 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

what the letter writer and the local president and her 
representatives have to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this type of action 
from this government before. A couple of years ago, Dr. Jon 
Witt was fired after raising serious concerns about the 
emergency room care in Saskatoon. He was removed from his 
position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind the minister that nurses have a 
professional obligation to speak out when situations and 
circumstances are jeopardizing patient care, such as a nursing 
shortage. Does the minister believe in this form of censorship? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s statement 
opposite defies credibility when one day they’re advocating 
censorship and the next day they are not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government does not approve of censorship at 
any time. The member says, the member opposite says that the 
approach that I’m taking in this case is not appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker. I wonder what part of consultation and being willing 
to listen he doesn’t approve of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That’s quite an interesting answer, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’ve been advised that the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses made a presentation to the health district back 
in September ’05, outlining the critical shortage in the North 
Battleford hospital and urging the board to take action. There 
has been no action taken since that meeting. 
 
This young nurse had the courage to speak out. This young 
nurse is expecting her second child. Will the minister guarantee 
that her career will not suffer because she spoke out about the 
shortage of nurses in North Battleford? 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The House will come to order. 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have received the letter that the member opposite referred to 
yesterday. I’ve received even another letter from a nurse in 
North Battleford or a worker in the field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both letters refer to the fact that they had read my 
speech in the Chamber here the other day. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
all my years of being in political life at the federal level or 
provincial level I haven’t had too many people in the same 
week say, jeez Len, I listened or read your speech. and I have 

something to say about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone is circulating my speech in the 
Battlefords. I’m pleased about that. I’m happy to stand by the 
comments that I’ve made. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m more than 
happy to receive the comments of those who wish to respond to 
me in that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would just remind the member 
that use of any member’s name, including his own, is 
unparliamentary. The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Right now a union 
representative is with this young nurse speaking on her behalf 
to the media in North Battleford for fear of repercussions 
because she has told the truth. 
 
To the minister once again: can he guarantee that there’ll be no 
repercussions to health care professionals that speak out about 
the health care system? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
said in this Chamber and I’ve said outside this Chamber that I 
value the work that’s being done by the civil servants in this 
province and in particular the work that’s being done by the 
health care field and the nurses working in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has no hit list, unlike that which 
we may have heard about in the past from members opposite. 
Mr. Speaker, we value the contributions of the health care 
professionals, and we want to encourage them to work within 
the system to ensure that it’s the best system possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Timetable for Changes to Corporate Taxation 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week this Minister of Finance said the Vicq report, as it 
applies to corporate taxes, represented a good road map 
forward. But he stopped short of committing to the detailed 
timetable for the implementation measures designed to improve 
Saskatchewan’s competitiveness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance commit today to the 
timetable as outlined by the business tax review committee? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
finance question, how refreshing. All I can say to the member 
opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. One at a time. 
The Minister of Finance. 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to advise the member, as I’ve advised the public, the 
provincial budget will come down on April 6. I will make sure 
that he gets an invitation to be at that budget speech, and he’ll 
have a full answer at that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister says it’s 
refreshing. I’m sure it is after seeing the job numbers that have 
come out, the population numbers, the NDP polling numbers. 
And, Mr. Speaker, he spent the whole week looking through 20 
years of documents to find a document that he had to apologize 
for, Mr. Speaker — not a good start for a Finance minister in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, page 7 of the Vicq report recommends cutting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Order. The 
member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, page 7 of the Vicq report 
recommends cutting corporate income taxes from 17 to 14 per 
cent on July 1, 2006. The report also recommends raising the 
small-business limit from the current $300,000 to $400,000 July 
1 of this year, $450,000 on July 1, ’07, and $500,000 in July 1, 
’08. And the committee recommends that the corporate capital 
tax be cut in half on July 1 and again cut finally on July 1, ’07. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Finance commit to this time 
frame today and bring Saskatchewan’s tax regime into the new 
millennium? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am of course aware of what’s in the business tax review report 
prepared by Jack Vicq and his committee. I have spent a great 
deal of time since I was sworn in as Minister of Finance 
meeting with representatives of the business community and 
individuals in the private sector about this. I can advise the 
member again as I have advised others that on April 6 this 
government will present a plan that will foster investment and 
job growth in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, now that this minister is 
actually reading his briefing notes, it’s encouraging. I think he 
will know, I think he will know, Mr. Speaker, that the world 
doesn’t wait for this socialist government, for this NDP 
government. Alberta doesn’t wait; they’ve cut their taxes. 
Manitoba doesn’t wait; they’ve cut their taxes. Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is being left behind. 
 

This week Alberta announced additional tax cuts. The rate for 
larger corporations will be cut to 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP in Manitoba is phasing out the general corporate capital 
tax. Unless this minister commits to the time table outlined in 
the Vicq report, Saskatchewan will fall farther behind, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Why won’t this minister send a clear signal to business today 
that he will decrease taxes in Saskatchewan to stimulate this 
economy? It’s about time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, Ontario, Manitoba, 
Alberta have all presented their tax plans in their budgets and 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, I will too on April 6. I would welcome if 
the member opposite will maybe read up a little bit on what else 
he’d like to be asking for so we can avoid the horrid spectacle 
we saw last year when he called for — what? — 1 billion, 4 
billion in extra spending immediately after the budget. 
 
If he has other advice, I’m always interested in hearing it. But 
the budget will be brought down on April 6, and we will present 
a plan to continue this province’s investment and job growth. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. I have a 
lot of advice for this Finance minister. Mr. Speaker, last week 
we saw BC [British Columbia], Alberta, Manitoba create record 
job numbers. The NDP, the NDP — and he does need advice on 
this — has posted job losses in each of the last six months. 
 
All the evidence shows, Mr. Speaker, there is something wrong 
with this NDP government’s tax regime. The symptoms show 
that the NDP philosophy isn’t working. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
road map. We have a solution given to us. It seems to work in 
other provinces. Why don’t we try it here, Mr. Speaker? Will 
the minister commit today to the Vicq commission’s timetable 
on tax reform, so we don’t have to be left in the dust by every 
other jurisdiction in the country? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I will commit that on 
April 6 this government will bring down a budget that will 
secure our prosperity, that will secure an environment for 
investment and job growth in this province, and will make 
significant new investments in the communities and the lives of 
working people in this province. And I will invite that member 
today . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order members. Order please. Minister of 
Finance. 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, on April 6 this 
government will bring down a budget that will create an even 
better investment and job-growth climate, that will make 
significant new investments in our social programs, in our 
communities. I will invite that member not only to the budget; I 
will invite him to support that budget when it is . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the minister 
that I don’t need his invitation to be here. The people of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs invited me to be here, and over 
200,000 people across this province invited me to be here, Mr. 
Speaker, for that. 
 
I do have more advice for the minister, but I’d also like to issue 
a challenge. They like to talk about the word challenge. I’d like 
to issue — through you, Mr. Speaker — a challenge to this 
Finance minister. Will he stand in his place today and commit 
to the full corporate package of Vicq in the timelines indicated? 
 
Will he also stand in his place today and reverse the biggest 
broken promise in this government — the $150 million tax 
grab? Will he stand in his place today and commit to that, Mr. 
Speaker? If he will do that, I will give him the credit that he is 
due on budget day. If not, Mr. Speaker, I think we can all agree 
that this budget will be an absolute failure. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
On April 6 I will deliver the budget, but let me ask the member 
this. If this government comes forward with the budget that 
fosters investment in job growth, if it commits to Vicq, my 
question is, will that member stand on his feet and support that 
budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Business Environment 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Shortly after the Vicq 
commission report to this Legislative Assembly was tabled 
here, the Premier was asked for his comments about the report. 
Would he in fact be moving, would his government be moving 
to implement these long-awaited changes, overdue changes for 
our provincial economy? And the Premier said that we ought 
not to underestimate his resolve. That’s what he said. 
 
Then two weeks later or so, three weeks maybe, he’s giving a 
speech to the Saskatchewan Mining Association in Saskatoon 
and says quite clearly that no, no it’s not competitive business 
taxes that we’re going to need in Saskatchewan. It’s that 
businesses — the ones he would have been lecturing that night 
— have to pay more in wages. That’s what he said. It’s a bit of 

two different stories going on here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d like to know from the Premier on behalf of the province, 
on behalf of an economy that needs desperately some leadership 
from his government — which is it? Does he think the 
businesses small and large have to pay more? Or is he going to 
do something about the tax environment in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — First of all, the Leader of the Opposition 
would profit immensely if he was actually to attend one of my 
speeches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Perhaps then he could report accurately 
to this legislature. That said, Mr. Speaker, you’ve heard the 
Minister of Finance this morning. The budget will be delivered 
in this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Finance has indicated again this morning the budget will be 
delivered on April 6 in this Chamber. And the full plan for 
improving investment climate in Saskatchewan, providing jobs 
to our young people, and building the social fabric of 
Saskatchewan will be laid out before this legislature. 
 
I would challenge the Leader of the Opposition, I would 
challenge him this morning: does he have a plan? Well then 
let’s have that Leader of the Opposition instruct his Finance 
critic to lay before this House a shadow budget. Let them set 
out exactly where they would expend the public purse, where 
they would change the taxation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I take my place — and I anticipate 
I’ll have a little further opportunity to speak this morning — but 
before I take my place the Finance critic this morning says 
we’re trailing in the dust. We’re trailing in dust in 
Saskatchewan. Well this is an interesting thing for him to say 
when the city that he and I both represent are hereby headline 
declared “No. 1,” Saskatoon, the “ . . . most competitive place 
to set up new enterprise.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — First, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
Saskatchewan Party’s position on competitive business tax 
rates, he will know what our position is. He can copy our 
position because it made it into the Vicq final 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. It’s right in that report. 
 
In terms of what the Premier has to say at his speeches . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Leader of the Opposition. 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of having to attend one of 
his speeches, we don’t have to attend them, Mr. Speaker, 
because after people hear the Premier talk about the economy, 
they come away giggling, and the first place they call is us, Mr. 
Speaker. And they tell us about his comments, lecturing 
business on paying more and they told us about his very special 
canoe story where we all finished last and that somehow 
epitomizes the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The question is simple. The question is simple. The Premier 
said he supports competitive business taxes. Two weeks later he 
said no, no, business has to pay more in wages. Which is it, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think as events of this 
past week have indicated, the Leader of the Opposition is very 
good at revisionist history. 
 
Now the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that the Vicq 
commission, the Vicq commission was established as a direct 
outcome of the economic summit that this government hosted 
about a year ago — our centennial economic summit where we 
brought together business people, working people, young 
people, Aboriginal people. The only people who boycotted the 
economic summit of the province of Saskatchewan were 
members opposite, the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s where the work began, and the work will 
come to some real fruition and conclusion budget day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But isn’t this interesting? Isn’t this interesting? Now they want 
to talk about the budget which is to come. Why don’t we want 
to talk about events of today? This week, Mr. Speaker, this 
week, Mr. Li Ka-shing, Mr. John Lau, and Husky Oil 
announced their intention to build a $2.3 billion expansion of 
the Lloydminster Upgrader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here are the events 
of today. The events of today are that under this NDP, under 
this socialist government, the policies of this government are 
actually managing to squander an oil and gas boom. We’re 
actually losing jobs, and we’re losing people in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. That’s what’s happening today. 
 
What else is happening today, Mr. Speaker? Well when small 
businesses in this province were recently surveyed by the CFIB 
[Canadian Federation of Independent Business] about the 
business climate that this Premier has given to them in 
Saskatchewan, what did they say? Mr. Speaker, what did they 
answer to the question, do you believe the Saskatchewan 
government has helped create an open-for-business atmosphere 
for the province? Eighty-eight per cent of those small 
businessmen and women say no. 

If we are going to reach our full and quite limitless potential in 
this province, it’ll be driven by the small businessmen and 
women in this province. Eighty-eight per cent of them think this 
government’s got to go. In the meantime we’re stuck with them. 
So what are his plans to fix this situation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this leader and this 
opposition is just not credible. It is just not credible. They will 
boycott an opportunity to sit down with the business community 
of Saskatchewan — with working people, with Aboriginal 
people, and young people — at an economic summit. They’ll 
boycott that opportunity so they can sit outside and take pot 
shots at what the people of Saskatchewan are doing. 
 
And what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is building an economy, 
building a society that will provide a future for our young 
people in this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what they will 
see —this opposition — and what the people of Saskatchewan 
will see when the Minister of Finance stands and delivers the 
budget on April 6. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, why are they so negative? Why 
are they not rejoicing in the fact that the single largest economic 
project has been announced, by Husky Oil, in our province’s 
history? Why are they not rejoicing about the climate that draws 
that? Why are they not rejoicing about the work of KPMG who 
have reviewed cities across North America and have concluded 
that the most competitive cities in the continent are right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Why are they not rejoicing about 
this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know, 
Mr. Speaker. What about the 2,300 people who lost jobs in the 
middle of an oil and gas boom? Why aren’t they rejoicing, Mr. 
Speaker? What about the 2,000-plus people who left 
Saskatchewan in the middle of an oil and gas boom, who had to 
leave to pursue opportunities elsewhere? I wonder why they’re 
not rejoicing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s an unbelievable statement for the Premier to make. I 
wonder why the small businessmen and women of this province 
aren’t rejoicing, Mr. Speaker, because they most assuredly are 
not, under the economic environment we have. 
 
In addition to the information I just informed the House of, the 
small businesses were also asked about their 12-month, 
full-time employment plans. And where do our businesses rank 
in terms of their confidence in creating full-time employment in 
the next 12 months? We are third lowest in the country, with all 
of the potential we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is — we asked it off 
the top — is it competitive business tax rates, or is he going to 
lecture them on paying more, Mr. Speaker? Can they expect 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

some hope now, or do they have to wait for the next election? 
And what a day of rejoicing that will be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The credibility 
of the opposition is at risk here because you see, Mr. Speaker, if 
you understand an economy, you understand its complexity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government understands the complexity of 
economy. We understand about the need to compete and to 
have competitive taxation in this province. We’ve been working 
there and we’re seeing the kind of results in the investment in 
this province. But if you’re a one-trick pony and you think the 
only answer to economic prosperity is taxation cuts, I tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, you must have studied at the Grant Devine school 
of economics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, this 
government does believe in working with our business 
community. To improve the wages for working people, we need 
to be competitive in taxation. We need to be competitive in 
wage rates. We need to be competitive in providing educational 
opportunities and training opportunities. We need to be 
competitive in a society and a fabric of a community that is 
unbreakable, where people can build their families and build 
their homes with confidence and security. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has a broad plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Professor Jack Vicq, who the 
Premier commissioned for this study on the business tax 
review, has said quite clearly that this is the number one issue. 
Certainly there are other elements to an economic plan, none of 
which this government seems to get. But at the top of the list — 
not the Sask Party, not even the CFIB — Jack Vicq, the 
Premier’s own commissioner on the issue has said this is the 
number one issue. 
 
The Premier initially said, don’t doubt my resolve to do 
something about it. A couple of weeks later though he’s 
lecturing business on the fact that they have to pay more 
money. We know what that kind of mixed message has done to 
our business climate. Eighty-eight per cent of businesses think 
we don’t have an open-for-business climate. Twelve-month, 
full-time employment plans, we’re third last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were asked — the businesses were — is your 
business able to compete effectively under the current NDP 
Saskatchewan tax structure, and only 35 per cent said they 
were, Mr. Speaker. If we’re going to create jobs, if we’re going 
to hit the great potential of this province, we’re going to need a 
government that understands how to get that done. It starts with 
the business tax changes in Saskatchewan. Does he have the 
courage to do it, Mr. Speaker? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what part of 
this the Leader of the Opposition does not understand. We’re 
going to deliver a budget here on April 6, and he will see, 
revealed in this legislature, the entire plan of this government to 
encourage investment, to provide new opportunities for our 
young people, and to build a social fabric, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has gone to the 
public. He’s come to this Chamber. He’s essentially got two 
planks, two planks. He said you will build an economy. You 
will build a future for Saskatchewan families, one, if you 
simply cut the taxes and, two, if you rid this province of some 
of its labour protections for working people — hard-won 
protection — because that’s the two-point plan. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not credible. That plan does not . . . 
that’s not credible in any economic circle that’s looking at the 
whole complexity of an economy and a society. I’ll tell you, I’ll 
take the word of the Royal Bank of Canada way before the 
word of the opposition leader. The Royal Bank of Canada says 
this economy is going to grow 3.9 per cent next year. And what 
is the headline, Mr. Speaker? The headline, boom time’s 
coming. That’s what’s coming. Boom time’s coming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 

Expansion of Husky Lloydminster Upgrader 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I’m pleased to rise to announce positive results from 
our government’s investment attraction initiatives. As you 
know, our government has been working hard to promote our 
province as a great place to live, work, and do business. 
 
We’ve got a creative strategy to attract investment, not only 
from local investors but also from investors beyond our borders. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s working very well. It’s projected that 
private sector investment in Saskatchewan will rise by 9 per 
cent this year, which is the third highest in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, Team Saskatchewan has been 
an integral part of our investment attraction programs. We’ve 
been travelling beyond our borders to tell the world about our 
province in a positive way, Mr. Speaker. We’re telling the 
world in a positive way about the excellent products produced 
by our companies, about the opportunities in our oil and gas and 
mining industries, and about the cutting-edge research in 
biotechnology and the work done at the synchrotron and at the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre. 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, the Team Saskatchewan missions have led to 
ongoing discussions with industry and government, with a 
number of trade delegations from abroad visiting Saskatchewan 
and making contacts for what we hope will result in positive 
business opportunities. 
 
In October 2005 the Premier had the opportunity to meet 
directly with Mr. Li Ka-shing, chairman of Husky’s parent 
company in Hong Kong. The Premier talked about our oil and 
gas industry, about our ethanol initiative, and about our 
transportation and telecommunication systems. Officials from 
the government have been working with Husky and its parent 
company since that time to discuss these issues and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce to this House that Husky 
announced on March 20 it will now proceed with engineering 
plans to expand the Lloydminster Upgrader. It will take 15 to 
18 months to complete all of the engineering work before the 
$2.3 billion expansion will take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the largest 
private sector investments in the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And it’s a positive story, Mr. Speaker, and 
it should be celebrated. 
 
There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that one of the contributing 
factors in moving along the upgrader expansion was the 
networking done during the Team Saskatchewan mission. We 
value our relationship with Husky. It is through these types of 
initiatives we’re able to build relationships, make connections, 
and talk about the opportunities available in this province. 
 
Husky’s announcement shows our business attraction initiatives 
are bringing investment to the province. And it’s because we 
are a good place to do business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we want to make it better. We’ve been 
doing work to create a positive business climate and will 
continue to do more in the upcoming budget. 
 
How good a place are we to do business, Mr. Speaker? Just ask 
KPMG, which this week rated Saskatchewan cities among the 
top in North America for low business costs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Or ask the Fraser Institute, which released 
a report on mining and rated our province as one of the best 
jurisdictions in the world to do business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Husky’s announcement reminds us of the strong oil and gas 
industry that is fuelling our economy, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
providing 25,000 jobs in communities across our province. It’s 
supporting cutting-edge research at the Petroleum Technology 
Research Centre that is attracting interest from around the 
world. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s contributing to this great province 

of Saskatchewan, contributing to our quality of life that is 
second to none. I want to thank the people, business 
researchers, and others from across Saskatchewan who are 
joining our government to work hard on our business attraction 
initiatives. We also want to wish Husky well in its upcoming 
expansion work. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise today to respond to the Minister of Industry and 
Resources regarding Husky Energy’s initiative and their 
projected investment there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to boast about the work Team 
Saskatchewan does outside our borders, and I don’t blame them 
for promoting Saskatchewan because it is a great place to live 
and Saskatchewan people in all of our minds are the best in the 
world. But Mr. Speaker, I can only imagine the trouble this 
minister has in selling this government’s record when it comes 
to business, whether it’s the ill-conceived policy directives like 
government-directed hours, that they have the most onerous 
business taxation regime in all of Canada, or in fact sending 
fundraising letters that claim businesses see a successful 
provincial economy and it wants to take it over. It shows a 
government that claims it likes business and then turns around 
and can portray it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I would ask members on 
both sides of the House to refrain from side debates so that we 
can hear the words of the member for Lloydminster. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, it shows this government that 
claims that it likes business. It can turn right around and portray 
them as evil when it suits them. The official opposition has long 
touted the natural advantages of our province. But we have for a 
long time heard from members of the NDP the lowering of 
expectations and the message of mediocrity and the status quo. 
 
We are very pleased to hear that Husky has announced plans to 
expand their upgrader in Lloydminster but I must emphasize 
again, it is Husky Energy’s initiative. You might not conclude 
that listening to both the minister and the Premier. 
 
It will create new jobs in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan 
people and support the further Husky oil production in that area. 
And it leaves one to think what could happen, what could 
happen, if these initiatives that are offered through these select 
industries is extended to the entire Saskatchewan economy with 
for instance the implementation of the Vicq report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record and the brand of this NDP is actually 
one of being unfriendly to those who create jobs in this 
province, to those who risk their own money into the 
Saskatchewan economy, and even to those who would choose 
to raise their families here. But we do extend our thanks to 
those like Husky Energy and others who contribute to our great 
province by creating the jobs directly for Saskatchewan people. 
Thank you. 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? Ministerial statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Ministerial statements. The Chair recognizes 
the Minister for Community Resources. 
 

Need for Foster Families in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, foster families are one of the most important roles 
in our society in caring for children and in helping them 
maintain connections with their own family, extended families, 
and their communities. There are currently about 750 foster 
homes in Saskatchewan providing care for approximately 1,750 
children and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Community Resources oversees 
foster care in the province and works jointly with the 
Saskatchewan Foster Families Association to provide that 
support and training to foster parents. 
 
As the Minister of DCR [Department of Community Resources] 
I want to extend my sincere and heartfelt thanks to each and 
every one of the foster families for their generous and caring 
contributions to helping children and families across the 
province. This is very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we’re looking at ways to get more foster homes. We are 
trying to seek out approximately 150 more foster homes that are 
needed right now to provide a positive home environment for 
children who cannot live at home. To answer this need, Mr. 
Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan has kicked off a 
campaign to recruit more foster families. The campaign 
includes billboards, radio spots, and other initiatives at the 
provincial and regional levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, foster parents come from all walks of life with 
different cultural, education, and economic backgrounds. We 
are very interested in recruiting Aboriginal foster families as 
well as those who are able to care for children with special 
needs. 
 
We recognize that public campaigns alone are not enough. Staff 
at DCR are continually looking and doing work at the local 
level to recruit more foster families and more foster homes. 
This includes making community presentations, setting up 
booths in malls and at community events and, Mr. Speaker, 
talking one-on-one with people. And this work will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, foster care is an area close to my heart. As a new 
Minister for Community Resources, I’ll be exploring 
opportunities in the near future to enhance foster care in 
Saskatchewan. This is a priority for me and my government. 
The fact that more homes are needed to care for children is 
very, very important. 
 
But I also want to say just how important the experience can be 
for the families who provide foster care. Many foster parents 
have told me how important their experience has been, how rich 

their experience has been. 
 
Yesterday morning I had the opportunity to meet Kevin Harris, 
a local foster parent here in the city, who is currently providing 
foster care for two other children. What’s interesting is that Mr. 
Harris has six children of his own. So why do he and his wife 
take in other children? Mr. Speaker, he tells me it is because of 
the rewards they experience in helping other children. In fact he 
considers one of the birth mothers of the child currently in his 
care as part of his own family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is testament that Saskatchewan does indeed 
have a big heart. The need for more foster homes is there and I 
know that there are many caring people around the province 
that have wonderful homes that they can share with children. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan that a 
child needs a home like yours. Please rise to the challenge and 
consider being a foster parent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m privileged to 
have the opportunity to respond to the ministerial statement and 
I want to thank the minister for getting this to me 10 minutes 
ago so we would have a lot of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fortunately I also take this issue very seriously and 
understand it. And not even being the minister, I have met with 
this group six times in the last six months. I’ve had the 
opportunity to visit their office, meet with their director, meet 
with their board, and to try to work with foster families and the 
foster family association to improve the situation of foster 
families across this great province. 
 
You know, one of the issues with foster families is that you 
have to look at the whole problem. It’s not just one issue. It’s 
how do we get to the position where we’re in. And one of those 
issues becomes from addiction. 
 
In the state of North Dakota, I just want to mention that with 
crystal meth addiction, one of the greatest things that’s on the 
rise in that state is that foster families are up 25 per cent. A 
terrible statistic — a statistic that means that families are no 
longer able to care for their children due to addictions. 
 
And where do we see this as part of Project Hope? Where do 
we see the correlation between these? Nowhere. Because really, 
truly it is project no hope. 
 
[11:00] 
 
You know, I’ve met with foster care families and we know, we 
know the tragic circumstances from which these people are 
dealing with. We know that homes that are designed for a 
maximum of four people have ten children in the home. We 
know that’s happening today. That minister knows it’s 
happening today. And the previous minister knew it was 
happening. 
 
And how long has it been going on, Mr. Minister? Not for two 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

months — for years. Now we’re having a campaign to expand 
on it, and I congratulate that. But we’re always reactive. Why 
aren’t we proactive in these situations? 
 
When it comes to the number of children, how about the safety 
of these children when we have ten in a home designed for 
four? Are we screening the children? Are we intermixing 
children that have behavioural problems, sexual problems, with 
other children? What type of training and support? 
 
I know for a fact that most of these foster families are underpaid 
for the work they do. They struggle. They have no ability to 
provide not only the basic needs of food and clothing on the 
money that they get, but for other issues with these children, to 
get them into sports, activities, recreational things — no, not at 
all. You know, why do we have 44,000 children living below 
the poverty line in this province that’s on a boom? So why do 
we have foster families? And why do we have the majority of 
them living right in the Premier’s riding? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the minister is beaking off over there 
and can say it. But he hasn’t met with them and I have, you 
know. You know, they lack funding. The workers that work 
within the foster care . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I would ask 
members who . . . Order please. The member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the member 
isn’t hearing is that we’re asking for more money for foster 
parents’ association, for the great people that run and 
implement those organizations, for the people that work, and for 
the families that look after them. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting as one of the things 
we’re doing is we’re advertising on television. We’re 
advertising on billboards. We’re doing all this advertising. But I 
noticed that there’s one distinct area missing, and it seems to be 
missing in all these government agendas. And that’s in the 
faith-based community. It must be a terrible word to say, that in 
a faith-based . . . We can’t have faith-based drug addiction 
treatment centres although the current system that the two 
government houses run under 12-step program, by the way, are 
faith based to a higher power. 
 
You know, in meeting with the foster parents’ care association 
in some of the issues that we’re dealing with, one of the issues 
we’re having is some of these children are FAS [fetal alcohol 
syndrome], autistic, dealing with drug addictions. 
 
Not only is there a plan needed to get these children foster care 
families, but where is the plan to take them back and get them 
into their own families and to heal the families from which they 
came? There is no plan for that. It’s okay to look after the 
children, but what about the families from which they came 
from? You know we recognize that there’s a need for these type 
of campaigns. We recognize that there’s an extension needed to 
this serious problem in our community and our families and in 
our cultures, except we don’t want to incorporate faith-based 
organizations to this from which I don’t understand. 
 
You know we say no one is left behind. Well that’s not true 

because you can’t have 10 children in a home and say no one’s 
left behind. You can’t take them from parents who are under 
distress or addicted or whatever issues the parents are dealing 
with, not deal with the parents, and then say no one’s left 
behind. 
 
You know I want to say to the minister, I certainly support the 
initiative, but I hope that in this budget that’s upcoming we also 
see funding for this organization, a dramatic increase . . . Am I 
on a time limit, Mr. Speaker? Is there a time limit on this? 
Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I hope that in the current budget that we 
have funding for these organizations and for the funding that 
people that run the organization and for an expansion, but more 
so for a coordinated plan across all departments of government 
that deal with these issues from a social aspect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be looking very seriously at the budget 
when it comes and to what this minister is going to do in cash 
dollars into foster parents’ associations and foster parents’ 
families. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the . . . Order please. Order. Why is 
the member from Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Yorkton wishes to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to the House for the opportunity to introduce. Sitting 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a young man by the name of 
Ryan Bater. Mr. Bater is currently working as an economic 
development officer out of North Battleford, and he has done 
extensive work with the coming together of three regions in that 
part of Saskatchewan. He is their chief executive officer and has 
not only been working on building a strong rural economy out 
there, but in fact has been serving under an advisory committee 
that I have, Mr. Speaker, in helping strengthen the REDAs 
[regional economic development authority] across the province, 
and make recommendations to how we could build a stronger 
rural economy in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s young men, Mr. Speaker, like Mr. Bater and others 
who have made a tremendous contribution to the work of rural 
Saskatchewan. And I want to recognize Mr. Bater for being in 
the House today, to extend my appreciation for the good work 
that he does, not only in his region but for making a difference 
for rural Saskatchewan in the work that we do on rural 
economic development. And ask all members of the House to 
recognize him and thank him for the good work that he does for 
Saskatchewan people today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Return No. 572 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll convert to motions 
returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you repeat please, sir? I couldn’t hear 
it. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Convert to motions returnable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. Converted . . . 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Return debatable, sorry. 
 
The Speaker: — 572 has been converted. 
 

Return No. 573 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Return for motions debatable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The 573 converted to orders return debatable. 
 

Return No. 574 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, return for motions debatable. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been converted to orders for return 
debatable. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling Regarding Preambles in Motions 
 

The Speaker: — Before calling on the member for Saskatoon 
Silver Springs, I wish to advise the member that his motion for 
a 75-minute debate contains a preamble. The motion begins 
with the phrase: 
 

That since the Saskatchewan Business Tax Review 
Committee of 2005 concluded that Saskatchewan’s 
business tax structure is outdated and poorly suited to deal 
with the competitive challenges of today and of the future 
. . . 

 
Notwithstanding the generally relaxed practice of this Assembly 
when it comes to private members’ motions, this phrase falls 
into the category of a preamble. 
 
It is a long-standing practice of this Assembly that preambles 
are out of order unless in a formal or non-contentious motion. 
For instance, whereas clauses have been permitted in formal 
constitutional motions put before this Assembly such as the 
Meech Lake Accord. Otherwise when motions have contained 

obvious preambles, the motions have been ruled out of order. 
 
Therefore, given the discretion of the Speaker to modify 
motions with respect to form under Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules & Forms 6th Edition, paragraph 566 (4), I 
modify the motion by eliminating the preamble. The new 
motion then without the preamble will read as: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to act on the 
corporate tax reform recommendations of the business tax 
review committee in this budget year adhering to the 
implementation schedule, and further, 
 
That this Assembly urge the government to reduce the 
PST [provincial sales tax] to 6 per cent in this budget year 
and defer further sales tax reform as recommended by the 
business tax review committee. 
 

The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Taxation Policies and Recommendations of the Business 
Tax Review Committee 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I put forward this motion and enter into this 
debate. I appreciate the Speaker’s advisement on the motion, 
and certainly we will change our motion accordingly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to do today as I enter into this 
debate is talk about five things: talk about the background, the 
Saskatchewan economy, and where we’re at presently; and to 
go on to talk about what the Saskatchewan Party’s solution is to 
this situation, Mr. Speaker; then to go on to talk about what 
Saskatchewan businesses have to say, those that create the jobs 
in our province, those jobs that are so needed here to keep our 
young people in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ll go on and talk about what the businesses have to say, 
what the Vicq commission has to say, Mr. Speaker. The Vicq 
commission is very telling. The Vicq commission is very, very 
telling in what exactly they have to say. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
go on and talk about what this minister, this Finance minister 
and this government and this cabinet have to say, and it isn’t a 
pretty story, Mr. Speaker. And then we want to conclude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s start with talking about the facts, examine the 
background. A good place to start about with the facts is 
KPMG’s tax facts book of 2005-2006. And I know the minister 
and others in the Chamber would want to hear this information. 
Let’s start with major tax rates, 2005, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 
compare where Saskatchewan is. Are we competitive, Mr. 
Speaker? I’ll let members make that decision on their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the corporate income tax rate in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and compare it to other provinces in this 
country. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, the corporate income tax 
rate, 17 per cent, the highest in the country. Mr. Speaker, we 
heard yesterday Alberta is lowering theirs from 11.5 per cent to 
10 per cent. We are at 17 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact for small businesses — those that create 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

many of the jobs in this province — the rates are even less 
competitive. On those making $300,000 or more — and I know 
members will want to hear this — in Saskatchewan the tax rate 
is 17 per cent. In Manitoba, yes, Mr. Speaker, in NDP Manitoba 
that tax rate is 4 per cent, and in Alberta it’s 3 per cent. No 
wonder Saskatchewan businesses are having trouble creating 
jobs. 
 
Let’s talk about the capital tax, Mr. Speaker, the largest capital 
tax in the country, and as Mr. Vicq has pointed out to us, the 
largest capital tax in North America — point six of 1 per cent 
. . . Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Finance minister and 
others say, come invest in Saskatchewan. This is the place to do 
business. And when you start doing that, the first thing you’ll 
get from this government — not even a congratulatory letter for 
coming here — is a tax bill, Mr. Speaker. That’s the shame of it 
all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can go on and talk about these tax rates, and I know my 
colleagues and members opposite will want to do that. But let’s 
look at what it is resulting in, what it is doing to our economy in 
the province, what are the consequences. 
 
And my hon. friend says, Mr. Speaker . . . well here it is, the 
“Sixth Straight Month of Job Losses under Calvert NDP 
[government].” It’s “Like an Anchor Holding Saskatchewan 
Back.” Mr. Speaker, it’s shameful. Twenty-three hundred and 
fifty-six people have left this province. Well we have a problem 
here; that’s for sure. And that’s the government opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Four thousand less jobs. Manitoba created 4,000 jobs. Alberta 
created 40-some-thousand jobs. BC created thousands and 
thousands of jobs. What happened to this province, Mr. 
Speaker? We are being left behind. We are. 
 
The parents who are seeing their kids leave this province, they 
are being left behind. And this entire province is being left 
behind because other jurisdictions are choosing to move 
forward and not dithering like this government is doing, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s shameful. And that’s where we are. And that’s the 
background that we have to talk about today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier today entered into the debate, and 
that’s always a good thing when he can defend his own actions. 
And we were glad to see that he tried to enter the debate today. 
He said that we should come up with a shadow budget in the 
next few days. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have news for the members opposite and 
for the Premier. Ten months ago we came up with that 
information, Mr. Speaker. We were the first group to make a 
presentation to the Vicq commission. Back on May 10 — and I 
know the Deputy Premier will be very interested in this — May 
10, 2005 in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, Canada, when the business 
tax review committee had their first hearings, the Saskatchewan 
Party made the first presentation, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party was the only party to make a presentation 
— the only party in Saskatchewan that took it seriously enough 
to make that presentation. 
 
And I know that the Deputy Premier was interested in that. I 
know because articles appeared in his paper that he referenced 

in this House later on, Mr. Speaker. It’s unfortunate that he 
couldn’t convince his party, his members opposite, his Finance 
minister — whichever one it was at the time — to actually 
make a presentation. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we didn’t hear anything from that NDP 
government. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t even take it seriously 
enough to make a presentation. So, Mr. Speaker, for the 
Premier’s benefit and members opposite, I want to go through 
that presentation that was made in Yorkton some 10 months ago 
where this party, this opposition not only criticizes but comes 
forward with alternatives and proposals — with a plan, Mr. 
Speaker, with a plan for sure. We’re not afraid of targets, 
Madam Speaker, we’re not afraid of goals, and we’re not afraid 
of putting the policies in place that will reach those goals. 
 
So let’s go through them, Madam Speaker. Reduce the 
small-business tax to zero per cent on the first $400,000 of net 
income over four years. Now, Madam Speaker, that sounds like 
an innovative idea but it is being done in other provinces. Other 
provinces are going ahead with that but, Madam Speaker, we 
are far away from that with this government in this province 
and that’s a shame. 
 
Madam Speaker, 10 months ago we said, reduce the corporate 
income tax from 17 per cent down to 11.5 per cent over four 
years. That would have had us match Alberta. But no, Madam 
Speaker, this government did nothing. They did nothing over 
the last year, and what happens? The world doesn’t stand still 
for socialist NDP governments. Alberta is moving along; 
Manitoba is moving along. Alberta announced today they are 
lowering their rate to 10 per cent. That’s what happens in a 
competitive marketplace. This government has no idea about 
what happens in that circumstance and their actions show that 
they don’t. 
 
We talked about expanding the manufacturing and processing 
profits tax reduction to include resource companies, Madam 
Speaker. What did the government do? Government hasn’t done 
anything on that. At least Jack Vicq and his committee were 
listening. They listened to the Saskatchewan Party and that’s 
why, Madam Speaker, we are so supportive of the work that 
Jack Vicq and his committee have done. They’ve done their 
homework. This government doesn’t have a plan. Jack Vicq 
gave them a plan. He handed the plan to them. It remains to be 
seen whether they will actually act upon that plan. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, we had eight recommendations that we 
put forward to the Vicq commission back 10 months ago. 
Eliminate the corporate capital tax on new investment for the 
first four years. Just eliminate it right now. It’s a new-growth 
tax cut. It’s something that the Leader of the Opposition has 
been talking about, and again it’s been falling on deaf ears over 
there. But Jack Vicq picked up on it. Jack Vicq saw enough 
information. 
 
And I know that the former Finance minister is listening 
closely. And I know . . . you know, frankly, I might have had 
more confidence in the former Finance minister to do the right 
thing than the current Finance minister. It’s a close race, 
Madam Speaker, but from what I’ve seen so far of this current 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

Finance minister, I think the former Finance minister was on the 
right track. 
 
Reverse the decision to impose the resource surcharges on 
income trusts. Now I know neither one of the Finance ministers 
on that side really enjoyed hearing about this one, but that’s 
what Saskatchewan companies are looking for, Madam 
Speaker. That’s what they want in this province, and it’s about 
time somebody in that government starts listening. 
 
Phase out the corporate capital tax on general corporations and 
resource corporations over four years. Just get rid of it. It’s an 
antiquated tax. It’s a dinosaur tax. It’s getting removed across 
North America. Those that even had it, those that even 
considered having it, they’re getting rid of it. Even the federal 
government is getting rid of it, Madam Speaker, so it’s about 
time. It’s about time. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to go on to talk a little bit about what 
Saskatchewan companies are saying in this province about 
doing business in Saskatchewan. Do you believe Saskatchewan 
government has created an open-for-business atmosphere in the 
province? Madam Speaker, 88 per cent of the companies — 
some of those companies in the constituencies of the very 
members opposite — 88 per cent of them say it’s not right to do 
business in Saskatchewan under this type of government. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business has done 
their survey. They’ve surveyed members across this province 
and the results are dismal, Mr. Speaker. The CFIB goes on to 
talk about doing business in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 
companies have a 17 per cent increased tax load as compared to 
the average across Saskatchewan. So not even are we keeping 
up to the average. We should be leading the way across the 
country, Madam Speaker. Seventeen per cent deficit compared 
to other provinces across the country as far as doing business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Can small and medium enterprises compete effectively in 
Saskatchewan? Is your business able to compete effectively 
under the current Saskatchewan tax structure? Fifty-two per 
cent, Madam Speaker, say no. The majority of the businesses in 
Saskatchewan say they can’t compete under this structure. It’s 
just not a way to improve Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Madam Speaker, I could go on and on quoting from this survey. 
The high priority issues . . . Saskatchewan businesses were 
asked, and I know members are very, very interested in hearing 
this. What’s the highest priority for Saskatchewan businesses, 
the highest concern that they have? What are they concerned 
with the most? The total tax burden — 86.3 per cent of all 
businesses in Saskatchewan are concerned with the total tax 
burden in this province, Madam Speaker. That’s general 
information. That’s general studies that’s taken from businesses 
across Saskatchewan. That’s what they have to say. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to quote from the Fraser Institute. The 
Minister of Industry and Resources, he rose in his spot today 
and talked about the Fraser Institute. Well what did they have to 
say about Saskatchewan, Madam Speaker? The minister 
conveniently didn’t mention this when he was talking about it. 
He said: 
 

Most jurisdictions in Canada have performed reasonably 
well on this indicator . . . [of corporate income tax;] only 
Saskatchewan and Newfoundland failed to score . . . [50 
per cent.] 
 

We failed in that regard, Madam Speaker, and that’s a real 
shame. That’s the Fraser Institute. And I know that members 
opposite don’t like to even debate issues that come forward 
from an economic think tank. But just to set the record straight, 
this is the portion that the Minister of Industry and Resources 
forgot to mention. 
 
Well let’s get a little closer to home, Madam Speaker. A little 
bit closer to home, but not quite in our province. Let’s hear 
what Todd Hirsch has to say. You know, his article titled “The 
Western Economy Project.” He goes on and I want to quote 
him, because he talks about what it’s like to do business in 
Saskatchewan. He says: 
 

Another reason for . . . skepticism is that taxes remain high 
in Saskatchewan. [True.] . . . personal income tax rates 
have come down, but [they] are still higher than in Alberta 
and other provinces. The provincial sales tax annoys 
people. Business taxes and the regulatory environment are 
onerous, and . . . [the] business community . . . [in 
Saskatchewan is right] in complaining [about it] . . . 

 
[All of] these additional taxes weigh heavily on [the] 
average income earners, boom or no boom. 
 

And Madam Speaker, this is the line that I like the most from 
Mr. Hirsch. Here’s what he compares doing business in 
Saskatchewan. He said: 
 

[It’s] like [having] a picnic in the rain: no matter how good 
the food is, [you still] . . . get wet. 
 

Now, Madam Speaker, it’s a good line. You know, it’s a funny 
phrase but it’s very accurate of what it’s like to do business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a lot to be proud of here, but with this NDP 
government it’s like having a picnic in the rain. It’s like having 
a picnic in the rain. It’s like having a picnic in the rain and the 
Deputy Premier forgets to bring his umbrella. Madam Speaker, 
we hope that they are able to change this in the next little while. 
 
Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker, the Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce, let’s hear what they have to say about this 
government. I’m told that I’m going to be running out of time, 
Madam Speaker, but I’d like to get on to what the chamber of 
commerce has to say, what the NSBA [North Saskatoon 
Business Association] has to say. And as you can see, I have a 
lot more that I’d like to talk about today. But, Madam Speaker, 
let’s get to the motion at hand and entertain the debate and hear 
where we go from here. 
 
Madam Speaker, I would like to put forward the motion today, 
seconded by my hon. friend and colleague, the member for 
Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to act on the 
corporate tax reform recommendations of the business tax 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

review committee in this budget year, adhering to the 
implementation schedule; and further, 
 
that this Assembly urge the government to reduce the PST 
to 6 per cent in this budget year and defer further sales tax 
reform as recommended by the business tax review 
committee. 
 

I so present, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It’s been moved by the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs and seconded by the member from 
Canora-Pelly, the motion before the Assembly. Take it as read? 
I would then recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into 
today’s debate about the future of Saskatchewan. Because as 
clearly indicated by the Vicq report and the position taken by so 
many individuals and so many different groups in the province 
of Saskatchewan when they were making their presentations to 
that committee, as my colleague has indicated, the 
Saskatchewan Party was very active in putting forward a plan 
that we believed was something that should be looked at. And 
we see almost an entire adoption of the plan put forward by the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to look at the 
comments in the Vicq report. And I think that’s what has to be 
highlighted so that not only people in Saskatchewan can see 
how important it is, but the Deputy Premier of this province 
might recognize that this is a very important topic. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, from the press release of the Vicq 
report — and I quote from that press release — it says this: 
 

A consensus emerged during our consultations that 
Saskatchewan’s business tax structure was clearly 
uncompetitive and outdated. 
 

That is the first statement that was in that press release, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. So you can see that as the different committee 
members listened to the presentations that were put forward, 
they recognized that Saskatchewan is uncompetitive and that 
we’re getting left behind. 
 
We listen to the lip service that the NDP members make to 
various topics that we’ve debated in this Legislative Assembly. 
And, you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is an example of 
one. They have been talking about the fact that Saskatchewan 
should not be left behind, but their policies continue to ensure 
that that in fact is exactly what happens. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, Vice-Chair Charlie Baldock also 
stated in that press release, and I quote again: 
 

Our . . . [dependence] on corporate taxes — highlighted by 
the highest provincial general tax rates on corporate 
income and capital — is a major disincentive to 
investment and job creation in the province. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a clear admission why 
this province in the middle of a boom, in the middle of one of 
the highest oil prices that we will probably ever see, this 
province continues to lose population. It continues to lose jobs. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, if you take a look at the statistics 
for the province of Saskatchewan, you will note that we have 
one of the worst per capita numbers for the age group 25 to 40. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, those are the people that are the job 
creators. They’re the business owners. They’re the people who 
have families. They’re the entrepreneurs. They’re going to build 
this province. And we have the worst statistic in all of Canada 
in that age group. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, those are the people that will be 
paying consumption taxes. They will be paying food taxes. 
They’ll be paying liquor consumption tax. They’ll be paying all 
kinds of taxes, fuel taxes, to this province. But you know what? 
We are the worst in Saskatchewan. We are the worst in 
Saskatchewan. So it’s time that this government recognizes that 
there are concerns. 
 
And, you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, as my colleague 
indicated, one of the first meetings was in the city of Yorkton. 
And the Yorkton Chamber of Commerce made a presentation, 
and I want to enter into the record the quotation from the 
Yorkton Chamber of Commerce as found in the final report of 
the business tax review. And it says this: 
 

A change in the mix of the business taxes is a flawed 
approach. Any changes that are made to the business taxes 
that do not make Saskatchewan more competitive will 
provide the same results we currently have, which is 
growth that is behind and substandard to our competitors. 

 
[11:30] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, that was one of the first presentations 
made on behalf of many people on the eastern side of the 
province. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we can see the effect 
of a tax that is holding back development. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, that tax of course is corporate capital tax. 
 
We have talked about one of the worst corporate taxes in this 
province, and that’s property tax. The Deputy Premier 
recognizes full well what property tax does. He was the minister 
of Learning a number of years ago, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I notice that the Deputy Premier wants to enter into the 
debate. And I’m sure he’ll get his opportunity to justify why 
there are businesses on the east side of the province who are 
looking at their investment, looking at the fact that, due to the 
agricultural crisis currently in the province, they will find out 
that in fact they’re still going to have to pay a corporate capital 
tax because they haven’t made any money. 
 
You know . . . and that’s the irony, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
When we take a look at comparing ourselves to Alberta, 
comparing ourselves to Manitoba . . . As the Deputy Premier 
knows, we’re very close to Manitoba. And he should look at the 
fact that Manitoba is leaving Saskatchewan behind. Manitoba 
has just indicated that they’re going to be reducing their 
corporate capital tax rate from decimal six per cent to decimal 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

three per cent. What a change, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I know it’s rather difficult for you to 
hear me. But I’m sure with my voice being as, you know, I 
think as strong as it is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Strong. Very strong. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you to the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone for that compliment. I’ll continue to speak even 
though the Deputy Premier continues to chirp from his seat, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look at Above Board 
Straw. Let’s take a look at the company trying to develop a 
business in the constituency of Canora-Pelly. Above Board 
Straw has major investors from the United States. One of their 
worst obstacles that they have just encountered, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, as the first fiscal year ended on December 31, 2005, is 
now the payment of provincial sales tax. They have brought 
millions of dollars worth of capital investment into a plant near 
Kamsack, Saskatchewan. And now the CEO [chief executive 
officer] has indicated to me that he has to self-declare the PST 
on all investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
The reaction by the investors out of the United States has been, 
why did we choose Saskatchewan? Why didn’t we choose 
Alberta? If we’d have known about this and done all of this 
calculations, we wouldn’t have decided to come to 
Saskatchewan. We may have decided to go to Alberta. And that 
is the situation that this government has to recognize because, 
you know, the PST exemption, the PST that will be eligible to 
be given back to the company is only when the company is 
profitable. That’s what the situation is — only when the 
company is profitable will they have an opportunity . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There are a few members that 
are entering into a side debate across the floor. I’d ask them to 
enter into the debate at another time, and I recognize the 
member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m going to 
quote from the Vicq report. And it says this: 
 

. . . most groups noted that [if] the application of PST to 
capital investments was very very harmful [it was very 
harmful] to economic growth. 

 
The members, I’m surely are not going to disagree with the 
Vicq report in saying that. And a further comment in the report 
says this: 
 

This affects new enterprises the most by increasing the 
capital required to start-up the business. It was strongly 
recommended that the PST on capital purchases be 
removed . . . 

 
And that’s the point that I’ve been making, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, is here we have an example of an entity that wants to 
develop in Saskatchewan. It wants to develop a strawboard 
plant near Kamsack. It has the technology. It has the capital 
investment. It has moved all of its equipment, but this 
government has created an obstacle for it. It has created an 

obstacle for it in comparison to other provinces. We’re not in 
the game. And I think that that’s what Jack Vicq recognized 
when he said that we are uncompetitive. We have to get into the 
game, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s also very interesting to note the 
headline in today’s paper that says “Alberta beats Saskatchewan 
in the big race to cut business tax.” Here again we’re going to 
finish behind the incentives that other provinces are moving on. 
So let’s take a look at Alberta, a tax rate now reduced to 10 per 
cent. We’re still at 17 per cent. We now look at Manitoba who 
has just reduced its corporate capital tax from decimal six per 
cent to decimal three per cent. By the way, Alberta doesn’t even 
have that tax; it’s zero. And then we look at the situation as to 
how do we attract investors and how do we attract 
entrepreneurs to Saskatchewan. 
 
Well there are some simple things that can be done, and I think 
very clearly Jack Vicq and the committee should be 
commended for laying that foundation, for putting in place 
recommendations, for putting in place a time frame that should 
be followed to make Saskatchewan competitive because that’s 
what will encourage investment. And I stand before you, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to say I am pleased and proud to 
support and second the motion put forward by my colleague. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. And I’m very pleased to enter into this debate in 
which, listening to the opposition, people might think that there 
was no economic growth in Saskatchewan. They might think 
that, listening to the gloom and doom we hear from them, 
Madam Speaker. And I think it’s important to remember that if 
we look at the economic growth occurring in our economy — 
last year, Madam Speaker, 2005 — the economy of 
Saskatchewan grew by 3.8 per cent, one of the best records in 
the country. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, this year private sector forecasters say 
the economy of Saskatchewan will grow by 3.9 per cent. 
Madam Speaker, that’s almost an 8 per cent increase in the size 
of the Saskatchewan economy over two years. And those 
people stand up and say you can’t have economic growth under 
the taxation policy of this government. It’s not true, Madam 
Speaker. It is not true. 
 
They say, as they put out their not-credible gloom and doom, 
Madam Speaker, that there’s no private sector investment in 
Saskatchewan. Well, Madam Speaker, this year private sector 
investment is projected to rise by more than 9 per cent in 
Saskatchewan, businesses investing in Saskatchewan. And yet, 
Madam Speaker, they say that there’s no growth in 
Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now one of the 
members says, we’re so far behind. Madam Speaker, we’re 
going to have the third highest rate of private sector investment 
increase in Canada this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — They will not recognize it, Madam 
Speaker, because they have no credibility. They have one 
objective, and that is to continually trash this province, Madam 
Speaker. And I want to say to the members opposite over there 
that I had people telephoning me, business people from Alberta, 
after the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party spoke in Calgary at 
one of his fundraising dinners which is where he gets his 
money, Madam Speaker. They could not believe how negative 
the Leader of the Opposition could be speaking about our 
province. 
 
And I say, I say shame for that, Madam Speaker. I say shame. 
And you know they like to get up and some of them quote Todd 
Hirsch, the economist from the Canada West Foundation. And 
what did he say, Madam Speaker? This is what he said. He said 
the Saskatchewan economy was on a roll, but we had a problem 
with attitude. And he said this: we need to shed our gloomy 
attitude. 
 
Where does that attitude come from, Madam Speaker? That 
gloom and doom is led by the cheerleaders of gloom and doom 
in the Saskatchewan Party over there, Madam Speaker. And 
you know what, Madam Speaker? There are lots of people in 
this province — I know lots of people in this province of all 
political persuasions, and I’m not afraid to say it — who are 
sick and tired of listening to their unending complaining and 
gloom and doom. They’re sick and tired of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because there are those of us, Madam 
Speaker, on this side of the House and there are hundreds of 
thousands of people across Saskatchewan who are proud of this 
province, Madam Speaker, who do not spend every waking 
hour complaining about how bad they think things are in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I have this to say to that opposition. They say as if they are 
some kind of creators of the Vicq commission, that the taxation 
recommendations of the Vicq commission should be 
implemented by the Minister of Finance in the budget. They say 
that as if the Vicq commission is some kind of stranger to this 
government. Who appointed the commission, Madam Speaker? 
Not them. The commission was appointed by the then minister 
of Finance, the member from Regina Douglas Park, to advise 
government on what to do about taxation. 
 
And I want to say to those people over there, and especially the 
Leader of the Opposition who’s yelling from his seat . . . he 
worked for a government in the 1980s and into the 1990s that 
did what? He talks about taxes. That raised the personal income 
taxes in this province four times, Madam Speaker — that raised 
taxes. They did not cut taxes. They are all talk, all talk, no 
action, no action. What did they do? They brought in the flat tax 
on income to hit the seniors, to hit the low-income people, the 
most regressive tax in the history of this province. 
 
And I say to that Leader of the Opposition who supported those 
people and those policies, Madam Speaker, I say this. The 
largest tax cut in the history of this province, Madam Speaker, 
occurred between 1999 and 2003 when this government cut 
personal income taxes by 35 per cent, Madam Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And those people who supported a 
government that raised income taxes four times, Madam 
Speaker, and raised a wide variety of other taxes, lecture 
everybody about taxation, Madam Speaker. And that member 
from Silver Springs got up just a while ago and he said this. He 
was talking about the small-business corporate income tax rate. 
When we took office in 1991, Madam Speaker, the 
small-business corporate income tax rate was 10 per cent, left 
over by the conservatives over there. You know what . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There are some members who 
are not in the debate who are yelling in the Assembly. I’d ask 
them to come to order, so I can hear the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — When we took government, Madam 
Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They don’t like the 
truth. The tax on small business was 10 per cent. Today under 
this government it is 5 per cent, Madam Speaker, 5 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Income taxes were the second highest in 
the country under those people. Today, Madam Speaker, 
according to the Alberta government in their budget documents, 
our income taxes are the third lowest in the country. 
 
They don’t like to hear about it, Madam Speaker. The Leader of 
the Opposition and the member from Saskatoon Northwest yell 
from their seats because they don’t want the public to know the 
truth. They don’t want the public to know the truth that there’s 
economic growth in this province. They don’t want the public 
to know that there’s investment in this province. 
 
I want that member from Saskatoon Northwest to listen to this, 
Madam Speaker. Investment in mining exploration this year — 
he thinks he knows something about the mining industry — will 
be $200 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Two hundred million dollars. In 2002, 
what was it? Twenty-three million dollars, Madam Speaker. 
Where is it going? It’s going like this. And any credible person 
in this province, which does not include one of those people 
over there, knows that as Todd Hirsch says, who they quote “ 
. . . [the Saskatchewan] economy [is] on a roll,” Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And they don’t want to admit it. 
 
What else do the headlines say? They say this. They say, 
“Saskatoon [is] good for business,” Madam Speaker. The 
economy of Saskatchewan is growing, whether they want to 
admit it or not, and they’re yelling because they don’t want 
people on this side of the House to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the truth. 
 
But I want to say this. I go around this community and this 
province, Madam Speaker, on a daily basis, and I talk to 
hundreds of people. And when I talk to people, Madam 
Speaker, what they say to me is, the economy is on a roll. 
Things are good. We can’t get enough workers. That’s what 
they say, Madam Speaker, because there are jobs out there 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

whether these people want to admit it or not. 
 
And I want to say this again, Madam Speaker. People are sick 
and tired of the negative doom and gloom from the 
Saskatchewan Party. People love this province, Madam 
Speaker. People see a future in this province, Madam Speaker, 
and we are proud of Saskatchewan. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And we have reformed the personal income taxes. We have 
reformed the taxes for small business. We have reformed the 
taxes for manufacturing and processing. Madam Speaker, we 
have reformed the oil and gas royalties, something they never 
did. We have reformed the taxes for the mining companies and 
exploration prospecting, something they never did. 
 
But you know what, Madam Speaker? It doesn’t matter what 
the government does or whether the economy is working, they 
will never admit it. They will never stop complaining. And the 
Leader of the Opposition, when asked what his policy would 
be, because we have brought in these policies to improve the 
economy, he said this — one time he said — I will appoint a 
committee if I become premier to advise me what to do. Well 
it’s not credible, Madam Speaker. 
 
And you know what he said the other week? This is what he 
said. They said, well the NDP has brought in policies to get the 
economy moving. How could you do any better than that? You 
know what he said? He said this, because I’m a different brand. 
He said, I’m a different brand. Now I don’t know if it was 
Kellogg’s or if it was Bacardi, Madam Speaker, but he says, 
I’m a different brand. Well you know what? It’s just another 
brand of cornflakes, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. I just wanted to sit here next to my colleague from 
Saskatoon, the Minister of Industry and Resources, to 
complement I hope in my very feeble way, to do justice to some 
of the points that he raised. 
 
And I want to point out in continuing the whole notion of doom 
and gloom, and recognizing the business contribution that the 
many businesses throughout our province have made to our 
province, not just in the past but certainly in the future as well, 
to recognize them. 
 
And I want to point out, Madam Speaker, that some of the work 
that this government has been doing to recognize the business 
people — small and medium and large, and the corporations 
that work and employ people of Saskatchewan — is that we 
appreciate their contribution, Madam Speaker. We appreciate 
businesses. And we appreciate corporations and the people out 
here that make a significant difference for our provincial 
economy, and employ workers and take care of those workers. 
 
And I want to add to what the Minister of Industry and 
Resources say about that doom-and-gloom party. Every time, 

Madam Speaker, we have some good news on this side of the 
Assembly, whether the headlines say the economy is booming, 
across the way there’s a bunch of depressed Sask Party people, 
Madam Speaker. They’re always depressed. Every time there’s 
great news, they’re depressed. They sit in their desk and they 
put their heads down, oh geez the NDP are doing it again. 
They’re building the economy. Well that’s not good for us. 
 
And every time something happens in Alberta they say, oh 
Alberta this, Alberta that, Alberta’s doing so great. What I say 
to the Sask Party guys, if you love Alberta so much, head out 
there. We’ll see you later. We’ve got a province to build here, 
Madam Speaker. We got a province to build and we’re going to 
build that province in co-operation, in a respectful relationship 
with the business community, and we’re going to continue to 
build on that success, Madam Speaker. 
 
Now let’s go back to the Sask Party opposition for a moment. 
Let’s go back to them for a while. Every time we have good 
news, they’re depressed. Every time something happens in 
Alberta, they talk about Alberta. Every time something great 
happens, they say, oh no, but this problem exists. They have not 
got one solution on that side of the House to help the economy 
or the business people or anybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we look at the NDP, the provincial government, Madam 
Speaker. They have a plan. And I want to take aim at the 
Finance critic there from Saskatoon. Here’s a guy, here’s a guy 
that comes along and by luck he gets elected. And he says, now 
I’m the Finance critic; now I have all this knowledge of what 
I’m going to do differently. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, the first thing he did was he spent four 
billion bucks going four blocks — and that was then last year’s 
budget — turn on the radio, and he promised everything to 
everybody. And you know the problem with Saskatchewan 
people is that they won’t believe the Sask Party propaganda, nor 
do they believe some of the things that they’re saying. And I’ll 
point out he’s got to be one of the most unsuccessful Finance 
critics I’ve seen in my time here, Madam Speaker, which is well 
over 10 years. 
 
And I’ll point out as well, you don’t just talk the talk; you have 
to walk the walk. So whether it’s their Finance critic being just 
somebody that has no credibility or doesn’t know how finances 
work or whether it’s the critic for Community Resources that 
didn’t realize that two years ago they were talking about cutting 
social services and programs in budgets by 25 per cent, and 
now they have the audacity to come up and be saying, oh no, 
we’re going to do things differently now; we’re a different 
brand. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, Saskatchewan people do not buy that. 
You don’t fake your way to developing an economy. It comes 
with an integrated approach. It comes with working with the 
business community. It comes with preparing the labour force. 
It talks about personal income tax. It is all connected. And it 
also talks about a social fabric. 
 
So when they come along with their one-trick pony and say, oh 
corporate cuts, corporate cuts — we know that it’s part of the 
solution, but it’s one solution in many. And I’m just a hockey 
player from northern Saskatchewan but I come along here to try 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

and make a difference and even I understand more about what 
they talk about when they talk about economic building than the 
entire Sask Party caucus that may have many degrees. 
 
The reality, the reality, Madam Speaker, is that they have no 
vision. They have no credibility. They have no plan. And the 
people of Saskatchewan when they ask them for arguments, 
what happens, Madam Speaker? They say, oh the NDP aren’t 
doing anything great. They say, oh Alberta’s doing everything 
wonderful. That’s the only response, that’s their only response. 
And you know you can’t sell fear if you want to be a leader in 
this province. You’ve got to sell vision. You got to sell hope. 
You got to bring partners in. And, Madam Speaker, you got to 
acknowledge all the players that like this government does 
when it talks about the business community and all the 
corporations that do wonderful work throughout our province. 
 
Madam Speaker, you look at all the arguments that they make. 
It’s always doom and gloom. Saskatchewan’s bad. 
Saskatchewan doesn’t do anything good. Saskatchewan’s a 
poor province, poor place to invest. My goodness, you know, if 
you’re saying that as an opposition member, we say we don’t 
want your attitude. We don’t want your attitude. We reject your 
attitude. This is a great province. It’s time to rock ’n’ roll, time 
to acknowledge that the business community is a big part of the 
solution. And on this side of the House we fully support them. 
We’ll fully work with them and we will fully respect them, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
Now what really tires people of Saskatchewan, and I concur 
with my colleague, that people in Saskatchewan are sick and 
tired of that doom-and-gloom party over there that has no 
vision. They have no vision. Even on the credibility issues, they 
have no credibility, Madam Speaker. So every bit of their 
argument and every component of their supposed plan for 
Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan look, see right 
through it and say, no, no, we’ve been there, we’ve done that, 
and we just don’t want to go back there again. 
 
Madam Speaker, I point out, I point out that every time there’s 
been a successful economy in Saskatchewan where people are 
working, where we’re paying down debt, where we’re putting 
money towards skills and training, where we work with the 
business community — every time in the history of 
Saskatchewan that that trend has been going upward and it’s 
been positive is when this NDP government has been in charge, 
Madam Speaker. That’s the only time. That’s the only time. 
And when we took over government in 1991 from that party, 
from that party, the cover-up party, we’re paying over almost 
$900 million in interest payments, Madam Speaker — $900 
million in interest payments. And that is the biggest 
disincentive today to helping the business community develop 
in this province, is the huge debt that this province has 
compliments of that party, Madam Speaker. 
 
So don’t come along and tell us in a sanctimonious way, oh we 
think you guys should do this. We don’t want no advice from 
you guys. We don’t want no advice from you guys because all 
you guys have been doing has been faking your way to try and 
confuse the people of Saskatchewan, trying to sell fear and say, 
look Alberta, envy us what we are. No, no, no. 
 
We are Saskatchewan people. We’re proud of where we’re 

from. We’re proud of our citizens. And all the citizens, in my 
books, include the business people and the corporations that 
make Saskatchewan their home. 
 
Madam Speaker, this is a good party. This is a good 
government. And we ain’t taking not one bit of advice from that 
party that put this province well over $15 billion in debt. 
 
And I would point out as well, and I’d point out as well that the 
fact is this province, this province is tired of hearing of the debt. 
We’re tired of hearing of the interest payments. And they say 
yes, you guys who have been there 15 years ago, we’re tired of 
you guys saying that to us. Well the people of Saskatchewan, 
Madam Speaker, are tired of paying that debt. You’re tired of 
hearing it; we’re tired of paying it. 
 
And the corporations and the business people in Saskatchewan, 
they know — these are very intelligent, capable people — they 
know they can move their industry forward under this 
government and that’s why this government continues to get 
elected, Madam Speaker. 
 
And I would point out in closing, Madam Speaker, what is the 
very important rule of thumb when you talk about trying to 
work with people is that we have to acknowledge people. We 
have to share with them our vision. And when you acknowledge 
people, you share your vision with them, then you give them 
hope. We today in this debate acknowledge the business 
community and we say these are Saskatchewan people. We’re 
going to continue acknowledging them, respecting them, and 
working with them, Madam Speaker. 
 
Plus, we also share in their vision of trying to develop a labour 
force, to bring costs under control, help with the infrastructure, 
bring the Aboriginal people into the economy. The list is long 
and certainly the process is integrated and is very complex. But 
we will continue moving forward, all under the while with the 
whole premise is no one is left behind on the path to 
opportunity. 
 
Madam Speaker, it is very important that people of 
Saskatchewan call a spade a spade. And from my perspective I 
see not one little bit of vision on that side. Doom and gloom and 
fear — self-fear — and call Saskatchewan down. Madam 
Speaker, we were there before. We don’t want to go there any 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a pleasure 
for me to have the opportunity to join this debate and to speak 
in favour of the motion from my colleague from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. 
 
The arguments put forward in favour of adopting this report 
immediately and completely in relation to the recommendations 
regarding corporate tax reform are compelling. The timing of 
adopting tax reform recommendations is long overdue. The 
recommendations for corporate tax reform have been out there 
for a number of years. 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

We as opposition welcome this report and participated in the 
process that has led to its conclusions and recommendations. 
We commend the committee for its thorough study and its 
conclusions and recommendations. Had these or similar 
changes been implemented two or five or ten years ago, we as a 
province would not be in the non-competitive situation that we 
find ourselves today. 
 
This government has been in the past unresponsive to the 
recommendations put forward to bring the economic 
environment of this province in line with what is happening 
around us. Their position, Mr. Speaker, was not that they could 
. . . their position, Madam Speaker, was that they could not 
afford these proposed changes. That position was wrong. We 
really could not afford not to introduce these initiatives. 
 
Time does not permit me to discuss all of the report, but I will 
focus on three of the significant tax areas. These are corporate 
capital tax, corporate income tax, and small-business limit. 
 
Saskatchewan’s corporate capital tax presently at point six per 
cent is the highest in the country, the highest in North America. 
This compares with zero in Alberta and British Columbia. Since 
its inception the corporate capital tax has been criticized as 
being a disincentive for business to invest, to expand, and to 
hire employees. 
 
Saskatchewan has become unique in its reliance on this revenue 
source, provincially and internationally. If we are indeed 
serious about creating jobs, then this particular tax must be 
addressed. The committee recommends the reduction by 
one-half, effective July 1 of this year, 2006; by an additional 
one-half, effective July 1, 2007; and total elimination, effective 
July 1, 2008. If implemented as proposed, this would send a 
clear signal to the corporate world that this province is indeed 
open for business. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Secondly in regard to the corporate income tax rates. As with 
the corporate capital tax, we are also uncompetitive when it 
comes to corporate income tax rates. Our rate of 17 per cent 
compares unfavourably with Alberta at eleven and a half per 
cent, now being reduced to 10 per cent. We’re also higher than 
Manitoba, Ontario, and British Columbia. The committee states 
that the tax rate in a jurisdiction affects the decision to start or 
expand a business into a provincial jurisdiction. Keeping the 
general rate competitive in comparison with other jurisdictions 
is desirable to remove impediments to business start-up and 
expansion. 
 
Thirdly, Madam Speaker, the small-business tax limit. British 
Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario all sit at $400,000 
limit. Saskatchewan remains at . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. We would ask that you 
would respect the member on their feet and have a chance to 
enter the debate. The member from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. The variance 
in the small-business tax limit is another impediment to the 
growth of small business in Saskatchewan. If for example a 
business is operating at the $300,000 level and paying 

provincial tax at 5 per cent, it is a disincentive to expand, to risk 
additional investment, and to add to its workforce in 
anticipation of the provincial tax rate increasing from 5 per cent 
to 17 per cent on the additional projected income. 
 
Madam Speaker, for the period 1977 to 2003, I had the 
opportunity to provide tax advice for a number of clients. The 
majority of these clients were farmers and small- and 
medium-sized business clients. It was a unique opportunity, 
Madam Speaker, in that for the most of these 26 years, I worked 
out of a chartered accountant office in Lloydminster. Yes, on 
the border between Saskatchewan and Alberta. Over this time I 
saw the increasing shift of capital, of investment, of jobs, and 
yes of our children, from east to west. This was not in the 
period of $60-plus oil. The shift from my perspective, Madam 
Speaker, was caused by uncompetitive tax policy and 
government regulations. 
 
Many of the successful small businesses that I was involved 
from start-up did start up in Saskatchewan. These ranged from 
construction companies, oil field service companies, 
agriculture-related businesses, and so on. 
 
Initially, as in most small start-up businesses, tax was not the 
major factor in determining their location. However, as these 
businesses expanded and grew, tax becomes an important 
factor. The provincial tax rates, both personal and corporate, 
became the determining factor when they came to expand, to 
create more jobs and yes, to become even more profitable. 
 
The series of events became all too common. Firstly, a move of 
part of the business operations to Alberta. Secondly, a move of 
the balance of the business operations to head office and the 
expanded buildings required to the Alberta side. And 
ultimately, Madam Speaker, the move of the family to Alberta. 
At this point all of the provincial tax, personal and corporate, is 
made payable to the province of Alberta. Unfortunately this 
shift has not slowed down. It continues. 
 
This morning, Madam Speaker, we were impressed with the 
announcement of the new addition to the Husky Upgrader. 
Think about for a moment the $99 million of engineering 
contracts that are being generated and the tax, both business and 
personal, that will be generated. Think about where these taxes 
will be made payable, Madam Speaker. I submit the vast 
majority will be payable to the provincial treasurer, province of 
Alberta. 
 
The report on the tax review provides not only the reasons for 
the present dilemma but also the framework, including the 
timelines, to begin to address this situation. Madam Speaker, it 
is all about jobs. Business investment is required to create these 
jobs and the business climate must be conducive to business 
incentive. 
 
Madam Speaker, it’s about a shift — a shift from high taxes to a 
shift to new prosperity. 
 
Madam Speaker, with the interests of our future at stake, I 
support this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, 
it’s truly a pleasure for me to join into this debate and be a part 
of this discussion. 
 
I did appreciate the fact that the speaker earlier today amended 
the motion because it helped to clarify it just a little bit although 
it’s still quite confusing as far as I am concerned. Because when 
you look at the content of the motion and then you look at what 
the Sask Party’s own report called The Promise of 
Saskatchewan says, it’s contradictory. The Sask Party’s own 
report, The Promise of Saskatchewan, says that: 
 

While the government of Saskatchewan may not be in a 
position to offer meaningful reduction in taxes such as the 
corporation capital tax, it can be . . . [very] aggressive in 
terms of incremental taxes on new activity. 

 
And that goes without saying, Madam Deputy Speaker. But I 
find it extremely confusing when their own report says the 
government may not be able to move in that direction, and yet 
their motion says, move in that direction. Very hypocritical, 
Madam Speaker. Very inconsistent. I mean, Madam Speaker, 
this is why that party over there has no credibility. 
 
In fact, Madam Speaker, the Finance critic, the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs, said about this report, and I would 
like to quote an article from the Leader-Post that was the 24th 
day of the second month, February 2005. And I quote: 
 

We think it’s a step in the right direction, but I don’t think 
it has been reviewed all that much. 

 
Once again, Madam Speaker, they’re saying one thing one day 
and then saying the total opposite the next day. Once again, 
Madam Speaker, that’s why they have no credibility. 
 
In fact if you look at now the preamble of their motion, the first 
paragraph of this motion says that we should implement the 
report. Then in the second paragraph it says we should only 
implement aspects of that report. They can’t even maintain 
consistency in the same motion, never mind day by day. 
Madam Speaker, once again this is an example of why they 
have no credibility. 
 
My grandfather used to have a saying that the proof of the 
pudding is in the eating. So often I think that we need to spend a 
little time looking at what independent third parties have to say 
about situations. In this case let’s look at some of the 
submissions through the Saskatchewan business tax review 
committee, a submission by the Fraser Institute which, Madam 
Speaker, is absolutely no friend of this government’s, that’s for 
sure. But on page 14 of their submission they said 
Saskatchewan’s small-business income rate is relatively 
competitive with most jurisdictions. They went on to say on 
page 15 that Saskatchewan’s applicable threshold for 
small-business tax rate is relatively competitive with other 
provinces in Canada. 
 
Madam Speaker, there is a third party verification — a third 
party which is actually a right wing think tank that would 

probably fall into line with the members opposite there — and 
they’re thinking and simply stating that they’re wrong; that 
once again they have no credibility on this subject. They’re 
saying Saskatchewan is in a competitive position. 
 
The Canadian Manufacturers & Exporters, they are saying that 
the province should be commended for some of the tax breaks 
that they have recommended. And they go on to say that the 
current corporate tax rates, after manufacturing and processing 
credits, is currently competitive with any other province in 
Canada. Madam Speaker, once again a clear indication of why 
that party over there have no credibility. 
 
But the one that really stands out, I think, Madam Speaker, is a 
statement according to KPMG. And they say that if you 
examine the following six cities in Canada — Regina, 
Saskatoon, Edmonton, Calgary, Winnipeg, and Toronto — the 
following conclusions can be drawn: the 10-year average 
effective corporate tax rate, including all taxes at all levels, is 
the lowest in Saskatoon and Regina. And if you look at the 
overall industrial averages of these cities in terms of total tax 
burden — that’s total tax burden, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
that’s the federal tax, the provincial tax, and the municipal tax 
— the tax rate is the lowest in the Saskatchewan cities. 
 
That’s why they led them to make this very bold statement. 
From KPMG, it says this is one of the key reasons why KPMG 
has said that Saskatchewan is one of the best jurisdictions in 
North America to set up a business. Not just in Canada, not just 
in Western Canada, but in North America, Saskatchewan is the 
jewel to set up a business. That is, as my colleague here says, 
the rest of the story. And one of my colleagues over there said, 
just that bears repeating. So I’ll just take a moment or two to 
repeat that. 
 
KPMG in their most recent study indicated that of the six cities 
of Regina, Saskatoon, Edmonton, Calgary, Winnipeg, and 
Toronto, the best place in North America to set up a business is 
either in Saskatoon or Regina. That speaks volumes for itself, 
Madam Speaker. It certainly does. 
 
Now I think this motion to some degree sets the real 
comparison between our philosophy on this side and their 
philosophy on that side, Madam Speaker. They believe in a no 
government involvement, tax-free regime. They believe that 
without taxes we’d all be rich. Well unfortunately, Madam 
Speaker, that’s not quite the way it goes. 
 
One of my colleagues is quite fond of using this expression, and 
I’ll just borrow it from him for a moment. Every so often in our 
history the right wing philosophy, the Saskatchewan Party 
conservative philosophy, gets into power. They are able to find 
their way to get themselves elected. And they bring to that 
position a philosophy that government doesn’t work. And as my 
colleague would say, they sometimes in our history get 
themselves elected and they prove that government doesn’t 
work. That’s the difference between us and them. 
 
I, like many people in Saskatchewan, believe we cannot afford 
not to pay taxes because through our tax dollars we have the 
services that we require. We have the services of health care, 
the services of education, the services of highway. We all 
contribute a little bit through our tax dollar to benefit from the 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

services when we require them. 
 
They, on the other hand, would like to see it the other way. 
They would like to see a no-tax system or a low-tax system and 
that private sector, private sector would provide these services. 
If that’s the case, then those services would not be affordable to 
most people. 
 
In that case, those people would not have the benefit of a 
quality health care system that we enjoy here in Saskatchewan. 
In fact, Madam Speaker, we have the best health care system of 
anywhere in Canada right here in this province, and I must say 
I’m very proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — And I know that there are members on that 
side of the House that have experienced the health care system, 
and they would agree with me at least in private. But I can say, 
Madam Speaker, speaking on behalf of myself and my family 
members, that we have experienced that health care system. 
And we are very, very thankful that we have that top quality 
system here that has served us so well and continues to serve us 
that way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a 
question for the Minister of Industry and Resources. There’s a 
famous letter that’s been referenced in this debate. It’s from 
October 23, 2003, and I’ll quote from the letter. It says: 
 

Big corporations see a successful provincial economy and 
want to take over the most profitable parts of it . . . So they 
finance a political party, in this case, the Saskatchewan 
Party, to [go] get it for them. 

 
It’s a famous letter, Madam Speaker. It’s the greedy corporate 
huckster letter. 
 
Madam Speaker, my question to the Minister of Industry and 
Resources is, who wrote this letter? Did he write it? Did the 
Finance minister write it, or did the former Finance minister 
author this letter? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resource. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Madam Speaker, what I like to 
talk about are the facts. And the fact is this. That under the 
leadership of our Premier . . . What have we done since our 
Premier came to office? We have revised the oil and gas 
royalties. And I’d like to tell the members opposite that oil 
production is double what it was 10 years ago in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What have we done? We’ve revised and reformed the mining 
royalties and exploration credits. And what has happened? 

There has been a sixfold increase in exploration activity in this 
province, Madam Speaker. That’s what has happened. 
 
What have we done? We’ve gone from the second highest 
income taxes — thanks to them — in the country to the third 
lowest. 
 
So when the members opposite get up, Madam Speaker, and try 
to suggest to people that there’s an anti-business attitude over 
here, don’t listen to their words. Look at the record. Don’t do 
what they say. Look at what they do, which is a very sorry 
record, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. My question is for the member from Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. And this is a question that should require a simple yes 
or no answer. If the government implements the general 
direction and/or improves upon the recommendations of the 
Vicq report, will he vote for this budget and stand up for the 
people and businesses of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
And with great pleasure I’d like to answer that question. I’m not 
sure where the hon. member was when I issued a challenge to 
the Finance minister. I challenged him that if he comes forward 
with a budget that honours the thrust of Vicq, that moves 
forward on the five recommendations on the tax reform, if he 
honours that and doesn’t water down the timeline, Madam 
Speaker, and if this government reverses their decision to break 
their election promise . . . We all know what the Premier said in 
the last election. He said, no new tax increases. What did they 
do? The biggest tax grab in Saskatchewan history — $150 
million. 
 
Yes, Madam Speaker, if they go and reverse that biggest tax 
grab, I will stand in my place and give credit where credit is 
due. But failing that, Madam Speaker, I challenge those 
members — those that are up for a challenge, Madam Speaker 
— I want them to say that this is the worst budget ever. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 
member from Regina Northeast. And I would ask him if he 
would concur with the statement that is printed in the business 
tax review that says this: 
 

Saskatchewan’s policy of charging the PST on M&P 
equipment effectively increases the cost of capital by 
seven per cent. To the start-up firm, the initial equity 
requirements increase substantially more than seven per 
cent because of how banks and lending institutions secure 
financing. 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

Madam Deputy Speaker, will the member concur that that is a 
deterrent to growing businesses in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the real question in 
this debate is a question of credibility. Does that group over 
there have the credibility with the people of Saskatchewan? 
And I would say no. 
 
And I’m reflecting what is being said in my constituency. And 
why? It’s because of their track record. Not only their track 
record as the former government in this province, but their track 
record in opposition where they have lacking consistency on 
any of their motions. They’re lacking consistency on any of 
their statements. They have a hidden agenda, Madam Speaker. 
We know that. They’ve proved that in the last election. And the 
people of this province know that they have that hidden agenda, 
and they will not allow them ever to be the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. My question is once again for the member from 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. And I would ask him the question 
once again: will he stand up and support the business people 
and the people of Saskatchewan if in fact this government 
implements the general direction on the timeline of the Vicq 
report in the provincial budget without adding new conditions 
to it? They have continually asked for this government to 
implement this report. Will he vote for the budget? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Madam Speaker, at least they’re 
consistent over there. At least they’re using the same language. 
He’s using the same language as the Finance minister used last 
week. Will he go with the general direction? Will he support a 
watered down version of the Vicq report? Can we extend the 
timeline? No, Madam Speaker, that is not good enough for the 
people of Saskatchewan. What they want to see is what is in the 
Vicq report. What they want to see is what was in the 
Saskatchewan Party’s submission of May 10, 2005 in Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan. That’s what they want to see. Anything less will 
be an absolute failure, and we’ll see what happens on budget 
day in this Chamber, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Athabasca. Jack Vicq in the 
business tax review committee’s report says that Saskatchewan 
companies don’t even make the short list. After 15 years of this 
government’s rule — most of the time that that member has sat 

in his seat and occupied a chair at the cabinet table — 
Saskatchewan companies don’t even make the short list under 
this NDP tax regime. Does he agree with that statement? Who 
knows more — him or Jack Vicq? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible 
for Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. What I would point out, Madam Speaker, is you look 
at northern Saskatchewan when we started this venture as the 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] some 
10-and-some-odd months ago . . . 10 years and some odd 
months ago, is that when we looked at some of the challenges 
out in northern Saskatchewan, there was certainly a lot of 
challenges. 
 
There was road challenges, school challenges. We needed 
medical facilities. We needed jobs, training, and employment. 
And, Madam Speaker, let’s put it this way. In our constituency 
of Athabasca, there’s now oil and gas development, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
There is now a promise and a commitment by the Alberta 
government to work with the Saskatchewan government on 
building a road to Fort McMurray, which is very important for 
the people of La Loche who led this effort. 
 
And you look at the forestry development opportunity in 
northern Saskatchewan. That’s coming on board, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
And the other important part — look at the diamond 
opportunities, look at the tourism opportunities, look at the 
marketing opportunities of this great province. 
 
And all we have over their is doom and gloom and poor 
Saskatchewan’s not going anywhere. And it’s another drab, 
dreary day for our province. And that’s the message coming 
from that opposition, Madam Speaker. And I will point out, I 
will point out, what qualifications . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time’s up. I recognize the Minister 
of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — My question is to the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. Does that member support full 
harmonization of the PST and GST [goods and services tax], 
and what are the conditions he would put on doing that? Does 
he support doing that? Does he want it done today? Because 
he’s talking out of both sides of his mouth on the PST. I’d like 
to hear right now, right here, what his position is on 
harmonization. And is he prepared to move $650 million off of 
business people on to individual consumers to support his 
agenda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Madam Speaker, I like this. I like 
answering questions from the minister. And I hope it’s 
foreshadowing of what’s going to happen in a few short months 
over here when I’ll be sitting over there, Madam Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, it’s interesting. It’s interesting. We didn’t 
hear, we didn’t hear a response from the minister to my 
challenge to him either in question period or earlier today. We 
didn’t even hear, we didn’t even hear anything from the 
minister in this debate. He comes as we’ve got a few seconds 
left in this debate and asks the question. 
 
Well, Madam Speaker, I stand beside Jack Vicq on that 
question when he says: 
 

We further recommend that the sales tax reform be 
deferred subject to the Province completing broad 
consultations with Saskatchewan residents and . . . 
[Saskatchewan] negotiations with the federal government. 

 
Madam Speaker, that member, that minister would be well 
advised to read this report and to follow its recommendations. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
now lapsed. Members, members, I congratulate you for your 
spirited debate and question and answer. We will now move on 
to private members’ motions. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Motion No. 2 — Public Complaints Commission 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m very pleased to stand here today to speak about 
the new Public Complaints Commission. At the end of my 
remarks, Madam Deputy Speaker — and now, Mr. Speaker — I 
will move the following motion: 
 

That the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly endorse the 
government’s creation of the new Public Complaints 
Commission which brings about fundamental changes to 
the public complaint investigation and decision process. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this new Public Complaints Commission 
represents a fundamental change to the public complaint 
investigation and decision process here in Saskatchewan. When 
The Police Amendment Act of 2005 becomes law on April 1, it 
will create a unique Saskatchewan model for the investigation 
of public complaints. It’s new to Saskatchewan, and in our 
opinion, it creates a public complaints model that is the best in 
Canada. 
 
The creation of this commission is in response to both the 
Commission of Inquiry Into Matters Relating to the Death of 
Neil Stonechild and the Commission on First Nations and Métis 

Peoples and Justice Reform. 
 
This new five-member complaints commission is necessary to 
ensure that the investigation of complaints is done in a manner 
that is both respectful of and representative of Métis and First 
Nations people. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members will come to order. 
Member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This change 
fulfills the government’s commitment to a governance structure 
for the municipal police community that is both transparent and 
accountable to all peoples in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the new process, every complaint regarding 
a police officer and every investigation with respect to a 
possible criminal offence with respect to a police officer will be 
subject to the direction of the police complaints commission. A 
member of the public may now make a public complaint to the 
office of the Public Complaints Commission, to a municipal 
police service, to the special investigations youth unit of the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, to the board office 
of the affected police service, to the Department of Justice, or to 
an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] detachment. 
 
From there the complaints commission will determine whether 
investigations should be conducted by the complaints 
commission itself, by the police service against whom the 
complaint was made, by the police service with an outside 
observer appointed by the complaints commission, or by 
separate police service. Through this independent process, the 
investigation into alleged misconduct will be subject to the 
governance of the Public Complaints Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think those involved in this process should be 
thanked for their work on this Bill. I believe that in the years to 
come, we will reflect on this work and realize how important 
and groundbreaking it has been. This is a significant historical 
event for Saskatchewan. 
 
The new five-person panel that makes up the Public Complaints 
Commission is a product of consultations with the FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Police Officers, the Chiefs of Police Association, 
and municipal police boards. 
 
The new members of the Public Complaints Commission will 
satisfy the need for our province to have proper representation 
in this area, and I would like to acknowledge these highly 
qualified individuals. Robert W. Mitchell, Q.C. [Queen’s 
Counsel], is the Chair of the committee. He’s from Regina and 
is the current Saskatchewan police complaints investigator and 
a former minister of Justice. 
 
Catherine Knox, Vice-Chair, of Saskatoon is a lawyer who has 
provided advice to Indian Residential Schools Resolution 
Canada and Battlefords healing circle. She has also served as a 
board member of the National Parole Board and is a consultant 
to Nova Scotia’s Project HOPE. Ms. Knox is also a member of 
the Canadian Criminal Justice Association. 
 
[12:30] 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

Ray Fox of North Battleford is a member of the Sweetgrass 
First Nation. He is the director of justice for the Battlefords 
Tribal Council, a city councillor with the city of North 
Battleford, regional director of the Saskatchewan Association of 
School Councils, and a member of the University of 
Saskatchewan regional advisory committee. 
 
Mrs. Loretta Elford of Regina is retired from the Board of 
Education where she held positions of director of education, 
superintendent, and high school principal. And Mrs. Alford is 
currently a member of the board of directors of Conexus Credit 
Union and the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 
 
And Michel or Mike Morris of Saskatoon is a respected Métis 
elder and board member of the Saskatoon Indian & Métis 
Friendship Centre, a member of the city police chief’s advisory 
committee on First Nations and Métis relations, and an elder at 
the White Buffalo Youth Lodge and at St. Mary’s Community 
School. 
 
I believe that these commissioners will ensure public trust in 
our police services and the investigative process. With this 
commission, Saskatchewan will have the best system in the 
country for dealing with police complaints, clear procedures in 
place for the governance of complaints to ensure they’re 
objectively and fairly investigated. The Public Complaints 
Commission will have direct control over the investigation into 
any public service complaint, including criminal matters. It will 
be able to investigate criminal allegations against police in a 
fair and thorough manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is all about trust and relationship, about 
having a place for people to go with their concerns and issues, a 
place they can trust, a place that will complement work already 
underway in this province’s police services. It demonstrates our 
belief as a government that relationship and trust with 
Aboriginal peoples is not only important but essential and that 
we should find as many ways and places as possible to build 
this trust. This commission is one step — one important step — 
along that path. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Mr. Speaker, we must not forget what 
happened to Neil Stonechild. It is a black mark in 
Saskatchewan’s history, but I sincerely believe that with the 
work of the Métis and First Nations communities, the police, 
and government, we have moved forward to ensure that such 
events will not happen again. 
 
We all want to live in a society where we can feel safe and 
protected. We all want to live in a society where we can trust 
those who were put there to protect us. And most importantly 
we want to live in a society where we can feel free to come 
forward and say something when that action is not conducive to 
the betterment of our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this week some of us had a presentation 
from Professor John Borrows from the University of Victoria. 
Mr. Borrows is with the Faculty of Law at the University of 
Victoria. He is an Anishinabe and a member of the Chippewa of 
the Nawash First Nation. He has an impressive background in 
Aboriginal law and First Nations legal issues, and he is 

Canada’s leading indigenous law scholar. 
 
And when Mr. Borrows spoke to us . . . and I will apologize 
here for simplifying and condensing down what he said and 
interpreting it in my own way. When Mr. Borrows spoke to us, 
he talked about the term reconciliation. And he gave a 
definition that I haven’t heard before, but a literal definition of 
the word reconciliation which he said means to sit back down 
together. 
 
He reminded us of what the Treaty Commissioner tells us that 
we as a people all sat down together through the Crown when 
the treaties were first signed, that we are all treaty in a sense, all 
signatories of the treaties. And he reminded us that treaty is not 
just a legal entity but one of honour, of respect, of trust, and 
therefore, he said, spiritual — not religious but spiritual. 
 
And Mr. Borrows spoke of five aspects of reconciliation. He 
spoke of legal reconciliation which is often limited in itself 
because of the adversarial nature of the justice system. And yet 
we see efforts at legal reconciliation across this country and this 
province with sentencing circles, Cree courts, and so on. 
 
He talked of economic reconciliation to make dollars count for 
Aboriginal people so that they’re equal participants in the 
economy. 
 
And he talked about social reconciliation to ensure that 
indigenous people have the health, education, and social 
services they deserve. 
 
And fourthly, he talked about political reconciliation so that 
there’s recognition of sovereignty along with a mutual 
exchange of respect and understanding. We will see evidence of 
this next week with the presentation and acceptance of a special 
gift in this Assembly — a traditionally crafted moosehide 
runner and beaver pelt cushion that will hold the mace that lies 
before us, a symbol of political respect and I believe of 
reconciliation. 
 
And lastly Mr. Borrows spoke of spiritual reconciliation, a 
recognition and respect for indigenous belief systems and, 
underlying this, a foundation of trust and relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of spiritual reconciliation, I 
immediately think of my experience in the SUNTEP 
[Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program] 
program in Prince Albert, which is a teacher training program 
for Aboriginal students affiliated with the University of 
Saskatchewan. And in that program were students who were 
Métis and First Nations. The First Nations students were Dene, 
Dakota, and Cree. They came from the North and from 
communities around Prince Albert. The Métis students came 
from the city and from rural areas and from the North. And of 
all of these students, many of them were deeply rooted in their 
culture and knew their first language. Others were just 
beginning their journey of learning about themselves and about 
their culture. 
 
So it seemed like a very homogenous Aboriginal teacher 
education program was in fact a very diverse multicultural 
program. And anyone who worked there or went to school in 
that program realized very early that in fact there was a spiritual 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

core to that program. And the best word we could find to sum it 
up was the word relationship — relationship meaning trust, 
humility, respect, but a parallel understanding that although 
there are differences that we must recognize and respect, there 
are commonalities or common ground that we must also stand 
on. And Mr. Borrows spoke of that when he talked to us earlier 
this week. 
 
We call this a spiritual centre, not a religious centre but a 
spiritual centre in the SUNTEP program. And the very best 
word we could use to describe it was relationship. And when 
you have that kind of a spiritual centre to any program, you 
operate in a different way. And as we worked in the SUNTEP 
program, we realized that in fact this is the kind of centre that 
must exist in every classroom if it’s to be a successful 
classroom. We realized that this is the spiritual centre that 
should be at the centre of every school and, to go even further, 
that this is the centre that in fact the justice system should move 
towards and that in fact a political system like this should 
consider as well. 
 
And certainly there have been moments in this Assembly when 
we realize that we don’t have a parallel understanding. We 
focus on the differences and engage in a purely adversarial 
approach and sometimes lose touch with what we do have in 
common. And the very best moments in this House are when 
we understand what we have in common and stand on that 
ground. 
 
So Professor Borrows said that reconciliation can occur only if 
we have this parallel understanding. And he too used the word 
relationship. I’d like to bring a quotation forward from someone 
that we read in the SUNTEP program, a writer by the name of 
Parker Jay Palmer from the United States, an American 
educator who wrote a book called The Courage to Teach. And 
I’m quoting from Parker Jay Palmer. He says: 
 

Relationships are all there is. Everything in the universe 
only exists because it is in relationship to everything else. 
Nothing exists in isolation. We have to stop pretending we 
are individuals that can go it alone. 

 
So Professor Borrows when he spoke of reconciliation, he said 
that we need to sit back down together and develop relationship 
and understanding and trust with each other. And I believe that 
there is an element of reconciliation in the creation of the Public 
Complaints Commission, that part of it is to build and rebuild 
trust and relationship between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 
people. 
 
There is legal reconciliation, but certainly there is an element of 
spiritual reconciliation and perhaps some healing as well as a 
result of the issues raised by the Stonechild inquiry and the 
Commission on First Nations and Métis Justice Reform. 
 
So the big picture here is one of being heard, of healing, and of 
creating relationship. And I’ll quote from Parker Jay Palmer 
again. He says: 
 

Why is being heard so healing? I don’t know the full 
answer to that question, but I do know it has something to 
do with the fact that listening creates relationship. We 
know from science that nothing in the universe exists as an 

isolated or independent entity. Everything takes form from 
relationships, be it subatomic particles sharing energy or 
ecosystems sharing food. In the web of life, nothing lives 
alone. 

 
And he says: 

 
Our natural state is to be together. Though we keep 
moving away from each other, we haven’t lost the need to 
be in relationship. Everybody has a story, and everybody 
wants to tell their story in order to connect. If no one 
listens, we tell it to ourselves and then we go mad. 

 
So the Public Complaints Commission, I believe, is a place 
where people’s stories can be heard and where relationship can 
continue to be developed between First Nations, Métis, and 
non-Aboriginal people. 
 
And so with those thoughts, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 
the motion that I gave at the start which is: 
 

That the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly endorse the 
government’s creation of the new Public Complaints 
Commission which brings about fundamental changes to 
the public complaint investigation and decision process. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers and seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin: 
 

That the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly endorse the 
government’s creation of the new Public Complaints 
Commission which brings about fundamental changes to 
the public complaint investigation and decision process. 

 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Meewasin, the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
second the motion of the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
The member for Saskatchewan Rivers has been a long-time 
respected educator in the province of Saskatchewan, and I do 
not hope to match his eloquence. But I do hope I can contribute 
to the understanding of the Assembly and of the public of the 
important changes that are being made here. And I do want to 
emphasize the fundamental changes that the new Public 
Complaints Commission represents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, eight days from now when The Police 
Amendment Act, 2005 becomes law, Saskatchewan will have a 
new model for complaints that is both unique to Saskatchewan 
and the best in Canada. It will be transparent. It will be 
accountable. It will be independent. It will be respectful. It will 
be representative, and it will be fair. 
 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2006 

This new approach was developed by a steering committee that 
put incredible work into this project. This committee included 
the Department of Justice, Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, Métis Family and Community Justice Services, Regina 
Police Service, Saskatoon Police Service, the RCMP, 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police, office of the 
police complaints investigator, Federation of Saskatchewan 
Police Officers, and the chiefs of police of Prince Albert, 
Moose Jaw, Estevan, and Weyburn. The committee also heard 
from Shirley Heafey then the Chair of the Commission for 
Public Complaints Against the RCMP. This committee met on a 
regular basis for almost two years to develop this new approach, 
and we are grateful to all members for their diligence and 
openness to change. 
 
[12:45] 
 
I would like to repeat for members the comments I made to the 
media upon release of the Report on the Commission of Inquiry 
Into Matters Relating to the Death of Neil Stonechild. I made 
these comments on October 26, 2004. Quote: 
 

I had the privilege to meet personally with Mrs. Stella 
Bignell, Neil Stonechild’s mother, yesterday afternoon. I 
wanted to meet privately with Mrs. Bignell to express my 
sympathy to her, as well as the sympathy of the 
government of Saskatchewan. 
 
I also met with Mrs. Bignell to apologize to her. I am sorry 
that she and her family had to wait 14 years for the 
investigation they deserved from the outset. 
 
As parents, our worst nightmare is that our children will be 
hurt or worse, taken from us — that some unfortunate 
incident will rob them of their potential. That we will not 
see them grow [up] to be happy, healthy adults. That we 
will not see them experience the joy of having children of 
their own. 
 
Mrs. Bignell has experienced all of this. But she has also 
lived with the belief that what she was told about the death 
of her beloved son was not complete and that the people 
she entrusted to find out those answers for her did not do 
everything they could . . . do . . . 
 
No mother should be called upon to exhibit the strength 
and grace that Stella Bignell has shown throughout the 
years since her son’s death. I admire her. 
 
And I ask all citizens of Saskatchewan to join with me in 
offering our most profound expressions of sympathy and 
sorrow to a woman who has spent the past 14 years 
contemplating the endless possibilities of a life not lived. 

 
Those were my words, Mr. Speaker. It is my hope that the 
changes we are discussing today will honour Neil Stonechild’s 
memory, validate the hope of his mother that his death was not 
in vain, and that our response will help heal the divisions 
between communities. 
 
Perhaps the greatest satisfaction for everyone who has 
contributed to our new complaints process was reading Mrs. 
Bignell’s positive comments in the StarPhoenix some 10 days 

ago when the commissioners were announced. I would quote 
her words: 
 

I believe if they [had] had a commission with an aboriginal 
person in it, (First Nations people) would be more open to 
telling the things that happen to them . . . That would be 
the most important step for anybody to get any outcome 
out of what they’re complaining about. 

 
What I have to say today for the Public Complaints 
Commission is not important, is of little import at all, Mr. 
Speaker, compared to the affirmation that we have received 
from the mother of Neil Stonechild. I know I speak for 
everyone who helped develop our new complaints process in 
saying that we are glad that Mrs. Bignell is pleased with our 
work. 
 
There are two concerns that we tried to address with the new 
complaints commission. Police services and the overall 
administration of justice have been criticized in those hard cases 
where a member of the public has died in a circumstance that 
would require the police to conduct an investigation of one of 
their own members. Notwithstanding the best of intentions and 
notwithstanding the best of efforts, there remains the concern 
that the police are policing themselves and that special 
treatment may be accorded. 
 
And second, and perhaps connected to the first, Mr. Speaker, 
First Nations people are not using the existing municipal police 
complaints process as much as they should. And they are not 
using the RCMP complaints process at all. First Nations people 
have, however, demonstrated through the FSIN special 
investigations unit that they will use a police complaint system 
that they trust. It’s these two concerns we have addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the members about some of the 
improvements that come with this new commission. We are 
increasing from one police complaints investigator to five 
complaints commissioners, commissioners that are 
representative of all the people of Saskatchewan. 
Commissioners are chosen through consultation and the 
commission includes First Nations and Métis representation. In 
addition we are increasing from one field investigator to four 
field investigators employed by the commission. 
 
Two of the three new field investigators have been hired and a 
third will be soon. Two of the new field investigators are of 
First Nations ancestry. In addition the three field investigators 
hired today are former police officers. It is important that those 
who undertake this work have extensive training and experience 
in conducting investigations. In addition to the existing Regina 
office of the complaints commission, we’re opening a new 
Saskatoon office where two of the four field investigators will 
be stationed. 
 
Finally, we have increased funding to support these initiatives, 
including $150,000 provided to the FSIN for the work of the 
special investigations unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes address the complaints process for 
municipal police services. However, the RCMP is federally 
regulated, thus complaints against the RCMP are handled by the 
Commission for Public Complaints Against the RCMP. I’ve 



March 24, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

invited and encouraged the RCMP complaints commission to 
locate an office in Saskatchewan to make our two systems work 
together smoothly. The RCMP complaints commissioner has 
the following to say in her 2004-2005 annual report and 
2004-2005 estimates, and I quote: 
 

The Chair of CPC maintains a dialogue with other 
agencies and associations concerned with excellence in 
policing. The Chair has been very involved in 
consultations with the Province of Saskatchewan and its 
key stakeholders (e.g. the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) in its newly developed police complaints 
legislation. The CPC and Saskatchewan are committed to 
working together to find additional opportunities for 
collaboration and cooperation to better serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. The Attorney General of Saskatchewan has 
asked the federal government to consider having the CPC 
open a regional complaints office in Saskatchewan. 

 
The Government of Saskatchewan Attorney General’s 
department and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations had been particularly interested in having a 
commission presence in Saskatchewan because of the 
large Aboriginal populations being policed by the RCMP. 
Both organizations are asking the commission to share 
office with them in Saskatchewan in an effort to improve 
the complaint intake process for the Aboriginal 
community in that part of the country. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with the openness of our suggestions 
that have been shown by the RCMP Complaints Commissioner. 
I intend to continue to encourage the RCMP commission and 
the federal government to act on this request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for too long the peoples of Saskatchewan have 
been divided and have had separate histories and — I think 
many believed — separate destinies, Mr. Speaker. This division 
was certainly facilitated by the many years in which First 
Nations people were confined, largely confined to reserves set 
aside for them and not allowed to participate as full citizens in 
the province, in their country, and in public life. 
 
This province has no choice but to recognize that we have a 
shared history, that we have not been intruders upon each 
other’s history. And the history that is shared will lead to a 
shared destiny, not with one group absorbing another, but with 
people working in co-operation, living in partnership, and 
building a strong future — our shared destiny together, 
respectful of our differences and finding strength in our 
diversity, fulfilling the motto of this province: “from many 
peoples, strength.” 
 
This will be done, Mr. Speaker, because First Nations people, 
Aboriginal people, will build, are building unique institutions 
— institutions that will reflect their sovereignty, their right to 
self-government. But it will also be done because institutions of 
the province of Saskatchewan, of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, of the people of Saskatchewan adapt and change 
to recognize the unique character of our province and our 
interest in our shared destiny. 
 
One small step — and it is a large step for confidence in our 
police forces, for co-operation between peoples, for effective 

policing and security for all people in Saskatchewan — but one 
small step towards that share of destiny is the unique institution 
that’s being created a few days from now when our 
amendments to The Police Act become law. 
 
This is an institution that is unique to the province of 
Saskatchewan. The way it has developed has been unique. The 
form it will take will be unique. The consultations that were 
involved were unique. 
 
And this type of institution that recognizes the strength that 
grows out of the shared history of these peoples towards their 
shared destiny as they work together — one not absorbing the 
other, but each taking strength from the other — this is what we 
will be celebrating. We’ll have occasions to celebrate it during 
the sitting, when it was referred to by the member who moved 
the motion, when the symbols of Aboriginal people are brought 
into this Assembly. 
 
But in a very real way, while we struggle with mutual problems, 
problems that affect both our communities, as we work to solve 
those problems, we work, we build, and take those problems not 
as a crisis but as an opportunity to work together in partnership, 
in co-operation, and create not an institution that is separate, not 
an institution that is assimilated, but an institution that is unique 
and exceptional to our province and our recognition of a shared 
history with the First Peoples of this land and a shared destiny 
with them as we grow together in this land together, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to second the motion of 
the member for Saskatchewan Rivers. And as it’s only a few 
minutes before the House adjourns, given the hour, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It have been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin that debate on the motion be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this being the first weekend 
of spring, with good wishes to you and all of the members and 
those in the House, I now move that this House do adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. I wish everyone a pleasant 
weekend. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:57.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................767 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................767 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................767 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................767 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................767 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................767 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................768 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................768 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................778 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yorkton Farm Forum 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................768 
 Scott Collegiate First Annual Arts and Music Gala 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................768 
 Saskatchewan’s Biggest Single-Day Farm Auction 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................769 
 Regina & District Labour Council’s Centennial 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................769 
 Race Track Gas Station Burns in Biggar 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................769 
 Pineview Youth Centre 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................770 
 Saskatchewan Huskies Player Wins Hockey Awards 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................770 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Reaction to Nurse’s Letter 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................770 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................770 
 Timetable for Changes to Corporate Taxation 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................771 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................771 
 Provincial Business Environment 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................773 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................773 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Expansion of Husky Lloydminster Upgrader 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................775 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................776 
 Need for Foster Families in Saskatchewan 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................777 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................777 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 Return No. 572 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................779 
 Return No. 573 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................779 
 Return No. 574 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................779 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................779 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling Regarding Preambles in Motions 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................779 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Taxation Policies and Recommendations of the Business Tax Review Committee 
  Cheveldayoff......................................................................................................................................................................779, 789 



 

  Krawetz..............................................................................................................................................................................782, 789 
  Cline ...................................................................................................................................................................................783, 789 
  Belanger .............................................................................................................................................................................785, 790 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................786 
  Harper ...............................................................................................................................................................................788, 790 
  Yates...........................................................................................................................................................................................789 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................790 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Public Complaints Commission 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................791 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................793 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


