
















































Hansard: November 07, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 231 
 November 7, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure again to stand in this Assembly and to present petitions 
to the Assembly from residents of the communities of 
Esterhazy, Whitewood, and Broadview. And I read the petition 
of the prayer. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition on behalf of constituents of the Cypress Hills area 
concerned about conditions of highways in the region, 
particularly Highway 18: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, again today this petition is signed by individuals 
from the community of Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the funding of the drug Avastin. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Carnduff, 

Gainsborough, and Glen Ewen. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of the constituents from Carnduff. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the communities of Carnduff, 
Carievale, Gainsborough, Glen Ewen, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I again present a petition on behalf of people 
concerned about the condition of Highway 5 between Humboldt 
and Saskatoon. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Allan, Humboldt, Vonda, Saskatoon, Lintlaw, 
Wadena, Endeavour, Preeceville, and Sturgis. And I’m glad to 
present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It won’t come as 
any surprise that I too have a number of pages of petitions of 
citizens that are concerned about the safety on Highway No. 5: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And again it demonstrates how well travelled this highway is, 
Mr. Speaker, because the signatures are from Humboldt, 
Meacham, Saskatoon, Big River, Colonsay, Macklin, Rose 
Valley, Lake Lenore, Preeceville, St. Gregor, Swift Current, St. 
Brieux, and Yorkdale. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of people concerned 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

about the Estevan Daycare Co-operative. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, Macoun, and 
Swift Current. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
for the safe driving conditions on Highway No. 3. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition on behalf of people across 
Saskatchewan who are disappointed that Saskatchewan and PEI 
[Prince Edward Island] are the only provincial jurisdictions in 
Canada that do not have a dedicated children’s hospital. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a children’s hospital 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Today the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, live in the constituencies of 
Saskatoon Silver Springs and Saskatoon Sutherland. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures of this petition are from Whitewood 
and Broadview. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by good citizens from Watrous 
and Lockwood. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise in the 
Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of citizens 
regarding the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the citizens of 
Carnduff and Gainsborough. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that this is the first time in the 
province’s history that the government has denied coverage of a 
cancer drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Carnduff, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege today to rise in 
the House to present a petition calling for the widening of 
Highway 5. Mr. Speaker, Highway No. 5 passes through my 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. It’s my privilege to read 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, 
Lake Lenore, and Viscount. I so present on their behalf. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on Thursday 
move first reading of Bill No. 206, An Act respecting 
Bio-diesel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Immigration: for the fiscal 
year 2005 and ’06, what is the average process in time for 
each category of the Saskatchewan immigration and 
nominee program from the point he or she applies to the 
point that he or she is considered nominated? 
 

Also the same question for . . . [inaudible] . . . and to date, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Also I’d like to ask: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: how 
much money did the department provide to the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism for the fiscal year 2006 
and for the two previous years? 
 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I shall give notice I shall on day no. 13 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: how 
much money did the department provide to the provincial 
youth advisory committee for the fiscal year 2006 and for 
the two previous years? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 13 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan: 
how many employees of Investment Saskatchewan have 
moved to Victoria Park Capital, and what are their names? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members, it was 40 years ago in 1966 that the 
first female Pages were hired in a Canadian legislature. Those 
Pages worked here in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. I 
understand it was five years later before any other legislature 
followed our lead. 
 
Today seated in our Chamber where she once served as one of 
those first female Pages is Ms. Joan (Seeley) Mushka and Ms. 
Vicki Brooks, who is deceased, were working as guides for 
Wascana Centre Authority when they were recruited to serve as 
Pages in the House for the fall emergency session in 1966. They 
are listed in “Page Boys of Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly,” as numbers 159 and 160 respectively for 1966, 
which was a second session that was a special session to deal 
with a strike by SaskPower workers. 
 
Vicki Brooks was hired at the same as Joan, so she shares this 
very first honour. Ms. Mushka is accompanied by Joe Moran 
and Jan Beadnell. Joe Moran was the head of the Wascana 
Centre Authority, and Jan Beadnell was the supervisor when 
Joan and Vicki worked there prior to being hired to work as 
Pages. 
 
I’m sure that all members will want to extend a welcome to 
these special guests and a very special welcome back to Joan 
(Seeley) Mushka, as we celebrate the 40th anniversary of the 
first female Pages hired in Canada. I hope your visit here today 
brings back many, many happy memories. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to join with you on 
behalf of my colleagues and members of the opposition, in 
welcoming Ms. Joan (Seeley) Mushka back to this Assembly. 
As one of the first female Pages that served on the floor of the 
Legislative Assembly, we’re pleased to welcome you back. And 
we want to let you know that over the past number of years and 
the years that I have served in this House that people have 
learned very well from your presence as a Page in the 
Assembly. We certainly want to say thank you to the current 
Pages and the many Pages through the years for the kind work 
that they have done for the members of this Assembly. 
 
A special welcome as well to Ms. Jan Beadnell and Mr. Joe 
Moran. Welcome back to your Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

would like to join with you and the opposition in recognizing 
Ms. (Seeley) Mushka back to her Legislative Assembly. We 
will all recognize that when young people come to serve as 
Pages in this place that it starts with a significant amount of 
trepidation about what’s occurring here, but by the time you 
come to the end of the session, it has become a part of your 
secret history which you are not allowed to share in full bloom 
with others. 
 
But I also want to inform Ms. (Seeley) Mushka, Mr. Speaker, 
that those who have come after her and 40 years later continue 
to serve the Legislative Assembly and the members here very 
well. And I know that she would take personal pride in the 
descendants of a great tradition that she began, being part of a 
change in history. And we welcome her back here today as 
well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I 
may make another introduction. Mr. Speaker, to you and to all 
hon. members, I’d like to introduce a special guest who is 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce Lucille 
Parkinson who is president of the Calgary chapter of Dreams 
Take Flight. Dreams Take Flight is a special needs children’s 
charity that is 100 per cent volunteer run. And over the past 14 
years, Dreams has taken 1,813 special needs kids on a one-day 
dream trip to Disneyland. 
 
Ms. Parkinson is originally from Shellbrook and is an in-charge 
flight attendant of 35 years with Air Canada. She was 
Saskatchewan homecoming queen for northern Saskatchewan 
back in 1972, but more recently she was voted Woman of 
Vision for Alberta in 2000 and Calgary Citizen of the Year in 
2002 for her work with special needs kids. 
 
In 1994 together with Brian Sklar, Ms. Parkinson created the 
idea for an annual fundraiser during Calgary Stampede week 
called Black Tie & Blue Jeans Dance and Silent Auction. Mr. 
Sklar and his band have played for the event every year since, 
and it’s a unique event where no one accepts any payment for 
their services. Every single penny goes to the kids — a total of 
over $1 million raised with 200,000 of that raised in this last 
year alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look to the gallery, I see she is also 
accompanied by someone that we will recognize: world-famous 
accordion player and polka king, Walter Ostanek, as well as 
Brian Sklar. I’ll ask all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, to join 
together in saying welcome to Ms. Lucille Parkinson. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the rest of the members, I am pleased 
to introduce — though he’s already been named — one of 
Canada’s most decorated entertainers, Walter Ostanek. 
 

Walter has 19 Grammy nominations; three Grammy wins; a star 
on Toronto’s Walk of Fame; memberships in every polka music 
hall of fame in Canada, the United States, and Europe; is a 
fellow in the Order of Canada; and was recently featured in a 
one-hour special on the Bravo television network entitled The 
Cult of Walt. 
 
Mr. Ostanek is currently touring in Saskatchewan with 
Saskatchewan’s Western Senators. Last Friday the group played 
to a sold-out Oktoberfest in Windthorst and to a packed hall in 
Swift Current on Saturday night. This coming Friday and 
Saturday Saskatchewan’s legendary Danceland at Manitou 
Beach welcomes Canada’s polka king. Mr. Ostanek currently 
has 82 albums and is working on number 83 and a new 
television series to be shot at Casino Regina in May 2007, again 
with Saskatchewan’s Western Senators. 
 
Please join me in welcoming everybody’s Uncle Walter, 
Canada’s polka king, Walter Ostanek. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Accomplished Great-Grandmother 
Honoured for Academic Excellence 

 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, Bernadette Nancy Hillier is 
an exceptional kokum from Denare Beach and a member of the 
Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation. Recently she was honoured for 
academic excellence at the University of Regina. 
 
Bernadette works at the Deschambault Lake Health Centre, 
helps out at the Flin Flon Women’s Resource Centre, teaches 
Cree language skills and traditional beading at the local 
friendship centre. Still she maintained the highest possible 
academic standards. Ms. Hillier scored the highest grade point 
average of her class in social work. 
 
She convocated from the University of Regina, winner of the 
University Prize in Social Work, along with almost 500 of her 
peers. And, Mr. Speaker, she did all of this as the grandmother 
and great-grandmother of 15. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all members to join with me 
in congratulating Bernadette Nancy Hillier. Her dedication to 
her family, her culture, her community, and to academics is 
truly inspiring. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation’s 
Annual Champions Luncheon 

 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today 
the Leader of the Opposition along with the members from 
Indian Head-Milestone, Saskatoon Southeast, and Regina 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

Elphinstone-Centre and I the opportunity to attend the 
Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan’s 
annual champions luncheon. 
 
The CHHF [Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation of 
Saskatchewan] was founded on the belief that children in this 
province deserve the finest health care. The CHHF is 
committed to optimizing the safety, health, and welfare of our 
children by supporting programs in the areas of pediatric patient 
care, disease and injury prevention, pediatric health education, 
and research. 
 
Today we were introduced to a terrific young girl from Regina, 
Micaella Fiacco. Micaella is the 2007 CHHF Champion Child. 
She is 14 years old. At the age of 11, Micaella was diagnosed 
with familial adenomateus polyposis, FAP for short, a disease 
which sees many tumours form throughout the abdomen. 
Micaella has had six surgeries in the past two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CHHF is dedicated to bringing a children’s 
hospital to Saskatchewan children. After meeting Micaella, it is 
easy to see why Brynn Boback-Lane and the entire CHHF are 
working so hard to make that happen. Today’s luncheon also 
serves as the kickoff for the fourth annual Regina Cares for 
Kids Radiothon. The CHHF, in partnership with Harvard 
Broadcasting stations, will be broadcasting live from the 
Northgate Mall tomorrow through Friday. You can hear 
amazing stories from children and their families and pledge 
your support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through you I ask all members to wish Micaella 
Fiacco well as the 2007 Children’s Health & Hospital 
Foundation of Saskatchewan’s Champion Child. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Osteoporosis Canada Opens Its Saskatoon Office 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November is 
Osteoporosis Month, so it was with great pleasure that I 
participated yesterday in the grand opening of the first office of 
the Saskatoon chapter, Osteoporosis Canada. 
 
The new office is in Market Mall in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Eastview. This is a great location as I have been told 
that this constituency has the highest concentration of seniors in 
the country. 
 
Congratulations to Elda Clarke, executive Chair, Saskatoon 
chapter, and the many dedicated volunteers who work so 
diligently through education, advocacy, patient support, and 
research to aid those suffering from this disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, osteoporosis is a silent disease that can go 
undetected in its early stages. The society’s website, speakers, 
information line, books, videos, brochures, and fact sheets help 
identify those at risk and suggest lifestyle changes that could 
prevent injuries. Mr. Speaker, the osteoporosis society’s 
emphasis is on treating the patient rather than the disease, 
involving those affected in their own treatment. 

Mr. Speaker, because of the efforts, dedication, skill, and 
commitment of the society’s volunteers and staff, the 
deterioration of the quality of life associated with osteoporosis 
is no longer inevitable and unavoidable. Congratulations to the 
Saskatoon chapter and their volunteers, and thank you for all 
that you do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Langbank Manufacturer to Expand Facility 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
Seed Hawk manufacturing of Langbank announced plans to 
expand its plant and sell a minority share to a Swedish 
agricultural company, Vaderstad-Verken. The new 
manufacturing plant will be constructed close to the existing 
facility just north of Langbank on No. 9 Highway. This new 
plant will mean many more jobs for the Langbank area. 
 
Pat Beaujot, president of Seed Hawk, says this agreement will 
give them instant access to international markets. 
Vaderstad-Verken is a well respected European agricultural 
company. Their investment in Seed Hawk as well as the 
expansion project will benefit both Seed Hawk’s international 
customers as well as their domestic ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Seed Hawk has been developing direct seed 
equipment since 1992 and have marketed their drills in Canada 
and throughout North America. Recently, in fact this past 
August, Seed Hawk sold three direct seed units to the country 
of the Ukraine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Seed Hawk on this most recent 
announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Book Chronicles Long-Distance Runner’s 
Triumphs and Challenges 

 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
short time ago I had the honour of attending the launch of a 
book entitled Never Give Up: Ted Jaleta’s Inspiring Story. The 
book is a powerful chronicle of the triumphs and challenges of 
this outstanding Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ted Jaleta’s accomplishments as a long-distance 
runner both here in Saskatchewan and around the world are 
legendary. This year alone, at age 51, Ted Jaleta won the Fort 
Qu’Appelle Echo Lake Road Race for the 11th time, and he 
came in first overall at the SGI CANADA Charity 10 K Road 
Race. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the story of the victory that this book is really 
about, is Mr. Jaleta overcoming imprisonment and torture in his 
native Ethiopia, overcoming four years in refugee camps, 
triumphing over the trials of adapting to a new culture and 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

country after arriving in Canada in 1982, and transcending all of 
those challenges to become an outstanding Canadian citizen, a 
runner worthy of the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame as well 
as a coach, a motivational speaker, and a tremendous role 
model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina-based author and journalist Deana Driver 
worked with Mr. Ted Jaleta to tell this story of triumph over 
great adversity. Peggy Collins also paid a critical role in telling 
this amazing story, and I want to thank them both. Also the 
book is dedicated Mr. Jaleta’s sister, his angel, Sadate, who 
died of breast cancer in 1993. And in her memory, $1 from the 
sale of each book will be donated to the Canadian Breast 
Cancer Foundation. 
 
Ted Jaleta says that Canada gave him a second chance. Well let 
me thank Ted Jaleta on behalf of this Assembly for giving so 
much to Canada and Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

The New Democratic Party and Traditional Supporters 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday’s 
Leader-Post had an interesting headline. It said, “Labour upset 
with NDP.” Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. It appears that some of 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] traditional supporters are 
getting tired of this government’s antics. Maybe it’s because the 
NDP keep adopting the Sask Party’s ideas. I wonder if the NDP 
will try to pacify the labour leadership with an agreement 
crafted on a napkin on the eve of the election like they did in 
2003. After all it was the member from Regina Lakeview that 
said this is how this government operates. 
 
The only problem, Mr. Speaker, is after the 2003 election, the 
NDP took the money back. It gave workers increases then asked 
them to return thousands of dollars because someone decided 
they weren’t worth the raises they had been promised and 
received. 
 
Now labour is threatening the NDP. One delegate at the SFL 
[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] convention told the 
Labour minister, we’ll take you down. In adopting the Sask 
Party’s policies in a desperate attempt to turn around the polls, 
the NDP is driving a wedge between the traditional supporters. 
As for everyone else, they see through the NDP charade. 
 
This government has a history of trying to buy votes by 
bouncing the PST [provincial sales tax] up and down like a 
yo-yo. Three times the NDP government has reduced the sales 
tax before an election to raise it after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are smarter than that and 
they are tired of this government trying to buy votes with 
taxpayers’ money. They’ve seen these tricks before. To quote 
The Who, “Won’t Get Fooled Again.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Internet Service for Northern Communities 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Humboldt is apparently confused about the 
purpose of the SaskTel tower at Dore Lake and I just want to 
take this opportunity to clear things up for her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the member opposite seems 
to think the tower in question was built to provide Internet 
services. If she had done her homework, she would know that it 
actually was built to replace an old tower to enable the delivery 
of basic local voice services. 
 
She would also know that SaskTel’s wireless Internet service 
and cellular service is delivered using entirely different 
technologies than those used to deliver basic local services. 
 
Now having said that, I am very pleased to say that SaskTel has 
announced that high-speed Internet service is via DSL [digital 
subscriber line] technology and is available to the people of 
Dore Lake as part of the northern broadband network initiative. 
This initiative is separate and distinct from the CommunityNet 
II program, and will install the infrastructure and deliver 
high-speed Internet service to a total of 35 First Nations and 
northern communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend SaskTel and its 
employees for continuing to lead the way in providing 
high-speed Internet to more rural locations than any other 
company in Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Coverage for Out-of-Province Medical Care 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
the Minister of Health had the opportunity to meet with Crystal 
Bonderud, Doug Bonderud’s widow. 
 
Despite this meeting, there are still many unanswered questions 
around the communication and coordination of Doug’s care. 
Crystal feels she is being denied out-of-country coverage from 
this government for Doug’s surgery at the Mayo Clinic because 
her oncologist didn’t follow Saskatchewan Health policies and 
procedures. However, she spoke to three different officials in 
the Department of Health and no one guided her as to how she 
should obtain or could obtain out-of-province coverage, Mr. 
Speaker. Simply telling the patient that prior approval is needed 
is not enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: what steps is 
he taking in the wake of this case, in the wake of the baby Paige 
case and many others that are brought before his attention, what 
steps is he taking to ensure that officials in his department in the 
health care system are properly communicating to patients 
about their options for out-of-province travel and 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

out-of-province treatment, especially when literally lives hang 
in the balance, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question. The Leader of the Opposition is correct. 
Yesterday I had the opportunity to review the case as presented 
again by Mrs. Bonderud. 
 
I want the House and people of Saskatchewan to know that this 
I thought was a very productive meeting, although at the end 
there wasn’t agreement on the exact nature of what we should 
do to go forward. But Mrs. Bonderud is a loving, caring, 
compassionate, committed, and dedicated individual who’s 
doing her husband very proud. And she’s carrying the message 
loud and clear. She promised her husband, Mr. Speaker, that 
she would do all she could to ensure that what happened to her 
husband would not happen to anyone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I take that request and direction very seriously. 
We have taken action in the past. The list is too long for me to 
enunciate it in the seconds available. We have taken action in 
results of the baby Paige case, and we are certainly looking at 
this particular case with ways to ensure that indeed some of the 
things that happened will not happen again. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s true that Crystal, and Doug’s 
friends and family, are doing their job with respect to making it 
better for others. The family of baby Paige did the same. The 
families of other patients whose cases have come before this 
minister have done the same. We’re waiting for this NDP 
government and for this minister to do his job in this regard, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s not happening yet. 
 
When the doctors at the Mayo Clinic began the surgery on 
Doug, they found that he was bleeding internally. They said he 
would have required emergency surgery in days. The choice 
that he was left with was to stay and have the surgery, or come 
back to Saskatchewan and wait. No guarantees were given as to 
the care he would receive in Canada, or when he would get it, 
Mr. Speaker. The reality is, is without immediate surgery Doug 
may not have survived the trip home. Because of the emergent 
nature of this case, why is Sask Health still denying coverage 
for urgent surgery, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think, as the member knows, there a number of options 
available to individuals and families when certain things appear 
not to go correctly within the health system. Mr. Speaker, in the 
meeting yesterday, I was able to outline for Mrs. Bonderud a 
number of options that she can take and the family can take in 
order to ensure that the various pieces of this . . . the various 
questions that she’s asking get answered. 

Mr. Speaker, for the majority of individual questions that are 
specific to this case, Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite 
is very much aware that for privacy, legal, and jurisdictional 
reasons, I cannot make specific comments on some of the 
specific questions. But in general, there are procedures in place 
that can help to answer those questions. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Crystal and Doug Bonderud felt that 
they had to navigate a very complex health system on their own 
and under very, very stressful circumstances. Perhaps the 
outcome of Doug’s illness would have been different had this 
couple been given the time of day when they first entered the 
health care system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, there should have been options prior to 
Crystal having to come to this Legislative Assembly, prior to 
her having to bury her husband. But, according to Crystal, no 
support was offered by the system. When they decided to get a 
second opinion at the Mayo, they spoke to the provincial quality 
care coordinator. They spoke to the head of the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency. They spoke to a medical consultant at 
Saskatchewan Health. And no one told them that their 
oncologist had to write a letter to Sask Health requesting 
out-of-country coverage, Mr. Speaker. Why is that happening in 
the health care system today, and what is the minister doing to 
fix it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There are a number of questions in what the Leader of the 
Opposition proposes. In those questions, Mr. Speaker, there are 
quite a number of processes and procedures that are being 
addressed by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and the regional 
health authority — not just today, Mr. Speaker, but in the past. 
 
Every physician, every specialist, every clinical head of every 
department in Saskatchewan Health, Mr. Speaker, is aware of 
the out-of-country policy. And, Mr. Speaker, why certain things 
do not get communicated — if in fact they were not 
communicated, Mr. Speaker — there’s a process in place to 
answer those questions. It has been in place for some time 
because this government has realized, and the system has 
realized, that on occasion, Mr. Speaker, certain questions don’t 
get answered. 
 
So how can we best deal with that, Mr. Speaker? The 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is currently taking steps, has 
taken steps to ensure that those issues are addressed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that minister is responsible for the 
health care system in the province of Saskatchewan. They 
spoke to the provincial quality care coordinator, the head of the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and a medical consultant at Sask 
Health, and no one told them of the steps that they needed to 
take to get a referral for out-of-province treatment. 
 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

The Premier has been listening to this exchange. He will know 
well the story of the Bonderuds. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the 
Premier would meet with Crystal — she’s here again today — 
to hear from her directly about this example — which is not 
unique; we have brought them before this Assembly before. 
This government is not doing what it needs to do to 
communicate the process that it itself has put in place, to 
patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would note that in the meeting yesterday, the minister even 
intimated that somehow it might have made a difference that 
Crystal and her family could afford this trip to the Mayo — 
which, by the way, they cannot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he meet with Crystal today? 
Will he get first-hand a report from her about has happened in 
the case of her husband, of her husband’s death, and then will 
he commit to fix the health care system, to do something about 
it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Not 
to defer from the importance of the subject matter in front of us, 
but the member, the Leader of the Opposition, and other 
members across the way have frequently cast aspersions upon 
things I may or may not have said when quite frequently, Mr. 
Speaker, I have not said the things that they have attributed to 
me. And in this case, Mr. Speaker, I would not have even 
intimidated anything along those lines. 
 
We have very specific policy, Mr. Speaker, and that policy is 
directed specifically towards ensuring that the overall health 
care system is sustainable. 
 
The members opposite have frequently raised questions in this 
Chamber that show they have no interest in sustainability, Mr. 
Speaker. They talk about changing policy on out-of-country 
expenses without any criteria. Mr. Speaker, they talk about 
funding new drugs, Mr. Speaker, without any reviews. They 
talk about funding regional and district construction without 
any . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question is simple. To the 
minister, without any preamble: what steps is he taking now to 
ensure that patients, that families, that people like Crystal 
Bonderud are given all the information, all of their options so 
they know that they can seek and receive out-of-province 
treatment that literally could save lives, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Communication is very important in the health care field. I 
understand that, Mr. Speaker. The members on this side 
understand that. And certainly the details of this case have 
brought to the attention that on occasion within the system 
perhaps the communication needs to be enhanced. 

But, Mr. Speaker, let it not be forgotten that out-of-province 
coverage has benefited close to 1,500 people in the last year, 
and this government has committed, over the course of the last 
12 months, over $10 million to cover out-of-province expenses. 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a secret to the physicians, the 
specialists, or the people of Saskatchewan. But on occasion if 
the communication isn’t there, the people at the agency, the 
regional health authority, and certainly in my department know 
we’ve got to spend more attention to that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

 
Supply of Emergency Room Nurses 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Friday the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses released a damning 
report on the shortage of emergency room nurses and the 
associated risks to patients. The report says, and I quote, “. . . 
many of the province’s Emergency Departments are 
overcrowded, understaffed and under-resourced.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses say that there 
are 64 emergency room nurses short right now to have a full 
complement, Mr. Speaker, for a full staffing complement in our 
emergency rooms. This spring the minister said filling 
vacancies was priority number one for him. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re not seeing his priorities filled. 
 
Will the minister agree with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 
that today we are 64 nurses short, just in the emergency rooms 
in our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I appreciate the question. And indeed I and Saskatchewan 
Health welcome the work that the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses have done in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the proposal brought forward by SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] suggests is there are 41 vacant 
positions, and they suggest there should be an additional 23 
positions put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed as the focus of our efforts over 
the next little while, through the recruitment and retention 
initiatives that we have announced, to fill the vacancies within 
our regional health authorities and the facilities operating 
throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, I will not argue with the 
member opposite or Saskatchewan Union of Nurses about total 
numbers that may or may not be required. Every single vacancy 
we fill with the programs we put in place is a step forward to 
improving the quality of care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the report goes on to say that 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

over 345 work-situation reports were documented, Mr. Speaker, 
that put patient care in jeopardy; 95 per cent of those 
documented cited adverse effects of inadequate staffing levels, 
Mr. Speaker. Patients are being jeopardized in our emergency 
rooms because staffing levels are short. The report goes on to 
quote a number of the nurses that are working in emergency 
rooms and here are some of the quotes: 
 

Patient and nurse safety compromised due to nurses 
working alone in the department on nights and weekends.  
 

Another quote, get this: 
 

Adult patient routinely placed in beds reserved for children 
so pediatric admissions are seriously delayed. 

 
Lack of senior nurses . . . another quote: 
 

Lack of senior nurses to work with junior nurses. At times 
all nurses on a shift are junior nurses [only]. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is no way to run the emergency rooms in our 
province. When is he going to start filling his priorities and 
commitments and fill the emergency rooms with a proper 
complement of nurses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 
that’s exactly what I’m doing and what Saskatchewan Health is 
doing and the regional health authorities are doing. Mr. 
Speaker, we even committed — just a little over a month and a 
bit ago — $25 million for recruitment and retention. And, Mr. 
Speaker, over the last month and a half the chief provincial 
nursing officer has been meeting with emergency room nurses 
around this province even before we had the information 
brought forward by Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday of last week the nursing committee of 
the recruitment and retention initiative had a meeting and 
discussed the proposal brought forward by the emergency room 
nurses in the city of Regina. Mr. Speaker, we are doing exactly 
what we said we’d do. Our focus is certainly on filling 
vacancies. Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of the dollars and the 
commitments is on nurses, although we are also looking at 
affiliated health professionals. Mr. Speaker, we are dedicated 
and determined to filling those vacancies and in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be doing do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know this minister is 
dedicated to talking about the problem. The problem is he 
doesn’t do anything to fix the problem, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a shortage. The shortage discourages 
experienced nurses from continuing to work in the emergency 
room. 
 

The nurses’ union says degrading professional practice 
environment and the destructive effects of this cause 
experienced nurses to not want to work in the emergency room. 
The common theme identified by the union is, and I quote — 
this is what nurses are saying: 
 

Why would I stay and work in . . . [an] environment, when 
I can work in other departments with significantly less 
workload and a realistic pace [Mr. Speaker]? 

 
The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and nurses across this 
province in emergency rooms, and especially the experienced 
ones, are getting fed up with the shortage of staff in our 
emergency rooms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This minister said that he’s been working on it, but he hasn’t 
done anything, Mr. Speaker. When will the minister start filling 
the vacancies in this province and quit just talking about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, $25 million, two 
committees of dedicated individuals providing advice — and 
I’m acting on that advice, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already put in 
place a recruitment agency. We’ve already put in place 
programs to attract nurses and others to this province. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve got bursaries in our education system. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the retention initiatives that we put into the graduating 
classes have produced 90 per cent of those graduating classes 
working in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only, not only am I talking about it, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve 
pulled together people to make this work. They’re happy to 
work with us. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it is working — unlike 
the members opposite who can’t take sustainability, can’t use 
the word sustainability in a sentence. 
 
As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, they’re talking about 
funding additional nurses and physicians and specialists without 
any stated guiding strategy. Mr. Speaker, they talk about 
building a children’s hospital without doing any planning. Mr. 
Speaker, they talk about funding new drugs without any review. 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Procedure at Public Accounts Committee 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, time 
and time again the Minister of Community Resources had told 
this Assembly that he welcomes scrutiny. Unfortunately other 
members of his caucus don’t appear to be on the same page. 
 
Despite a unanimous motion to have the former deputy minister 
appear before the Public Accounts Committee, members of the 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

government side did a complete reversal. The former deputy 
minister was not allowed to answer questions directly. Mr. 
Speaker, can the minister instruct his colleagues that it is the 
minister’s policy to welcome this public scrutiny? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as House Leader I’m happy 
to take the question which is about procedure. The member 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, makes reference to the procedure in the 
Public Accounts Committee today. And there had been, Mr. 
Speaker, a motion to have the former deputy minister of the 
Department of Community Resources attend. She was there. 
 
There was also, Mr. Speaker, a decision made by the 
committee, democratically made by the committee that the 
long-standing tradition of the current deputy minister 
responding on behalf of the committee which appears before the 
Public Accounts would be the person who would speak for the 
department. The former deputy was there, was there to provide 
advice on the answers. 
 
The members opposite may not have liked the answers, Mr. 
Speaker. But it’s about seeking information. Information was 
provided. And the proper procedures were followed by the 
committee today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, she was called as a witness. 
That was unanimously agreed by the committee. Yesterday the 
former minister of Community Resources said she wouldn’t 
even be there today because she was sick, yet she showed up. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did they do — a bait and switch. 
 
Everyone agreed to it. Suddenly a legitimate line of questioning 
was shut off. Suddenly the woman who’s at the storm when 
serious allegations were made about the safe house, were 
surfacing, is no longer available for questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is this government frustrating 
efforts to get to the bottom of this serious issue? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that the 
hon. member’s questions are somewhat misleading. You listen 
to his statement. He establishes the fact, Mr. Speaker. He said 
the deputy minister was there. That’s what I said. She was 
there. She was there, provided information for the answers that 
were asked by members of the committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The committee has the right to determine its own procedures. 
Its procedures asked her to be there; she was there. It defended 
the long-standing tradition, Mr. Speaker, of the current deputy 
of the department being the one who would provide the 
response to the members of the committee. That was done. 
Questions were asked, answers provided. They may not have 

liked the answers, Mr. Speaker, but the answers were provided. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Oyate Safe House 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, if she was there, she might as 
well have been in a different part of the building. Mr. Speaker, 
she never answered one question. 
 
This government doesn’t want the truth to come out. This 
government wants this whole mess to go away. This 
government doesn’t welcome scrutiny, and neither does that 
minister who won’t even get up today and answer the questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just yesterday I was presented a list of meetings 
between the department and the Oyate board. There were two 
meetings where the minutes were not provided. These were also 
the two meetings where the minister attended. Now isn’t that 
pretty convenient? Mr. Speaker, the minister, he says he 
welcomes public scrutiny. Will he commit to this House by the 
end of the day to produce the minutes of those meetings that he 
attended that there’s no minutes given for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I once again want to 
reiterate that I welcome scrutiny on this particular file, Mr. 
Speaker. We will continue to welcome the scrutiny because, 
Mr. Speaker, the truth will always rise to the surface. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have always maintained open communication on 
this file. We let people of Saskatchewan know exactly what is 
happening. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
this: the facility is closed, the children are being looked after 
and, Mr. Speaker, what we have right now is an irresponsible 
opposition that not only have they misquoted me, not only have 
they made irresponsible statements, all they have created, Mr. 
Speaker, is negative headlines. And now they’re going after a 
long tradition of deputy ministers responding to their particular 
portfolio. Now they want to circumvent that, Mr. Speaker. 
Nothing but negative, negative, doom and gloom and fear, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan doesn’t want that. We want solutions. We plan 
on implementing those solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, he didn’t answer the question. 
He attended two meetings with the Oyate board which were the 
only minutes that were not produced to this committee. Would 
he stand in the House today and explain why that is? 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that we 
have had discussions with the Oyate board on an ongoing basis. 
We advised them that there is some problems and, Mr. Speaker, 
on every occasion that we’ve advised them that there are some 
problems, actions were taken by the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll again point out that we have absolutely 
nothing to hide. We have been very forthright with the 
information, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue providing that 
information. Ninety-nine point nine per cent of the quotes that 
that member used in this Assembly were statements that we 
presented to them and evidence that we put on the table so that 
they have the courtesy of knowing what was done when, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But once again I go back to the opposition. Not only do they 
accuse the chiefs of using the race card, Mr. Speaker, but last 
year, a couple of years ago, they also said, we’re going to cut 
$50 million from Social Services’ budget. That’s their solution, 
Mr. Speaker, cut Social Services’ budget. And, Mr. Speaker, 
where would the children be today if those guys got in power? 
Nowhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, where would the children be 
today if it wasn’t for the advocate, the auditor, and a newspaper 
that reported this? They’d still be in the same environment and 
he’d have done nothing about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, according to the list provided 
to me yesterday, there were no meetings between the Oyate 
board and the department officials from February 7, 2005 to 
January 27, 2006. During this period allegations were made 
concerning financial irregularities, nepotism, and the inability to 
provide proper services to these vulnerable children. Yesterday 
the minister said the allegations of nepotism and financial 
irregularities were investigated and no evidence was found. Mr. 
Speaker, can this minister explain how these investigations 
were conducted without any meetings of the Oyate board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy now the 
member has finally been able to pronounce Oyate correctly. 
He’s been, oh-yitti, oh-yaddi . . . Now it’s Oyate. So finally, 
Mr. Speaker, he’s able to pronounce the name correctly. And 
that goes to show how much they have researched this 
particular file, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Every bit of information that they have quoted in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, they have got from my department. 
We’re forthright, open, honest, and accountable, Mr. Speaker. 
And again I point out we’re not going to listen to the negative 
message of the Sask Party. We’re not going to continue looking 
at the problems that occurred two or three years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have a go-forward plan, Mr. Speaker, that talks about 
accountability. We have a go-forward plan that talks about 
making sure that First Nations are involved, Mr. Speaker. And 
above all else we have a go-forward plan that’s going to solve 
the problem and help these kids off the street so no longer are 
they exploited for sexual purposes, Mr. Speaker. That’s our 
plan. We’re going to stick to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006 
(No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur l’éducation (no 2) 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, The 
Education Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 4, The Education Amendment Act, 2006 
(No. 2) be now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, The 
Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 22, The Legal Profession 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read for the first 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Securities Transfer Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 
Securities Transfer Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources that Bill No. 23, The Securities Transfer Act be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to table responses to questions no. 11 and 12. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 11 and 12 have been 
submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Trew, seconded by Ms. 
Hamilton.] 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a 
privilege to stand and enter into the debate on the Speech from 
the Throne. I don’t know if I’ve ever stood right after question 
period to enter into debate because what I really would rather 
do is just talk about what the minister just answered and the 
lack of answers from the Department of Community Resources 
and Employment and how they’re absolutely stonewalling. He 
says they want scrutiny, and they don’t want scrutiny. And he 
says there’s minutes, but he won’t provide them and all of those 
things. 
 
But that really wasn’t what I wanted to talk about. It’s what you 
really want to gravitate to when you first stand up after question 
period, but certainly there are a number of things that I want to 
talk about regarding the Speech from the Throne and some of 
the comments that were made on that side of the House as 
we’ve gone through this past six or seven days on replying. 
 
But before I get to that, there are a number of thank yous that I 
want to also express, and it starts with the constituency and the 
constituents of Indian Head-Milestone and how fortunate I am 
to represent such a fine group of people. Every year as we travel 
our constituencies — which I know members on both sides of 
the House spend a lot of time doing — you get to meet and 
renew friendships that you’ve made in . . . over past years and 
meet new people. And I can tell you that every year that as I 
travel my constituency I’m impressed by the work ethic and the 
commitment to our province, Mr. Speaker. In spite of the 
government that’s in power right now — and I hear that an 
awful lot — in spite of the government that’s in power they still 
are committed to the province and want to remain here and raise 
their family and work. 
 
[14:30] 
 
We’ve been fortunate for the most part in the constituency of 
Indian Head-Milestone which is mostly agriculture. The small 
area along the Qu’Appelle Valley of course is more geared 
towards tourism, that type of thing, around the Fort Qu’Appelle 
area, but the majority of the constituency is based in agriculture. 
 
And I can say that we have been fortunate over the last two 
years to have two pretty darn good harvests. It could always be 
better, but they have been overall a good average crop. Of 
course last year we battled the low commodity prices, but right 
now there is a certain amount of optimism as the prices are 
moving up. You know, you’re seeing the canolas and the canary 
seeds and flax and lentils rising in price. It’s interesting that 
none of which are marketed under the wheat board, but they are 
actually rising in price. And I know we’re going to have 
certainly a chance to talk about the wheat board issue as we go 
on. 
 
But the constituents of Indian Head-Milestone, and I can 
honestly say, are hardworking individuals that, you know, when 
it comes to issues such as agriculture I tend not to get a lot of 
phone calls because they feel that, you know, they’re taking it 
upon themselves and working through the problems such as 
crop insurance with low coverage and high premiums and 
things like that. They’re dealing with that for the most part on 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

their own. 
 
The other . . . a number of other thank yous of course is to my 
family and all the support that I’ve had from my wife, Cindy, 
and our two boys, Craig and Mark, and their busy lives whether 
it’s . . . it seems to be all into the boarding sports now. They’re 
into wakeboarding and snowboarding, but they certainly 
understand when I can’t be around at times. They still support 
me in what I am doing. 
 
The other person and individual that I really wanted to thank 
. . . And most of the MLAs have talked about their constituency 
assistant. I too have what I think is probably one of the 
strongest, if not the strongest . . . I guess every MLA would say 
that. Well yes, I think everybody’s agreeing with me that my 
constituency assistant, Vonni Widdis, does an excellent job for 
me in our office in Balgonie dealing with constituents from the 
constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
But since I have taken on the . . . have been asked to take on the 
role as Health critic, I know the workload for her has certainly 
gone up. Because you don’t . . . We don’t just have health 
concerns in the area I represent. There are health concerns 
throughout the province and she fields a number of those phone 
calls — in fact an awful lot of those phone calls — and deals 
with the issues that are presented to us. We try and deal with as 
many of them as possible by going through the steps that the 
minister has laid out, whether it’s the quality care coordinator or 
the cancer advocate or professionals like that. 
 
But there are times when results just don’t come the way 
they’re supposed to and where people are waiting extremely 
long time . And some of those people want to go public, and 
certainly Vonni has helped them with that. 
 
Along with our researchers here in the building, Terry 
Gudmundson and her research staff have done an absolutely 
excellent job sorting through the mounds and mounds of health 
concerns that we have come through this office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Madam Deputy Speaker, and I can only 
say, thank you and thank you and thank you. Because of all the 
cases that we have brought forward, you know, we’ve never 
had any that have been misquoted by us. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the research that has been done on each and every one 
of those cases has been ideal. And when they come to the floor, 
Mr. Speaker, they are because this is where . . . this is their last 
resort, and this is where they had to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to congratulate — as a number of the members on our 
side have done — congratulate the new member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who just did an absolutely wonderful job, 
not just during the election but in the lead up to the election. It 
was a hotly contested nomination, and for the NDP, what that 
means, there’s more than one candidate running for a position. 
 
It was a hotly contested nomination in which our successful 
candidate beat out two other strong candidates. And I wanted to 
thank both those other candidates, Audrey Trombley and Mrs. 
Young, for putting their names forward because we certainly 
knew that whoever won that nomination race would be a very 

good representative in this legislature because that would be the 
next step. 
 
As is usual, on our side of the House anyway, the toughest part 
of getting to this place is winning the nomination because it’s 
usually the general election or the election of a . . . a by-election 
is maybe not nearly as hard as winning the nomination race. So 
congratulations for Dustin for a great . . . or for the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy for a good job in the nomination 
race, but more importantly a wonderful job in the election. 
 
I know when we were sitting in the House and bantering back 
and forth — the Deputy Premier and I would talk back and 
forth — and I remember saying that I believe, I have the feeling 
that this NDP government and their candidate, who is the local 
candidate, will be finishing in third place. I believe that he’ll be 
finishing in third place. 
 
Well the deputy minister, the member from Yorkton, said ah, 
that could never . . . that will never happen. There is no way 
that we will finish in third place in Weyburn-Big Muddy, the 
home of Tommy Douglas. There is no way that we could finish 
third. Well lo and behold, lo and behold, to the Deputy Premier, 
I wish we would have put. . . To the Deputy Premier, I wish we 
would have put a little wager on that as to where they would 
finish, Madam Deputy Speaker. Because I said they’d finish 
third, and lo and behold they finished below the Liberals. And 
in Saskatchewan just after a federal election that is pretty tough 
to do, is to finish below the Liberals. But, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, the NDP are able to do that. 
 
The other person that I would like to thank and compliment on 
the work that she has done in this Chamber is our Clerk, Gwenn 
Ronyk, who has been here. . . I have been here for seven years. 
I know she was here for a few more years than that and has 
done absolutely wonderful work in this Chamber. 
 
I can tell you that when I was elected in 1999 some of the first 
orientations that were done she led and really did, really. . . The 
first thing that I was so impressed was the professionalism that 
was put forward. But also with professionalism was a feeling of 
being comfortable, and knowing that if we had questions on 
how the system worked and issues around what went on in the 
Legislative Assembly that we could go to her and talk to her. 
 
And the reason that I am saying that is because I believe that 
this is the last session that she will be the Clerk. As of 
December 31, I believe she will be retiring and she will be 
missed. And so thank you on behalf of myself, and I know 
members on this side of the House, for a job well done over the 
years that she has been here. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, what I really want to get to is 
what I have been hearing in this Chamber over the last six or 
seven days, the replies from the Speech from the Throne. And I 
can say that many members on our side of the House really hit 
some points that were well researched and certainly caused one 
to think about this Throne Speech and how effective it was. 
 
But I also listened to replies from that side of the House. And I 
was interested . . . I think if a person really didn’t know where 
we were on the electoral cycle — if it was first year, second 
year in — I think after listening to some of the speeches on that 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

side of the House we would definitely know where we are in 
the electoral cycle because many of those speeches were 
nothing more than political tirades getting ready for the next 
provincial election. I remember two years ago after the Speech 
from the Throne it wasn’t nearly as politically charged as what 
those members are making it in their replies to the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
And a few of the words that . . . and I just remember a couple 
— whether it’s a member from Saskatoon Nutana or a member 
from Prince Albert Northcote — the word that comes to mind 
so automatically is self-righteous. How self-righteous they 
were, which I really find is really quite interesting because I 
remember listening to the Premier after the Weyburn-Big 
Muddy by-election. And after the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
by-election, where they finished . . . By the way, did I mention 
that they finished third in the by-election? After they finished 
third in the by-election how the Premier stood in front of the 
cameras and said, well Weyburn-Big Muddy has certainly sent 
us a signal and yes we are not maybe . . . we’ve lost touch with 
the electorate and maybe the people aren’t as happy with the job 
that we have been doing as what we think they should be. 
 
And then, not more than five months later, you hear members 
from that side of the House come into this Chamber and reply 
to the Speech from the Throne with this self-righteous, the only 
people that know how to govern in Canada would be the NDP 
government, Madam Deputy Speaker. And it’s unbelievable. 
They go on and they preach about how if we don’t learn from 
the past we’re doomed to repeat it. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, first of all you’ve got to get the 
past correct. Some of the statements that have been made over 
the last six or seven days are absolutely misleading and if 
you’re going to learn from the . . . For example I remember the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana talking about the last, I would 
say, 25 years in this province. And if she is learning from that 
history that she recited, we’re going to be in big trouble with 
this government and we are in big trouble. Because her 
recitation of what the history was in this province is completely 
different than what I remember and I believe what most people 
in the province remember, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana talked about the auditor’s 
report. I found it really quite interesting. She did not talk about 
the auditor’s report in 2006. She chose to talk about the 
auditor’s report in 1982 when the Devine government came to 
power and she supposedly cited from the auditor’s report what 
the debt was from Allan Blakeney moving on to the Devine 
government. And she said it was something around the three . . . 
2 to $3 billion mark. That may have been true but then when 
it’s recited back that the auditor is saying that seven out of the 
last 16 years this government has run a deficit budget, she fails 
to point that out. She fails to acknowledge it. She takes the 
auditor if it serves her purpose but she ignores the auditor when 
it goes against what she is trying to espouse. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, certainly when the Devine 
government took over, there was debt from the Blakeney 
government. We can debate back and forth what that was. But 
what I do know, that through the 1980s there was a 22 per cent 
. . . Well the minister from . . . the former Finance minister is 
saying there’s no debate. Well I think there is an awful lot of 

debate. There’s an awful lot of debate if you want to take into 
the debt that was hidden into the Crowns and if you want to 
take into the unfunded pension liability. 
 
But, you know, once again they’ll take the number that they 
think that serves their political interest. And that’s all it does is 
it serves their political interest because it doesn’t do anything 
for re-acting history accurately. It serves their political interest 
and that’s all they’re worried about, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s interesting because through those years it was 
22 per cent. You could take $3 billion and you can go at 22 per 
cent interest, which is exactly what the Devine government 
inherited was 22 per cent interest. So what does that 3 billion 
do? If it’s 3 billion what does the 3 billion do in four years? It’s 
going to double. Blakeney’s debt will double in four to five 
years on 22 per cent interest, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask all members to 
allow the member from Indian Head-Milestone to continue. 
Order. I ask, I ask the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs to 
please come to order and allow the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone on his feet to continue with his debate. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Absolute incompetence of this government. 
The absolute corrupt government that this government can be, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And you bet it’s corrupt. We’ve got a 
minister, we’ve got a minister from Prince Albert Northcote 
that will stand in this House and talk about a ministerial aide 
and what he did in 1980 but fail to mention what he did in 1990 
and ’95, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The minister from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote can stand in 
here and talk about what happened in the ’80s but fail to 
mention the $40 million he lost and deceived the public for six 
years, wouldn’t tell the public the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The minister, the member from Regina 
Victoria was hollering from his seat about a corrupt government 
but he can’t seem to look in the mirror. If he looked at the 
member beside and saw what that member did to the public by 
misleading them for six years, Madam Deputy Speaker, in fact 
that member had to stand in this House and apologize to the 
public of Saskatchewan. And I don’t remember too many other 
members from this side of the House having to apologize for a 
$40 million loss that was deceived from the public for many, 
many years, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And that’s absolutely appalling because the history that they 
recite is a history that only simply serves their political purpose. 
It does nothing for the political debate of this province. It 
supplies the interests of that party, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And, you know, it’s funny because they’ll stand in this House 
and they’ll holler about the ’80s, but they hate to look in the 
mirror because what this government is going through right 
now is some disastrous times, is some disastrous times. 
 
We can look at . . . It doesn’t matter which file you want to look 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

at. Whether you want to look at health care and the baby Paige 
case or the Crystal Bonderud case or the number and number of 
cases that we’ve brought forward and the absolute shambles 
that this government has made of our health care system. 
 
And it is nothing more than that. They’ve made an absolute 
shambles of our health care system when you have people 
coming to have to plead their case on the steps of the legislature 
because they can’t get service in the emergency room of the 
Regina General Hospital. That is appalling, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when you look at the . . I have to get 
back to my notes here. When you look at some of the things 
that have been said over the last six or seven days and some of 
the resuscitation of history that is so politically slanted, you 
know, whether it’s a corrupt and dishonest government . . . 
which they like to talk about in the ’80s; they love to talk about 
the Devine government in the ’80s. 
 
You know what makes these guys, you know what makes the 
NDP more frustrated than anything else, is that they promised 
more than the Devine government did in the ’80s and still 
couldn’t get elected. 
 
You know, it’s really quite interesting. You know, they think 
that the Devine government was the only government that 
promised and that went into debt. Well that government over 
there, that party over there promised more than any Devine 
government ever did and still couldn’t get elected. 
 
And, you know, it’s interesting how they’ll shy away from their 
cousins, their cousins from Ontario. They’ll talk about the 
Devine government in the ’80s and the fiscal house that they 
left the NDP government in 1990. But you know it’s amazing 
how they’ll ignore what happened under Bob Rae in Ontario. 
What happened under Bob Rae in Ontario was exactly what 
happened under Grant Devine here which is exactly what 
happened under Manitoba which is exactly what happened in 
every other province in Canada. 
 
But you know they’ll fail to acknowledge that. They’ll fail to 
acknowledge the fact that Bob Rae was the premier of Ontario 
when they went into a huge debt, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
because all they seem to want to do is relive the ’80s, relive the 
’80s and do a revisionist history of what the ’80s were, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Because it does nothing for the debate of this 
province, but it does everything to try and pump up their 
sagging political polls. And, you know, you can tell that they’re 
sagging, and you can tell that there’s dissention on that side of 
the House. 
 
I find it absolutely amazing that under a government, under this 
government, you can have a Minister of Community Resources 
stand in the House every day and deal with what he’s dealing 
under Oyate, but you can have a former minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety say one bad thing about the Premier and he’s 
out of cabinet. And we know there’s a couple others on that side 
that don’t have the confidence in the Premier. 
 
And I can guarantee you that if it wasn’t for a leadership 
convention in November, we wouldn’t have seen a 2 per cent 
drop in the PST last week. The only reason we saw a 2 per cent 

drop in the PST last week is because this government and that 
Premier are having huge difficulties internally, huge difficulties 
internally. In other words, I really wish, you know, if I was to 
buy a truck a couple of months ago, that your convention 
could’ve been a couple of months ago so that you would’ve 
dropped the PST then, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well unfortunately 20 minutes passes and passes very, very 
quickly, and I’m glad I was able to stand and comment on some 
of the debate that has been put forward by this NDP 
government, Madam Deputy Speaker. And I know that we’re 
getting closer and closer and closer to an election because I can 
tell the desperation in each one of their voices. They are 
desperate. They are tired. They are old. And after the next 
election, they’ll be opposition. Thank you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance, 
the member from Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m very pleased to enter into this 
debate on the Throne Speech and to have an opportunity to put 
on the record my thoughts about where we’re at today in the 
province and where the direction is that this NDP government 
will help move our province forward. 
 
This is, I think, my 11th opportunity to address a Throne 
Speech in the Assembly. And I have to say as I was reading the 
comments by the new member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, I was 
reminded again of the first opportunity I had in this House in 
early 1996, after the 1995 election, to stand and put on the 
record my comments for the first time. And I was I think, at the 
time, similar to that member. I was the youngest member of the 
House. I was no doubt awestruck. I didn’t have the same good 
fortune that he did, not to be heckled in his speech. In fact I 
think I was heckled in mine at least three or four times, 
unfortunately all by Premier Romanow at the time. But it was, 
nevertheless it was a real privilege to be here. 
 
I’m reminded as I was thinking back on that opportunity, and 
that first opportunity you have to stand and speak on behalf of 
somebody other than yourself — what a remarkable and 
awesome responsibility it is. And I think it’s something that we 
should each remind ourselves of as we stand and speak in this 
Assembly, that in fact we are here to represent our constituents. 
 
The House I think as demonstrated by the comments by the 
previous member have taken a rather personal, adversarial, I 
would say in many ways churlish if not an unfortunate turn. 
There is no doubt that there is no love lost between the two 
sides of this Assembly. There is a lot of personal animosity. 
There is a lot of dislike. But at the end of the day, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I don’t know that that actually really matters. 
Because we’re not here to all be friends. We’re here to make 
sure we’re bringing forward a debate to move forward with the 
issues on behalf of our constituents. 
 
I find it interesting listening to the member opposite refer to me 
as old. I’m still the fourth youngest member of this Assembly, 
and one of only four that are under 40. And as I look to this 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

Assembly and to this debate, I see a wide variety of experience 
in this House on both sides. And I think that we would probably 
do better to try to listen more to what each of us is trying to say 
than necessarily what exactly is said. 
 
I was interested as I was listening to the Speech from the 
Throne to think about what it is that the Speech from the 
Throne actually does. And really it allows us as legislators two 
major opportunities. Number one, it allows us to take stock of 
where the province is today. It allows us to take stock of where 
our province is, where our society is, where our communities 
are, where our economy is. It allows us to lay on the table for 
the debate of Saskatchewan people and its legislators, a 
foundation for us to discuss what change it is we seek to move 
forward. 
 
I have to admit after the spring legislative session I spent a great 
deal of time really thinking about what it was that we’d 
accomplished in this province. I thought a lot about what it was 
we needed yet to do in this province. I spent a lot of time this 
summer thinking about what it is that we need to do, not only 
for the province and its economy and its community, but really 
for the families of this province. What is it Saskatchewan 
people really want at this juncture in our history? 
 
I made the conscious decision not to look at it as the Minister of 
Finance, the privileged position that I hold. I decided not to 
look at it as a cabinet minister. I decided not even to think about 
it really as an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 
Rather I wanted to think about what is it that we could do in this 
Chamber, or what is it we could do as a government to help 
move this province forward in the way that we connect really as 
individuals to our community. What is it that we could do to 
move the province forward? 
 
And I thought about it as a member of a community, as a 
neighbour, as a son, as a grandson. I thought about it as a social 
democrat, as someone who really does believe there’s more that 
we can do to increase opportunity for ordinary people here in 
this province. And I thought about it as a young person who had 
decided to make his home here and to make his living here. I 
also thought about it as someone who comes from a family 
who’d settled here generations ago and who, for generations, 
whose family has made a living here on these Great Plains of 
ours. 
 
I thought a lot about how much this province had changed. I 
thought about how much it had changed since my Grandfather 
Thomson settled here and in the century that . . . this would 
have marked 100 years if he was still alive today since he had 
been born. I thought about how much it had changed since my 
Grandfather Patterson came back from the war. I thought about 
how much it had changed in the brief time that I’ve been alive 
and indeed in the even briefer time that I’ve served in this 
Assembly. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s changed a lot. It’s 
something I don’t think we focus enough on, is Saskatchewan is 
not a static place. This is not a pool of stagnation. This is a 
place of social change. It’s a place of growth. It’s a place of 
opportunity. And the simple fact is, is that life is better here 
than it was a 100 years ago. It is better here than it was when 
the war was won. It is better here than it was even at the turn of 

that 21st century. Life here today in Saskatchewan is better than 
it has been at any point in this province’s history. 
 
And what I think is perhaps even more important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that our best days I do believe are truly yet to come. 
This is a province with tremendous opportunity. 
 
Now I appreciate that maybe that’s not always been so evident. 
I know that as a member of this caucus . . . I joined this 
operation in 1995 as a member of the caucus, and I joined a 
group of men and women who faced some very difficult 
choices in the early part of the 1990s. I know to them it may not 
have been so evident that the best days were yet to come as they 
were grappling with the situation where the previous 
administration was spending a $1.25 for every $1 it took in, at a 
time when we saw a province that had been ripped apart in 
terms of its social fabric with community pitted against 
community, group pitted against group, competing to try and 
bring this province back to a point where we know that it could 
grow, where we could have balanced budgets, where we could 
have financial freedom, where we could have opportunity. This 
was not an easy task for that caucus. 
 
And I know that as I joined it in 1995, it was a real privilege to 
join a group of men and women who had fought hard during 
those early ’90s to really help pay for the excess — the gross 
excess — of the 1980s. 
 
And it’s a caucus that I have to say I have a high degree of 
regard for, not only because of the experience that they have but 
because of who they represent in reflecting what it is we are as 
a community. And as you look on this caucus, you’ll see a wide 
variety of people from different backgrounds. You’ll see 
teachers and farmers; we have social workers and bankers, 
labourers and business people, corrections workers and lawyers, 
preachers and journalists. We’ve got civil servants. We’ve got a 
wide variety of Saskatchewan people represented in this NDP 
caucus. And I think that that is in large part our strength as a 
caucus and as a government, is that we’ve been able through 
that debate to be able to reflect the values and the experience 
that is the Saskatchewan people. 
 
This NDP caucus is the one that came together and found a way 
to bring Saskatchewan back together. It’s the one that found a 
way to secure our future as a prosperous province by making 
politically difficult choices. Choices, yes, to raise taxes, to 
reduce services and rebalance our budget, and the ongoing 
difficult task to make sure that budget stays in balance. 
 
This is an NDP caucus that was prepared to commit itself to 
ensuring that we were able to pull the province back together. 
That we spent the 1990s paying for the 1980s, and that we 
would never return to that place that that administration brought 
us to. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is because, it is because of the choices 
of the Romanow government and their determination to clean 
up the mess made by the Conservatives that we today enjoy an 
unprecedented level of fiscal freedom. It is unbelievable the 
opportunity that we have as legislators, as people in 
government, to be able to make choices that only 10 years ago 
were impossible to imagine. 
 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

That administration, the Romanow administration, laid a 
foundation for growth and prosperity. But it really is the 
administration that has been in office now since 2001 under the 
leadership of the current member for Saskatoon Riversdale, the 
current Premier, that has really worked to reshape this province 
in terms of our opportunity for growth. 
 
I was particularly pleased to be invited to join that cabinet, after 
this Premier was elected, as the minister of Energy. I often joke 
that I have had the good fortune, I suppose, of having served as 
the minister of Energy at a time when oil was at $24 a barrel 
and potash was at I don’t know what. Uranium was at $7. They 
weren’t great times in the resource sector let me assure you. It is 
much nicer to be the Minister of Finance when we are looking 
at substantially higher oil and gas prices, substantially higher 
production in potash, substantially higher prices in uranium. It 
is nevertheless an opportunity for us, a great privilege for me to 
have been able to work in this administration. 
 
[15:00] 
 
What’s interesting to note though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
what this Premier does not get enough credit for in this 
legislature is the work that he did to turn this economy around. 
This Premier came to office with a very simple idea of what it 
was we needed to rededicate ourselves to, and that was to 
ensuring that we had an economic progress that allowed us to 
afford the social progress we wanted within our communities. 
 
And some five years ago, he established a very clear plan and a 
vision to make a better future for Saskatchewan families. It’s 
interesting to note that in the time that the MLA for Riversdale 
has been the Premier, there have been some remarkable 
changes. I was saying to him the other day just before we came 
into the House to cut the provincial sales tax, that most people 
don’t realize that since 2000 — since the year 2000 — we have 
cut almost three-quarters of a billion dollars from the tax rolls 
of this province. We have made record investments in health 
care. We have made record investments in education. We have 
made increases in our social programs that people have not seen 
for a generation. And we’ve done that because the decisions of 
the Romanow administration allowed us to afford it, and the 
decisions of this administration allow us to make it sustainable. 
Those are substantial changes. 
 
And if you look at what’s happened under this Premier, we’ve 
seen that we’ve already taken significant changes to simplify 
and reduce personal income taxes. We have reduced oil and gas 
royalties to stimulate investment. We’ve restructured the potash 
and uranium royalties to stimulate production. We’ve cut 
corporate income taxes. We’ve cut corporate capital taxes. 
We’ve cut farm property taxes. We’ve cut small-business taxes 
and yes, we have cut the sales tax to its lowest level in 20 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Since the year 2000, we have cut 
nearly three-quarters of a billion dollars in taxes while at the 
same time finding the money to invest in education, finding the 
money to invest in social services, finding the money to invest 
in health care. 
 
On any given day if you listen to the members opposite, if you 

talk to three of them, you’ll get six different opinions on what 
we should do. It usually involves spending more, taxing less, 
and doing something around the debt repayment or running a 
deficit. This is always the approach of that opposition, to not 
put on the table what their true plan is. And it’s interesting to 
read in the little pamphlets going around Saskatoon right now 
by the current Leader of the Opposition, his comments about 
what it is that he wants to do — the founding principles of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And he talks about how they will continue to cut the size of 
government. I find this to be a very interesting comment when 
each and every member in their Throne Speech response has 
stood up and talked about how government should be spending 
more. It’s not impossible to spend more as long as you are 
finding either new revenue to deal with it or finding other cuts. 
So if they’re talking about cutting the overall size of 
government on top of all of their new spending, one has to ask, 
who is it that will suffer? What are the priorities of that party as 
opposed to ours? 
 
We’ve laid out our agenda on health care, on education and 
northern affairs and rural development and tax reduction and 
debt control. Those pieces are clear here. What’s not clear is 
what the secret agenda is of that party opposite. What is it 
they’ll cut? Will it be the literacy programs like their federal 
cousins cut? Will it be the support to culture and recreation? 
Will it be a direct attack on our cities? Will it be another attack 
on the poor? What is it that those members will cut to keep with 
their founding principles that the Leader of the Opposition 
hands out in his little pamphlet around Saskatoon? What is it 
that those members will really do? 
 
And it’s interesting that just the other day we were at a debate 
on property tax with the realty association here. And there was 
the Finance critic standing up and saying, you know what, 
we’re going to cut the property tax. It’s our number one 
priority. Well two weeks before, when we had cut the sales tax, 
he said cutting the sales tax is our number one priority, 
followed by income tax which is our number two priority. Oh 
yes and then we’ll cut the property tax. But when he appears 
before a different audience, all of a sudden it’s the property tax 
is the number one issue.  
 
Meanwhile just up the street the Health critic is standing and 
demanding more money, that their number one priority would 
be health care. When is the Sask Party going to come clean with 
Saskatchewan people about what their real agenda is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When are they going to start being 
honest with Saskatchewan people? 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the good news about this 
province and about the Throne Speech today is that our 
economy is stronger than it has ever been. We have more 
people working than ever before in this province. There are 
more opportunities today for young people than we have seen in 
generations. Our tax levels are at their lowest point since I was 
a teenager and the Leader of the Opposition was in university. 
Our tax levels have come down significantly because of the 
strength of our economy. 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

And you know what? We have an opportunity by supporting 
this Throne Speech to make life even better for Saskatchewan 
young people and Saskatchewan families. This legislature will 
be called upon during this session and the spring session to do 
more to help build a better life for Saskatchewan families. 
 
It will be called upon to have the MLAs stand in their places to 
build a better future for young people right here by investing 
more in education and training. It will be called upon to 
strengthen our support for our communities, to improve 
regional infrastructure programs, to improve highways 
programming through new measures to improve accountability 
like the gas tax accountability Act that I’ll introduce in the next 
couple of days in this Assembly. 
 
This legislature will be called upon to support changes to 
improve access to education and health care. It’ll be called upon 
to support the expansion of our natural gas network to the North 
so that even more people can enjoy the benefit of the 
lowest-cost utilities in Canada. And yes, yes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it will be called upon to support the tax changes that I 
have introduced to benefit ordinary Saskatchewan people. 
 
This is an economy that is growing, that can afford to make 
these changes because of the decisions of an NDP government 
that has worked with Saskatchewan people to make real change. 
This is an economy that is growing. It’s in a province that’s 
prospering, and it’s a place that I think all of us should truly 
agree is the best place in this country to live, to work, and to 
raise a family. 
 
This legislature will be called upon to make these changes on 
behalf of the people who elected us and who placed their trust 
in us to rise above cheap partisanship to do their business. On 
behalf of those people, on behalf of those people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am pleased to say I will be supporting the changes 
that have been called upon in the Throne Speech to make life 
better for Saskatchewan families, and I will be supporting the 
Throne Speech motion this afternoon. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
a pleasure to participate in another address-in-reply debate here 
in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Before I get into my remarks, I want to make some introductory 
comments, some acknowledgements, some thank yous. And 
those relate to the new member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. They 
also relate to my family back home and the team whose support 
we enjoy in the Saskatchewan Party and for me and my office 
in Swift Current. 
 
Just before I do that though, Mr. Speaker, may I say this close 
to Remembrance Day on behalf of the official opposition, that 
not only will we — all of us, as will members opposite — be 
marking Remembrance Day in our respective communities, to 
honour those who have paid the ultimate price for freedom for 
our country and those who have served and returned home also 
willing to pay that price. We will be doing that in a number of 

days to celebrate Remembrance Day, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
especially important that we would do so given the fact that 
even this day our troops, our men and women are engaged in a 
battle against terror in a faraway place to make life better in a 
very faraway country. 
 
And on that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you’d permit me, I’d 
like to share just a quick story about an individual that I had the 
great pleasure of meeting just prior to the Labour Day game, 
which also turned out to be an enjoyable event in and of itself, 
and the Riders rolled up a win on the Blue Bombers. But prior 
to that, the reserves had at the armoury an excellent event where 
they wanted to, they wanted to honour reserves of our country, 
those who are prepared, who stand by ready to serve this nation, 
ready to service freedom, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I remember meeting a young corporal who had just days 
earlier returned from Afghanistan, and I asked him about that. I 
actually took him over to our table — I had our . . . our family 
was with us — because I wanted . . . I introduced him to our 
kids. And I said, you know there’s some people call the players 
we’re going to watch in the game heroes, but I want you kids to 
meet a real hero, someone who has just returned from 
Afghanistan to try to make the lives of strangers better, to try to 
bring freedom to that country. 
 
And in the course of my discussion with him, I asked him first 
of all how he felt about what he did over there. And he said that 
he felt intensely proud of what he was doing, of serving his 
country and making Afghanistan a better place. And I asked 
him what he was going to do now. And he said he was going to 
take a bit of time off, and then he was going to sign up to go 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Those are the kinds of people that we all will honour in just a 
few days, and not only in this Assembly here but in 
communities across the province. And if I may just say at the 
outset of my remarks today, thank you to them on behalf of all 
of us in the opposition and I’m sure members of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I have the great fortune, good fortune, to be 
blessed by a wonderful family at home. My wife, Tami, and our 
children, Megan, Colter, and Faith are just so supportive of the 
work that I’m doing and the fact that I have to be away 
sometimes more than I would want to be away. And I want to 
acknowledge them today as well as my mom and dad who have 
been just supportive in everything I’ve done, including dumb 
things that I may have done. They have sought to provide some 
constructive correction and hopefully, hopefully that’s paid off 
for them. 
 
But I want to thank mom and dad today, and acknowledge in 
our office in Swift Current, I have a new constituency assistant 
there. Her name is Crystal Martens. She’s just started. She’s 
doing great work in the Swift Current office serving the 
constituents and helping me serve the constituents of Swift 
Current. Everett Hindley, the former constituency assistant, is 
now stuck with me travelling the province when we get a 
chance to do that and I want to acknowledge him as well as all 
of our staff here in Regina and in Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We wouldn’t be able to do what we do without their 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

excellent work, so let me acknowledge them. 
 
There is a brand new member in the Legislative Assembly that I 
am very, very happy to be able to, for the first time since this 
session began, officially welcome. He’s no stranger to this 
caucus certainly, and no stranger to the building. And already I 
think the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy are benefiting from 
the experience he has here. They’re benefiting from the fact that 
he was the local candidate in that by-election with strong roots 
in the Weyburn area. They’re benefiting from the same passion 
we recognized in him long ago to serve, passion for the political 
process, and passion most importantly for Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s already thrown 
himself into the work that he’s been assigned as a part of this 
caucus team to focus and develop a youth retention and 
recruitment strategy for our province even beyond what the 
Saskatchewan Party’s been offering over these seven years. 
 
And I actually want to begin my remarks and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if I can, referencing that by-election. Because I think if 
we consider the results of the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election 
from June of this year in the context of this Throne Speech 
debate we’ve been having and specifically in the context 
admittedly of a vote that occurred yesterday, the confidence 
vote in the Assembly — but certainly it was an amendment to 
this motion — I think it’s informative and I think it’s important 
that we do it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, interesting to note that in 2003 in this 
hotly contested constituency . . . And let’s not forget that 
Weyburn-Big Muddy has been for the last two general elections 
in the province of Saskatchewan, at least ’03 and ’99, a hotly 
contested seat. It is the home of Tommy Douglas. And I found 
out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, first-hand, that when you campaign in 
Weyburn you know you’re not campaigning only against the 
Leader of the New Democratic Party, you’re not only 
campaigning against their candidate, you’re still campaigning 
against Tommy Douglas. 
 
And there’s a number of people there who I think are very 
disappointed in the NDP, disappointed in the antics of people 
like the member from Regina South — supporters of the NDP 
who believe that the member for Regina South has very little in 
common with Tommy Douglas. And so when they vote for the 
NDP they’re not voting for this version, they are still voting for 
Tommy Douglas. But it’s a tightly contested constituency and it 
has been for some time. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting to note that in 2003 
in that election, the Saskatchewan Party in the city of Weyburn 
now won only five of 26 urban polls, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That 
was in the general election of 2003. In this election that . . . In 
this by-election that we just had with a brand new candidate, 
with the Liberal leader also in the race, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
with the NDP touting that they had the only local candidate, 
what happened? Well the new member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy won 23 of 26 city polls, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The poll 
he lost was by four votes at Souris School in Weyburn. He 
received a total of 1,747 votes in Weyburn — a massive 
increase from what happened last time. 
 
[15:15] 

Now in the context of the debate that we’re having today, I 
think the question that needs to be asked is, why would that be? 
Why in that by-election . . . which granted are opportunities for 
people to send messages and requests for change to the 
province’s legislature. But why would such a massive 
turnaround occur in that riding with the Liberal leader in the 
race, with the NDP pouring all of their considerable political 
machinery in the home of Tommy Douglas, with a brand new 
candidate nominated for the Saskatchewan Party? Why would 
that be? Why would the NDP support collapse to third place 
behind the Liberals, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And the member for Indian Head-Milestone has done a good 
job of pointing out that you have to do pretty crappy in 
Saskatchewan politics to finish behind the Liberal Party, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And that is exactly, that is exactly what 
happened to the NDP in the by-election. Why? Why is that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Why did they lose in Weyburn-Big Muddy? 
Why is the government lacking support? Because, you know, 
conventional wisdom would take a look at the political 
conditions or the economic conditions in the province of 
Saskatchewan and say, regardless of who’s governing, 
regardless of who the governing party is, there should be an 
advantage for the governing party because high oil prices are 
driving revenues for the Government of Saskatchewan. Because 
the Government of Saskatchewan is stealing the enterprise plan 
of the opposition, that’s driving some job creation in the 
province of Saskatchewan. All the conditions, all the conditions 
are there. 
 
So why, when that’s the case, why then would we see the result 
that we saw in Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Well there’s a couple of answers. There’s some specific issues, 
some specific answers if we look at that riding, and then some 
broader ones that relate directly to the Throne Speech. 
 
Let me deal with the specific ones very quickly, and then we’ll 
move on to the broader discussion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Consider that in the dying days of that by-election, with their 
campaign fully in flames — it was an absolute wreck of a 
campaign for the NDP; the venerated machine that they have 
was crashing in Weyburn-Big Muddy — what do they try to do 
in the dying days of the campaign? They tried to buy off the 
support of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy. In the dying 
days of that campaign, they promised millions of dollars worth 
of commitments based as a result of the Souris Valley centre. 
That’s what they tried to do. It was amazing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I remember the daily papers of this province not being fooled at 
all. I remember their headlines in their columns saying, well 
this is pretty transparent; this is very transparent; it’s crass 
politics. And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it may 
have. . . At one time in Canadian politics it may have worked. 
That kind of politics may have worked at one time. The politics 
of trying to buy people with their own support, the politics of 
fear, that may have worked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at one time. 
 
I remember one particular example that we heard about in the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy campaign. It was a by-election in the ’80s 
and the NDP were campaigning hard. They said, if you don’t 
vote for us the governing party of the day will close all five 
hospitals in that riding. Do you remember that? That’s another 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

example, that’s another example of the kind of politics that they 
practise. And they tried it in Weyburn-Big Muddy. Now 
interestingly, that dire prediction was quite prescient. It did 
come true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The NDP, led by that member 
for P.A. Carlton, closed those hospitals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
that riding. 
 
And you know what? You know what? The people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy haven’t forgotten that still today. So that 
was one specific example of why . . . of the result. 
 
Now interestingly, I think that particular happenstance, 
occurrence in Saskatchewan political history, should inform us 
about the future of Saskatchewan politics. Because if this NDP 
government, try as they might, couldn’t buy off the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, they most assuredly will not be able to 
buy off the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Most assuredly, with their own money. There is 
going to be a lesson there. I hope the NDP are paying attention 
for their own sake because we do like to be a helpful opposition 
and we’re worried about their fate if they don’t learn any of the 
lessons from the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election and from the 
past. 
 
There are some broader issues at play here, Mr. Speaker, that 
would speak to the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election result. 
And there are some broad notions that we need to consider that 
would help us make our decision to propose an amendment that 
moved the non-confidence motion yesterday and for us to vote 
in favour of that non-confidence motion, and later on this day 
vote against the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
those relate to some very important measures of government, 
some very important measures of government — specifically, I 
think, competence. 
 
I don’t think people expect a lot from their governments at any 
level. I do think they like to see fiscal probity, I think they like 
to see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some just core competence in 
delivering the public service that they are hired on to deliver, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. On that count this government, by any fair 
measure, has failed. 
 
And do you know what? If members opposite want to 
understand why we’re going to vote against this Throne Speech, 
why we voted in favour of a non-confidence motion just 
yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all they have to do is review 
question period from earlier this day. That’s all they have to do. 
 
Consider, consider what occurred in question period earlier this 
day. We raised questions on behalf of Crystal Bonderud and her 
family. We raised . . . Well the Deputy Premier is very anxious 
to hear why the people of the province have lost confidence in 
his government. And again, wanting to be helpful, we’re 
prepared to do that right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Crystal Bonderud came to our legislature today after meeting 
with the Minister of Health yesterday and not getting the 
answers that she deserved about the tragic, the tragic death of 
her husband, Doug, the needless death of her husband, Doug. 
She came to get answers again today on a couple of key points. 

Remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question we asked today? 
Yes, it was about whether the government would reimburse 
Crystal and her family for the 80-plus thousand dollars they’re 
out of pocket, having gone to the Mayo Clinic to get help when 
there was no help available in our system here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Yes, there was that question for sure. 
Because, as the doctors in the Mayo found out, this was an 
emergency. It needed to be dealt with quickly. And under those 
terms, that kind of out-of-province funding should . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the Minister of Finance just 
said spend more, spend more. That’s what he said from his seat. 
 
His rules, the rules of his government are this. If there is an 
out-of-province emergency, yes, the Government of 
Saskatchewan takes care of its own citizens. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if there is some treatment not available in the province 
of Saskatchewan then there’s an out-of-province approval 
process that people can access to get that care. So in that case, 
when it’s their own rules and when a life hangs in the balance, 
we do say spend that money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s what we’ll say. And if that Minister of 
Finance doesn’t think we ought to do that, then we ought to 
have a whole separate debate about that issue. I would welcome 
that opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
She raised the issue of the emergent nature of this case, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. She raised that case. She also had some pretty 
fair questions. She said she had gone through all the political 
processes. She had talked to her quality care coordinator, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. She had talked to doctors and oncologists. She 
had talked to a medical consultant, another doctor at Sask 
Health. Did any of them say, did one of them say, oh by the 
way here’s an option for you and Doug. Here’s an option that 
you have to get out-of-province treatment and care for your . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I apologize to the 
Leader of the Opposition. Members, it’s getting difficult to hear 
the Leader of the Opposition. He has the floor and I would ask 
for order in the Assembly so that he can be heard. I recognize 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of those people in the 
health care system, all those people in the health care system for 
which the minister is responsible, could have said at any time to 
Crystal and Doug, oh by the way you have an option here. We 
can get you out of the province. We can provide some care for 
you and find out what’s going on. It might not be Crohn’s 
disease, it might in fact be bowel cancer — as unfortunately it 
turned out to be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t happen. Now if this were a 
unique circumstance, it would be terrible and tragic and still 
worthy of raising in this Legislative Assembly. But the great 
tragedy is, it is not a unique circumstance. It is not unlike the 
baby Paige example, where again the family’s not told of 
options they have until they pack up baby Paige in a car, 
screaming because of the pain she’s in, and drive to the Stollery 
Children’s Hospital in Edmonton, Alberta. 
 
It’s not unlike a call I had last night from a friend of mine who 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

has told me that he’s been loath to call me because, you know, 
he didn’t want to bother me, waiting two years for a diagnosis 
about chronic pain that he has. He can’t have it. And I asked 
him last night, did anybody ever tell you about options in terms 
of potential referrals for out of province? You know what his 
answer was? His answer’s no. I’ve asked caucus colleagues, the 
critic for Health has asked them, have you had cases come 
before you where the people will say, no one ever told us about 
the options we have to go out of province for the care of our 
loved ones? And every single member has said they have an 
example of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that speaks to the confidence that people don’t 
have . . . And that Deputy Premier right there who heckles from 
his seat, who is more than prepared to heckle from his seat and 
engage in that communication, but he’s not prepared to turn 
around and light up the Minister of Health to communicate to 
people about their options in the health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why 
the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy said, man, that is enough. 
That is enough. And that’s why if they’re not careful, if they’re 
not careful and we continue to work hard to earn the support of 
the people of the province, they’re going to get a similar lesson 
province-wide. 
 
What else did we talk about in question period today? What else 
did we talk about in question period? Well we did talk about 
Oyate. But first we talked about nurses and the shortage of 
nurses, and the problem that we’re seeing in emergency rooms 
around the province. Because again this Minister of Health and 
this government are pretty good at press releases and they’re 
pretty good at Throne Speeches; they’re pretty good at talking, 
Mr. Speaker, but they’re not very good at doing anything. 
 
We know it’s possible for NDP governments to do something 
because the NDP in Manitoba — on the issue of recruitment 
anyway — they’ve got it right. I think they’ve got double the 
training seats in the province of Manitoba. I think they’ve 
worked hard. They’ve worked with the stakeholders, nurses; 
they’ve consulted with them. They’ve developed a plan that 
addresses things like too much, you know, overtime. They’ve 
developed a plan that addresses the fact that nurses want to ease 
into those high-stress situations so they’re not chased out of the 
workplace in that province. And I’m sure it’s imperfect, but you 
know what? It’s a lot better . . . there’s a lot more progress 
being made in the province of Manitoba than there is in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And why is that? Because we have a 
minister that won’t set targets. We have a minister that’s good 
at issuing press releases, and a minister whose plans fail the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy said, you 
know we have had enough. We’ve had enough. That’s why 
members opposite voted against this government in a 
confidence vote yesterday as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What else did we talk about in this question period? We talked 
about Oyate. We talked about the safe house. The safe house is 
at least in part a product of the efforts of a joint committee of 
this Assembly. I think that joint committee of this Assembly 

was a highlight for all of us in this House, where we had the 
member for Greystone, who was recently sitting right there, Mr. 
Speaker, the member for Greystone. We had the member for the 
. . . the former member for Humboldt. I believe we had the 
member for Regina Dewdney on that committee as well. And 
we had the member for Kelvington who continues to be a voice 
and a leader on the issue of children involved in the sex trade. 
 
And there was some good work done by that committee. There 
were recommendations made by that committee that could 
change the lives of kids that are caught in the sex trade. Now 
we know that only four of the many recommendations have 
been implemented by the government. You could argue that the 
Oyate Safe House or that the notion that we need a safe house is 
a product of the work of that committee. So something fell apart 
between the good work of that committee and what this 
government’s doing, and what this government’s doing. 
 
We have seen, with respect to the case of the Oyate, we have 
seen what the Children’s Advocate has said about the safe 
house, and unfortunately it has turned out to be anything but 
safe for kids —12- and 13-year-old girls — who need the 
protection of the minister. 
 
We have heard the Children’s Advocate talk, admonish the 
government. They said the department did not take corrective 
action to remedy breaches of the service agreement. That had 
significant impact on the quality of care. The department failed 
in its responsibilities with regard to children in its care. The 
children were not provided with the services and protection they 
were entitled to. Files on children were discontinued even 
though the department knew sexual exploitation continued, and 
all the while, all the while, the minister — the worst minister in 
the history of social service in this province — was briefed. He 
knew about it. He knew about it. 
 
He knew about the fact that somebody involved in Oyate had 
been accused of a sexual offence and that managed to cancel a 
grand opening. Actually it was his predecessor, the member for 
Moose Jaw North was a minister at the time. So they knew 
enough to cancel the announcement but did anybody else hear 
about it, Mr. Speaker? Did they come clean? Did they say, here 
is a problem at Oyate that is affecting the safety of kids? No, 
they didn’t. When did this information come out? 
 
Well, the Minister of Finance says it’s sad. And it is sad. The 
fact that CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] had to 
break the story, the fact that the auditor has to get involved, the 
fact that the Children’s Advocate says that this government has 
failed kids ostensibly, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the member for 
Northwest has to drag information out of this government, 
that’s what sad, Mr. Speaker. That’s what sad. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Wall: — What did we hear today? What did we hear today 
from the minister? Well he wouldn’t answer at first. He hid 
behind the Government House Leader when we asked him a 
pretty important question. Because the all-party committee 
that’s now looking at this, all-party members of the Public 
Accounts Committee, had decided not too long ago by 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

unanimous consent — and unanimous I would understand to 
mean that NDP members supported this — that the former 
deputy minister, the former deputy minister would come before 
that committee and would answer the questions from the duly 
elected members of this Assembly on both sides of the House, 
on the government side and on the opposition side. All the 
members agreed to that. I believe that’s right. That’s right. 
 
But as the heat has been turned up on this government on its 
failure on Oyate, as the heat has been turned up on its minister, 
they had a change of heart. And today they used their majority 
on that committee to do what? To stifle testimony from a 
witness that had been called. And their answer today? 
Remember the answer? It was amazing. They said, well the 
witness that we’re referring to that wasn’t allowed to testify; the 
witness was in the room. Well, isn’t that special, Mr. Speaker? 
The witness was in the room, but the government members 
don’t allow that person to testify. So what good is having the 
witness in the room if government members use their majority 
to quash a formerly unanimous decision of the committee to 
have her testify? 
 
And all that sounds like a lot of procedural mumble-jumble. I 
understand that, Mr. Speaker. But what’s at stake? What’s at 
stake? Twelve- and thirteen-year-old girls who are at risk, who 
may have been betrayed by the very government that had 
charge over them, who may have been let down, who were let 
down by the minister responsible for them. That’s what’s at 
stake in this. What’s at stake in this are answers that the people 
of the province deserve. Maybe the answers are embarrassing to 
this government but you know what? The people of this 
province, they don’t care if it embarrasses this government. 
They want to know what happened. They want people held 
accountable. They want it fixed. They want a government who 
has charge over these young kids to do its job and take care of 
them, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it wants. That’s what it wants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And that’s why we voted against this government 
in the confidence motion. That’s why that member is sitting 
right there on the opposition side of the House. Yes he was an 
excellent campaigner. He worked very hard. And oh, by the 
way, also his constituents have had enough of the NDP. And 
that’s the case . . . That’s the thing that we see right across this 
province. 
 
So just in question period today you got a glimpse I think, Mr. 
Speaker, of why members on this side of the House have lost 
confidence in the government, why a growing number of 
Saskatchewan people have lost the confidence of the 
government. And it must be the only explanation. It must be the 
only explanation because as I said at the top, as I said at the top 
of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, conventional wisdom, 
conventional political wisdom would have any governing party 
in the current economic circumstances riding high in the polls. 
But they’re not. 
 
Because people are tired of Oyate; people are tired of the 
waiting lists for health care; they’re tired of a callous 
government’s attitude on the Bonderud situation. They’re tired, 
Mr. Speaker, that even in this boom that the Premier refers to, 
we lose population; 4,500 people left last year while even 

Manitoba grew. They’re tired of saying goodbye to their kids 
and having them leave for some other place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re tired of a province with all of the potential that we have 
here . . . And make no mistake — the potential of this province 
is limitless. They have a problem with the fact that this 
government is managing to squander that boom, that 
opportunity. They’re overseeing the loss of people which 
actually is exacerbating the labour shortage situation of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s because of this. And here’s another explanation. I 
think it’s because of this. I think the people of the province that 
understand that now while there are some signs of economic 
performance, some performance in our economy, they can 
attribute it to a number of things. They can attribute it to high 
oil prices. And they can attribute it to the fact that this NDP 
government has finally, finally thrown its hands up and said, 
you know what, the Sask Party has had it right all along. We’re 
going to adopt much of, not all of, but much of their growth 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And the Minister of Learning I think, yes, right, 
she laughs at that. I wonder, does she remember the television 
ad from the last campaign, the television ad that they ran that 
referenced taxes on business? You see, the former leader of the 
opposition had a plan to grow the province — as we have had 
since — that involved what, Mr. Speaker, that involved what? 
Reducing the capital tax, reducing business taxes, reducing 
those taxes that hurt growth and investment. 
 
And what party ran ads in the last campaign? I’m paraphrasing 
a bit, but they said something like, don’t let — I’m paraphrasing 
— don’t let the former leader of the opposition cut those taxes 
to big evil corporations. There was TV ads about it, Mr. 
Speaker, but somehow, but somehow they’ve managed to pile 
into the Premier’s bus. They’ve managed to pile into the 
Premier’s bus all at once, all the while playing the horsey game 
we think. That was interesting. More on that, more on that in a 
moment — playing the horsey game. 
 
And where were they driving, Mr. Speaker? Well they were 
apparently on the road to Damascus because in the last budget 
of course they adopted the same plan they derided and criticized 
in the campaigns. That is the absolutely, undeniable evidence 
that this government is bankrupt of ideas. And in that case, 
much like kids who want to help out others who are having 
trouble in school, we’re prepared to let them look over our 
shoulder and cheat off our homework, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
prepared to do that in this Assembly for the benefit of the 
province. 
 
So if there is any question at all as to not only why members on 
this side of the House would want to vote against this 
government, would want to vote against this Throne Speech, is 
that they are bankrupt of their own ideas. They continue to 
preside over the exodus of our people to other places, Mr. 
Speaker. They continue through Oyate and the Bonderud 
tragedy and any number of other issues — the nursing shortage 
— to demonstrate the fact that they lack confidence. The easiest 
thing for us to do on behalf of a province that we know has 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

limitless potential, the easiest thing it is for the members on this 
side of the House to do is stand in our place and vote against 
this government and be grateful that we are one day closer to its 
end. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. As always it is a privilege to stand in this 
legislature and to speak to important issues of the day. I thank 
the constituents of Saskatoon Riversdale for affording me this 
privilege, Mr. Speaker. And I am grateful to have the 
opportunity to participate in this Throne Speech debate — a 
debate about vision and future, plan and purpose, a debate about 
focus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the most casual, I believe even the most 
casual observer of this legislature in the course of this Throne 
Speech debate — and even in the course of this afternoon’s 
debate — would come to some real conclusion very quickly 
about the contrast, Mr. Speaker, between this government and 
between that opposition. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to a 
variety of the speeches in this Throne Speech debate. I’ve heard 
members of the government stand in their place and speak 
about future, speak about vision, speak about hope for the 
people of Saskatchewan, speak about the challenges that we 
face. I want to thank the two members who moved and 
seconded the Throne Speech for their tremendous, tremendous 
contribution to the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And then, Mr. Speaker, we turn and we 
hear, we hear members of the Sask Party enter the debate, and 
it’s political rhetoric. It is whining. It is complaining. And the 
last thing it is, is any plan for the future of our province or the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it was so illustrated this afternoon again 
when we listened to the member of Milestone-Indian Head 
stand in his place and spend most of his Throne Speech time 
defending the Grant Devine government. Never did I expect in 
this Throne Speech debate the member opposite to stand and 
spend 20 minutes defending the Grant Devine government. 
 
Now we’ve just listened to the Leader of the Official 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker. We’ve just listened to the Leader of 
the Official Opposition. He started out talking about the 
Weyburn by-election — not the Throne Speech, not the future 
of Saskatchewan. He started talking about the Weyburn 
by-election straight off the hop, and then he went into a 
20-minute question period presentation, a 20-minute tirade — 
the kind of thing we hear in question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Was there a considered vision in the Leader of the Opposition’s 
remarks this afternoon? Was there a word about what he or his 
party would see for the future of Saskatchewan families and the 
future of Saskatchewan young people? Not a word, Mr. 

Speaker. There, there, Mr. Speaker, there we can see the 
contrast. There we can see the contrast, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
about this contrast that I wish to speak this afternoon. 
 
Here, Mr. Speaker, here sits a government, a government with 
vision — a vision that we outlined in the Throne Speech of a 
year ago. A vision for the province and the people of 
Saskatchewan where we said our vision for this province is a 
province where no one is being left behind on the pathway to 
opportunity — no one. We vision a province where we have an 
unbreakable social fabric that is based on the foundation of a 
green and a prosperous economy in growing and diverse 
communities, Mr. Speaker. That is government’s vision for the 
future of Saskatchewan. 
 
We take that vision, Mr. Speaker, and in this Throne Speech we 
give it focus, clear focus, Mr. Speaker. In this Throne Speech 
the clear focus of the government I lead is to make life better 
for today’s Saskatchewan families and to build a better future 
here in Saskatchewan for our young people. That is the focus of 
our government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And we take that focus, Mr. Speaker, 
and we turn it into specific action, specific action, Mr. Speaker. 
This Throne Speech, very much like the people of 
Saskatchewan, very much like the province of Saskatchewan, is 
a Throne Speech which is very down-to-earth but where the sky 
is the limit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask you and I ask the people of 
Saskatchewan to compare that with the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition who, Mr. Speaker, have no vision — no vision at 
least they’re prepared to enunciate — no plan, Mr. Speaker, and 
no focus with one exception. The only focus that we witness in 
this House day after day of the Saskatchewan Party under their 
current leader is the focus of winning at the polls, of regaining 
government. As one member said, of getting their mitts back on 
the treasury of Saskatchewan. That’s their single focus, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here is the contrast. You have a government that believes and 
works for the future of Saskatchewan people. You have an 
opposition that only works for the future of the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I ask all members, I ask the 
people of Saskatchewan to note the contrast between this 
government and the opposition. 
 
Let’s talk about record. This is a government, Mr. Speaker, that 
is proud of its record in government. This is a political party 
that is proud of its record in government. A record in 
government that took this province from the very verge of 
bankruptcy in the 1990s as a result of the work of that party in 
government. Took this province from the very verge of 
bankruptcy and restored the fiscal foundations of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. As a result, 14 straight credit rating upgrades — 
five of them since I’ve become Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That, Mr. Speaker, is a record of which 
we are immensely proud. Equally we are proud of the work that 
we’ve accomplished in the last five years — in the last five 
years — of rekindling, re-energizing, and reshaping the 
Saskatchewan economy so that once again this economy can 
serve as the foundation for the social progress that we desire 
and the people of Saskatchewan deserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is a record, Mr. Speaker, in the last 
five years where we have maintained the balanced budgets, 
where we’ve continued the fiscal scrutiny that provides the 
credit rating upgrades, but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 
record investments in social services, record investments in 
health care, record investments in education, and, Mr. Speaker, 
record tax relief for families of Saskatchewan and a record of 
improving the investment climate in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And what, Mr. Speaker, what, Mr. 
Speaker, is the result of that today? Well manufacturing 
shipments are up. Retail sales are up. Housing starts in our 
province are up. And, Mr. Speaker, what is most satisfying is 
that jobs are up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the records of the New 
Democratic Party in government that produces the headline that 
we saw on the front page of the Leader-Post, Regina’s 
Leader-Post on Saturday night, a headline which reads, “Jobs, 
Jobs, Jobs . . . ” is a record that we are very, very proud of, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now contrast that, Mr. Speaker, contrast 
that with the Saskatchewan Party opposite who will do 
everything in their power to hide from their record in 
government. Hide from their record of fiscal destruction of this 
province. Hide from the shame that accompanied that 
administration. Hide from the fact that their leader was in this 
building, a part of that government. Do everything they can to 
hide from their record, so much they had to go and change their 
name so that they could hide from that period in their history 
and in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when your focus, when your focus, Mr. Speaker, 
is only the political fortunes of the Saskatchewan Party, you 
hide from your record. When your focus is serving 
Saskatchewan people, you’re proud of your record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now here, Mr. Speaker, again, clearly 
from the debate that’s occurred in this legislature since we 
returned, let me speak to another contrast. Here, Mr. Speaker, 

you have a Premier and a government who are willing to stand 
up for Saskatchewan families, who are willing to take positions 
on issues that affect Saskatchewan families in our relationship 
with the national government of Canada. 
 
We have taken a clear position on child care and the cuts to the 
child care. We’ve taken a clear, clear position on literacy and 
the cuts to literacy. We have taken a clear position on the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board and the right of producers to 
participate in a democratic forum around decisions on the wheat 
board. We’ve taken a very clear, clear position on the cuts to the 
national voluntary sector initiative, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
taken a very clear position on a fair deal for the natural 
resources of the people of Saskatchewan under equalization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask you then to 
contrast that, and the people of Saskatchewan to contrast that 
with the position of the Saskatchewan Party. What is their 
position on the federal government’s cuts to child care? Do we 
know it? We do not. 
 
What is their position on the federal government cuts to literacy 
programming in our province? We don’t know it. What is their 
position, Mr. Speaker, on the future of the Canadian Wheat 
Board and the right of producers to participate? We don’t know 
it. What, Mr. Speaker, is their position on the cuts to the 
voluntary sector initiative and the volunteer community of 
Saskatchewan? They don’t know about that. 
 
What is their position to this recent announcement that we’ve 
had now of cuts to Aboriginal education, Aboriginal language 
education in our province? Mr. Speaker, we’ve made it very 
clear our position on the Kelowna accord. What is the 
opposition’s position on the Kelowna accord for Aboriginal 
people? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what today is their position on a fair deal for 
Saskatchewan’s natural resources? What is their position in the 
equalization debate? 
 
Well it is noted, it is noted, Mr. Speaker, it is noted that when 
we had a Liberal government in Ottawa, this opposition was 
much more upfront about their position — much more upfront. 
Now we have their Conservative cousins in Ottawa. What 
happens? Well we’re very, very quiet. We don’t want to, we 
don’t want to irritate our cousins and friends in Ottawa. We 
wouldn’t want to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you when your focus, when your focus is 
only to gain political power, when your focus is to get your 
hands and the mitts in the treasury again, when your focus is the 
Saskatchewan Party, you don’t want to take any positions that 
might offend your friends, the Conservatives, in Ottawa. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, when your focus, when your focus 
is Saskatchewan families and building a better future for our 
young people, you bet we’ll take positions. And we’ll stand 
firm on behalf of Saskatchewan people no matter who occupies 
the Prime Minister’s office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But here, Mr. Speaker, here, here is 
where perhaps the contrast grows sharpest. We have listened. 
We have listened at length to members of the Saskatchewan 
Party participate in this Throne Speech debate. They have not 
begun to debate the very speech and the content of this speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this speech speaks directly — directly — to the 
future of Saskatchewan families and young people in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. We have taken this vision, and we have 
put focus to the vision. We have a cornerstone. The first 
cornerstone of this Throne Speech is to make this the best place 
for young people to live, to work, and to build a strong future, 
Mr. Speaker. That is the cornerstone of this Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In this Throne Speech we commit this 
government, we commit this government to the literacy 
program of Saskatchewan and its expansion in spite of, in spite 
of the cuts from Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We commit this government to 
continuing our work in early childhood learning and education 
and childhood . . . to provide real options for Saskatchewan 
families. We commit in this Throne Speech to expanding 
training opportunities, to unveiling a new partnership between 
Saskatchewan people who are workers, who are in labour, a 
partnership with people who are in business and a partnership 
with our educational institutions to build for labour market 
development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve committed in this Throne Speech to strengthening and 
expanding our regional training model, bringing education, 
bringing the student and the student’s education closer to the 
teacher, and the both of them closer to the opportunity and 
closer to the employer. 
 
We have committed in this Throne Speech to expanding our 
partnerships and working with First Nations and Métis people, 
Mr. Speaker. We have committed to deepen those partnerships 
because we know that much of the future of our province will 
involve those young Aboriginal people of our province today. 
We know that, Mr. Speaker, and we are committed to working 
in partnership with the Aboriginal people of our province and 
the Aboriginal training institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we remain committed to the bold initiative of 
immigration that we established a year, a little more ago. Mr. 
Speaker, we set some bold, bold targets. In our Throne Speech 
last week we said we would achieve 5,000 new immigrants, 
offshore, from outside of Canada, coming to Saskatchewan — 
5,000 per year by the year 2008. Mr. Speaker, we are on track. 
We are ahead of schedule. This year alone we will welcome 
2,400 new immigrants to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they talk about labour 
market development. Late, late in the day they begin to talk 
about labour market development. And while they’re talking 
about it, Mr. Speaker, we are doing it. We are building a future 

here for our young people that is a cornerstone of this Throne 
Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the second cornerstone of 
this Throne Speech is our efforts to improve access to health 
services in our province and to maintain our leadership in 
publicly funded and publicly administered medicare, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I remind you and I remind the people of Saskatchewan 
again, we are the only have province in Canada that does not 
charge its families and its citizens a health care premium for 
their health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Under the leadership of the Minister of 
Health and the ministry of health, in this Throne Speech we 
commit to expanding training opportunities for the health care 
providers. We commit to retention strategies, recruitment 
strategies that are and will work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about more opportunities for those 
internationally educated professionals to work in our province. 
We are talking very specifically about expanding the Aboriginal 
health workforce. And, Mr. Speaker, we commit in this Throne 
Speech to continued progress towards a children’s hospital 
within a hospital in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, if I may 
say, this Throne Speech commits this government to further, 
further implementation of the Premier’s Project Hope initiative, 
providing support, providing education, providing rehabilitation 
to the young people of our province that will be affected by the 
abuse of drugs or alcohol, Mr. Speaker. We are committed to 
those young people because they are part of today’s 
Saskatchewan families and they are not to be left behind, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech we recognize, we 
recognize the role that the senior has played in the life of this 
province. We commit, Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech to 
create a better life for the senior in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Because they too, they too, Mr. Speaker, 
are part of today’s Saskatchewan families. The second 
cornerstone of this Throne Speech, improving access and 
building on our leadership in public health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third, the third cornerstone so significant, so significant to 
the future of this province. And not just the province and nation 
but to the globe, and so important to the young people of today, 
Mr. Speaker. We will advance Saskatchewan as a leader in 
environmental protection and the green economy, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, we will implement, we will implement further 
strategies, further steps to achieve our long-term goal 
established last year of — Mr. Speaker, get this — meeting 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

one-third, one-third of our energy requirements through 
renewable energy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue our work, as you’ve seen 
in just the last few days, towards building the world’s first 
utility-grade, clean coal production facility — electrical 
production facility. We’re going to pioneer it here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue our 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, in carbon sequestration. We going to 
work with large partners in terms of a polygeneration capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’ve seen our advancements in biofuels. We’re 
going to be the first province in Canada to mandate the use of 
biofuels during this session. We are seeing expansion of that 
industry and we are going to lead the nation in biofuel 
production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to lead in green energy but beyond 
even the production of energy we are going to lead in 
conservation of energy, in conservation of energy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are pursuing our strategies in agroforestry and, Mr. 
Speaker, we are pursuing strategies for organic food production 
in this province. And we await the work that’s being done, and 
we will act to see progress in terms of organic food production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in the future of this province. We 
believe in the sustainable future for this province. We believe in 
its environment, the God-given natural environment that we so 
treasure in this province, and we will show leadership to the 
nation. We will show leadership to the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And the fourth cornerstone, Mr. Speaker, 
of this Throne Speech is to ensure, absolutely ensure that 
today’s Saskatchewan families are going to benefit, are going to 
benefit in real and tangible ways from our prosperous economy, 
the economy that we have laboured to build together. We are 
going to ensure that Saskatchewan families are going to know 
those benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to ensure — when we are successful in keeping 
and having the federal government keep its promise around 
equalization which means, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 
Saskatchewan 800 million of our dollars that will be retained 
here, retained here from the benefits of our natural resources, 
800 million to be retained here — we’re going to ensure those 
dollars are going to benefit Saskatchewan families. We’ve 
already said that 30 per cent of those revenues, Mr. Speaker, 
will go to property tax relief in this province. We’re going to 
ensure that that promise is kept because it’s a promise to the 
families of Saskatchewan and a promise to the young people of 
Saskatchewan as they build their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to establish in this session, from 
some of our one-time revenues as a result of these good 
economic times and the resource times, we are going to 
establish a multi-year infrastructure fund which will include a 
building communities fund that will provide for opportunities in 
our communities, opportunities for our families, opportunities 
for our young people. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in this session, as by virtue of commitments in this 
Throne Speech, we’re going to continue to build safer 
communities because we believe that our families deserve 
security in their neighbourhoods and our young people deserve 
the security of growing up in safe neighbourhoods and safe 
communities. You are going to hear much about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We are going to continue to work with the people in the 
communities of northern Saskatchewan to ensure that life for 
Saskatchewan families who live in our North will be better, and 
that the young people of our North have futures in the North, 
Mr. Speaker. We are going to continue making progress on the 
northern roads strategy, bringing roads and infrastructure to the 
people of the North. And you’ve heard the happy 
announcements, Mr. Speaker, already made for our northern 
residents. A new natural gas pipeline to La Ronge and the area 
of La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I was proud to be in 
the community of La Ronge last week and participate with the 
members of the North in announcing a court house for the 
people of La Ronge to meet the needs of their community, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We are going, Mr. Speaker, through the dollars available, to 
provide for the people of Saskatchewan a multi-year, 
multi-million highways transportation policy of road and rail. 
We are going to build the infrastructure that meets the economy 
of today and the economy of the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of this Throne Speech and the 
prosperity of our economy, there will be real benefits for real 
families. There will be real benefits for farm families in 
Saskatchewan. In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, we are 
committed, committed to the 100 per cent funding of CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] while the Minister 
of Agriculture negotiates a better program for Saskatchewan 
farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are going to act in this 
session around issues facing workers in our province, 
occupational health and safety issues that face our workers. 
We’re going to act on issues around workers’ compensation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to act on behalf of vulnerable 
workers in our province because they are part of today’s 
Saskatchewan family, and they will not be left behind, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to 
continue the work in spite of the federal government. We are 
going to continue the work of our volunteer sector initiative 
because much of the strength of our province is the strength of 
community and the strength of community is so much the 
strength of our volunteers. And under the Legislative Secretary 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

for the volunteer sector initiative, we’re going to continue the 
work, and we’re going to develop and build new relationships 
with the voluntary sector and this government, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to do that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we turn the leaf on this year and move 
into next year, we are going to make Saskatchewan centre stage, 
Mr. Speaker, centre stage in the nation. In the year to come, Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to host, in the province of Saskatchewan, 
the Western Canadian Music Awards in the city of Moose Jaw, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We are going to host here, in the capital 
city of Regina, Canada’s Country Music Week, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to host it here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In the community of Prince Albert, we 
are going to host an Aboriginal showcase, Mr. Speaker, and in 
my hometown, the city of Saskatoon, we are going to host the 
Junos. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, no other province has 
ever been able to do this. No other province has been able to 
pull together to attract these events. This is going to be a year of 
celebration of the arts, focusing on a celebration of music 
because, Mr. Speaker, this is the new Saskatchewan. This is the 
new Saskatchewan, the only jurisdiction on the Rolling Stones’ 
world tour that could support two concerts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This is the new Saskatchewan. And this 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is going to be, is today, and will 
even more in the future be an attractive place for young people 
to build their futures — attractive in its affordability and 
attractive in its ability to provide housing at a reasonable cost, 
where young people have a hope of owning their own homes; 
an attractive place to be trained and skilled; an attractive place 
to pursue any career or job opportunity that you want to; and an 
attractive place for your lifestyle, Mr. Speaker, because we are 
focused on making life better for Saskatchewan families. We 
are focused, Mr. Speaker, on making a better future for our 
young people right here. 
 
And as a result of this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, we said that 
this prosperity that we’ve built together as the people of 
Saskatchewan — not with any assist from the opposition — this 
prosperity that we’ve built should be felt by real families in 
Saskatchewan, and it should be felt in their pocketbooks, Mr. 
Speaker. As a result of this Throne Speech, the provincial sales 
tax has been lowered two points, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, as I to come to some 
conclusion, as a result of this Throne Speech, the families of 
Saskatchewan will enjoy a Family Day holiday in the darkest 

days of February, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So here, Mr. Speaker, here, Mr. Speaker, 
is the contrast. Here is the contrast. A government that comes 
with vision. A government that comes with focus. And a 
government that comes with a specific plan to make life better 
for today’s Saskatchewan families and to build a better future 
here for our youth. 
 
And what do we have over there? An opposition party that’s 
only interested in the future of its own political party — that, 
Mr. Speaker. I hear no vision. I’ve heard no plan in this debate 
from opposition members. I’ve heard a great, now a great 
defence today of their time in government when . . . in the 
1980s when Mr. Devine was the premier. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here comes the test, here comes the test 
because they can hide behind political rhetoric in speeches. 
They can hide behind political rhetoric when they’re in front of 
the media. But you can’t hide from a vote. You cannot hide 
from a vote in this legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here it comes. Here comes the vote. And my 
question is this. My question is this. Will the Saskatchewan 
Party stand in their place today and vote for or vote against the 
full funding of CAIS? Will they stand in their place today and 
support a program that will expand literacy work in the 
province of Saskatchewan or will they vote against it? Mr. 
Speaker, will they stand in their place today and vote for or 
against a 2 per cent tax cut in the provincial sales tax? Will they 
vote for it or against it? And, Mr. Speaker, will they stand in 
their place today and vote for or against a Family Day holiday 
for the families of Saskatchewan? 
 
The contrast, Mr. Speaker, the contrast is now to be determined. 
There is no hiding from the vote. If, Mr. Speaker, they believe 
in the future of Saskatchewan families, in the future of this 
province, if they believe in making a better life for 
Saskatchewan people and building a better future here for our 
young people, if they believe that as we do on the government 
side, Mr. Speaker, they will vote for this Throne Speech. If their 
only interest is in the Saskatchewan’s Party future, they will 
vote against it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we stand for Saskatchewan people. They stand for 
the Saskatchewan Party. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 
difference. And that is why I will be supporting the Throne 
Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The question before the 
Assembly is the motion for an address to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor, moved by the member for Regina 
Coronation Park, seconded by the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains: 
 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard November 7, 2006 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the motion say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who oppose the motion say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:07 until 16:11.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
The question before the Assembly is the motion for an address 
to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. Moved by the member 
for Regina Coronation Park, seconded by the member for 
Regina Wascana Plains: 
 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor: 
 
To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech in which Your Honour has been pleased 
to address us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 28] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Van Mulligen 
Lautermilch Hagel Serby 
Atkinson Cline Sonntag 
Wartman Forbes Prebble 
Crofford Belanger Higgins 
Thomson Nilson Beatty 

Taylor Junor Harper 
Iwanchuk McCall Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson   
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 
 

[Nays — 26] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kirsch 
Brkich Dearborn Merriman 
Morgan Duncan  
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 28; those 
opposed, 26. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. The Chair 
recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
[16:15] 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
government Deputy House Leader, the hon. member for Regina 
Dewdney: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
government Deputy House Leader, the member for Regina 
Dewdney: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 



November 7, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

deputy government house leader, the hon. member for Regina 
Dewdney: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 116, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 
 

So moved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw North, seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 116, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:17.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................231 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................232 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................232 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................233 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................233 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................233 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................233 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................233 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................233 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................233 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................234 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Accomplished Great-Grandmother Honoured for Academic Excellence 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation’s Annual Champions Luncheon 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................234 
 Osteoporosis Canada Opens Its Saskatoon Office 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................235 
 Langbank Manufacturer to Expand Facility 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................235 
 Book Chronicles Long-Distance Runner’s Triumphs and Challenges 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................235 
 The New Democratic Party and Traditional Supporters 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................236 
 Internet Service for Northern Communities 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................236 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Coverage for Out-of-Province Medical Care 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................236 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................237 
 Supply of Emergency Room Nurses 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................238 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................238 
 Procedure at Public Accounts Committee 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................239 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................240 
 Oyate Safe House 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................240 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................240 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation (no 2) 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................241 
 Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................241 
 Bill No. 23 — The Securities Transfer Act 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................242 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................242 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................242 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................242 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................245 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................248 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................253 
 Recorded Division ........................................................................................................................................................................258 
MOTIONS 
 Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................258 
 Ways and Means 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................258 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


