






















































Hansard: December 06, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 25A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 699 
 December 6, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to present a petition in regards to the 
out-of-country medical costs of Doug Bonderud. And I read the 
prayer: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed today by the good 
folks of the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition today also with relation to the effort of the 
Bonderud family to have their medical expenses reimbursed. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the city 
of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding reimbursement of out-of-country medical costs for 
Doug Bonderud. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people in the 
Saskatoon area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have many 
petitions to present today on behalf of a constituent from 
Carnduff. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from communities across 
Saskatchewan including Carnduff; Calgary, Alberta; Earl Grey, 
Regina, Kelvington, Saskatoon — across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the treatment received by the 
Bonderud family from their provincial government. The prayer 
of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today all hail from the great city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today again on behalf of people in my constituency and beyond 
who are concerned about Highway 49. Your prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Nut Mountain, from Okla, from Medicine Hat, from Wadena, 
right across my constituency. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

petition today to do with the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the refusal of this 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government to fully cover the 
health care costs of the late Doug Bonderud. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Hanley and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise this 
afternoon to present a petition to reimburse the out-of-country 
medical costs of the late Doug Bonderud. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators to the petition are from the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able 
to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are 
very concerned with this government’s addiction to gravel 
highways. I have a number of petitions, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll 
read one of them, and it deals with Highway 22 between 
junction 6 and junction 20. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 

so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey and area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Imperial, Strasbourg, Southey, Earl Grey, Regina, and Craven. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It will come as no 
surprise that I again today have a petition of citizens concerned 
with the safety of Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, North 
Battleford, St. Denis, Humboldt . . . [inaudible] . . . Bradwell, 
Naicam, Kelvington, Bruno, Preeceville, Kamsack, Delisle, 
Canora, Cudworth, Carlyle, Lumsden, Lloydminster, Sunset 
Estates, LeRoy, Meacham, Waldheim, Martensville, and 
Archerwill, as well as from Alberta — Lacombe, Edmonton, St. 
Albert, and Strathmore. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province, 
namely the Bonderuds who are concerned about out-of-country 
medical costs for Doug Bonderud. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-county treatment costs and improve the future 
communications and coordination of cancer services for 
all cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Warman, Saskatoon, 
and Delisle. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again and present a petition from citizens of Biggar who are 
concerned about reduction of health care services in their 
community. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Perdue and Kinley and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present a petition surrounding the truly tragic 
circumstances of the death of Doug Bonderud and the lack of 
acceptance of responsibility by this NDP government: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners today live in the constituencies of Saskatoon 
Sutherland and Saskatoon Silver Springs. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens that are getting more and more upset with 
the NDP’s two tiered health system. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very, very concerned with the 
government’s two-tier health system and the handling of the 
Doug Bonderud family. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are all from Saskatoon. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I bring 
forward a petition to urge tougher sentences for sex offences 
against children. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all steps available to speed up the public disclosure 
process so that communities are alerted to the presence of 
known sex offenders in their community as soon as 
possible, and lobby the federal government for tougher 
sentences for sexual offences against children. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re signed entirely by the good people of 
Cudworth and Wakaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Colonsay, Manitou Beach, and also Regina. I so 
present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens urging for tougher sentences for sex offences against 
children. Mr. Speaker, it is a rather lengthy prayer, so I shall 
shorten parts of it: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
lobby the federal government for tougher sentences for 
sexual offences against children, tougher measures to keep 
track of offenders once they are released from a 
correctional facility, and a review of the dangerous 
offender designation process. 
 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good 
citizens of Viscount, Saskatchewan. I am pleased to present it 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and 
a privilege today to rise to present a petition that Mr. 
Bonderud’s surgery at the Mayo Clinic was deemed emergent 
and therefore should be covered under Saskatchewan Health 
policies. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
patients. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today these petitions are from the good people of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 
present a petition regarding the unacceptable conduct of this 
NDP government regarding reimbursing the Bonderud family 
for their out-of-country medical costs. Mr. Speaker, I will read 
the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to reimburse the Bonderud family for 
out-of-country treatment costs and improve the future 
communication and coordination of cancer services for all 
cancer patients. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from a number 
of neighbourhoods in Saskatoon as well as Tisdale, Watson, 
Naicam, and Spalding. I so present on their behalf. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today in the Assembly to present a petition calling on the 
government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people from 
Saskatoon and Martensville, and I’m very pleased to present 
them today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to 
present many, many petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 
citizens who are very concerned about the future of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore my petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position and 
the right of all Western Canadian farmers to decide the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board and not the federal 
cabinet. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have signatures here from Saskatoon, from 
Elrose, from Cut Knife, from Fort Qu’Appelle, from 
Assiniboia, from Moose Jaw, from Eyebrow, from Waldeck, 
from Regina, from Edenwold, and from Oxbow; from all across 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I present the petitions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of the 
citizens of Saskatchewan who are very concerned about the 
opposition’s position on this issue and who are equally 
concerned about the future of the Canadian Wheat Board. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
is the right of all Western Canadian farmers to decide the 
future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are from Lancer, Pennant, 
Waldeck, Success, Lucky Lake, Cut Knife, Kindersley, 
Saskatoon, Lumsden, Herschel, Kamsack, Langenburg, Biggar, 
Hagen, Birch Hills, Weldon, and other places. Mr. Speaker, I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present a petition 
on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned 
about the future of the Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all Canadian farmers to decide the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are from Wynyard, Cudworth, 
Delisle, Colonsay, Allan Kelliher, Lanigan, Spruce Home, and 
Macdowall, to name a few. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — For introduction of guests, members, I have a 
lengthy list of introductions it’s my pleasure to do today. There 
are many, many special guests who are here to observe Gwenn 
Ronyk and the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] — 
and to observe the MLAs — this being Gwenn Ronyk’s final 
day as Clerk at the Table. And first, I want to introduce the 
family of our Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk. As I introduce you, would 
you mind just either waving or standing up so people can 
recognize you. 
 
First of all Gwenn’s husband, Reg; their children, Evan, 
Brittany, and Keith Ronyk; Gwenn’s mother, Ms. Ida Harris; 
Gwenn’s sister and brother-in-law, Michel and Dale Milne; 
Barry and Fay Harris and Nathan — that is a brother, 
sister-in-law, and nephew to Gwenn; Don Harris and Carla 
Harris, a brother and a niece to Gwenn. I would like the 
Assembly to welcome these very special guests of Gwenn 
Ronyk, her family, to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Also in their legislature are former members 
who served as Speakers, and some of their spouses are here as 
well. Mr. Herb Swan and Anita Swan; Mr. Arnold Tusa and 
Larissa Tusa; Mr. Herman Rolfes and Ms. Myrna Rolfes; Mr. 
Ron Osika, also now mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle; Mr. Dale 
Flavel, former Deputy Speaker, and Mrs. Flavel. Would you, 
members, please welcome these people back to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — There are people who are here from out of 
province: Clerk Assistant of British Columbia, Craig James 
who is a former Saskatchewan Clerk Assistant and Legislative 
Assembly reference librarian; also Clerk Assistant of Alberta, 
Louise Kamuchik. Would you welcome Craig and Louise, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The MLAs might notice that there is a large 
group of people in the gallery who are ordinarily in the building 
where Hansard is housed. There are about 20 or more staff here 
along with Lenni, their boss. And when I asked them who’s 
minding the shop, Lenni assured me, says not to worry; they’re 

planning to use a text from last year’s Hansard. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would also like to welcome former librarian, 
Marian Powell, and former archivist, Trevor Powell; former 
security, second-in-command, Ben Block and his good wife, 
Marlene. Debbie Saum is also here. She’s the director of 
protocol. All people . . . And there may be others who I’m 
missing, who I have missed. But all here, welcome to this 
Assembly for this afternoon’s procedures. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Are there any further introductions? The 
Chair recognizes the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members of the House, a couple who are here today from 
Australia — Kathy From and her partner, Peter Dennis. Kathy’s 
originally from here and is daughter to my constituency 
assistant, Donna From. Kathy’s been living in Brisbane and 
working for the Sisters of Mercy in a girls’ group home, and 
Peter is a mechanical engineer. 
 
In order to show Peter a real Christmas, the whole family went 
out to the Come See-Come Saw tree farm at Moose Jaw and cut 
their own Christmas tree on Sunday. The hot chocolate and the 
cookies afterward were great, and I think Peter’s getting a good 
sense of what winter in Canada is like. We hope he enjoys it. 
And I’d ask them to wave to the House so you’ll know who 
they are, and we ask all to welcome them here to the Chamber 
and to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this last day 
of the Assembly, one of our Pages, Michael Radmacher, this 
will also be his last day as a Page. And to honour him, his 
parents, Gordon and Marion Radmacher, are seated in your 
gallery in the back row, and I’d ask them to acknowledge the 
legislature. They’re here to help him celebrate the fact that this 
is his last day but also to see an important milestone in his 
career as we know that we’ll all be watching how he does from 
this point onward. And we look forward to seeing him in many 
successful ventures in the years to come. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, my uncle, Ed Morgan who’s seated in your gallery. 
And I’d like to say that he taught me everything I know, Mr. 
Speaker, but I know that that would embarrass both him and 
me. 
 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

But seriously, I do want to say that my uncle spent his career 
with the provincial archives. He retired some years ago. And I 
had believed — until I heard the maiden speech of the member 
from Weyburn-Big Muddy who said that Halbrite, 
Saskatchewan was the centre of the universe — I had been 
raised to believe that Colonsay was the centre of the universe. 
But I’d like members to join me in welcoming my uncle here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

National Day of Remembrance and Action 
on Violence Against Women 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, today is the national day of 
remembrance and action on violence against women. On this 
day we remember the 14 students in Montreal who were 
murdered in 1989. They were slaughtered simply because they 
were women. We mourn their loss and the loss of all women 
and girls who have fallen victim to the scourge of violence. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, today is indeed a day of mourning. Today 
we grieve for the grandmothers, mothers, and sisters who have 
been taken from us. Today our heartfelt sympathy and prayers 
are with all those who daily suffer the pain of knowing their 
loved one will never come home again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is also a day to renew our commitment, our 
commitment to ending violence against women and girls 
everywhere. Our commitment to work for the day when every 
woman and girl will be free from the fear of violence in all 
aspects of their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today there are ceremonies across Canada marking 
the tragic events in Montreal 17 years ago. I know that all 
honourable members will find the time to attend one of these 
remembrance ceremonies. We cannot bring the victims who 
have lost their lives back to life, but we can honour their 
memory by doing everything we can to prevent such violence 
from claiming even more victims into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Christmas Greetings for Canadian Troops in Afghanistan 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ten to seventeen per 
cent of the Canadian military contingent in Afghanistan is made 
up of reservists. These part-time soldiers, and I say part-time 
because they are civilians who have trained part-time, have 
volunteered to go oversees to defend Canada’s interests and to 
help rebuild a war-torn country. These soldiers will not be home 
for Christmas, Mr. Speaker. They will not see their families. 
They will not see their friends. They will not be in the comfort 
of their own homes. 
 

I rise today to bring awareness to a very noteworthy project. 
Former lieutenant governor and honorary reservist Jack Wiebe 
is spearheading a project to send Christmas cards to soldiers 
serving in Afghanistan. Our party in the opposition 
wholeheartedly supports the idea. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Our Canadian troops are bringing peace to a country where war 
and strife have been the reality for all too long. Because of the 
work of Canadian troops, women are now allowed to vote; 
they’re in places of leadership in Afghanistan; classrooms 
include girls; and many, many more Afghani people can now 
drink clean and safe water. Mr. Speaker, in addition to that of 
course they’re helping to fight the war on terror on our behalf. 
 
Cards and letters can be mailed: To Any Soldier, TF 
Afghanistan, Box 5068, Station Forces, Belleville, Ontario, 
K8N 5W6. People can also send Christmas greetings, Mr. 
Speaker, through our caucus website where there is a link to our 
Canadian troops. 
 
We need to send them a message this Christmas that we are 
thinking of them. They are truly Canadian heroes. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, we wish them a very, very 
merry Christmas and a safe Christmas, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Film Financing Company Launched in Kipling 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last night 
the community of Kipling, a town of about 1,100 people, 
launched a film financing company and began accepting 
investments in the company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will all be aware of the Red Paper Clip Day 
back in July and the fact that Internet blogger Kyle MacDonald, 
through a series of Internet trades, traded up a red paper clip for 
a house in Kipling. 
 
Kipling mayor says he expects 200 people to chip in between 
350 and $400,000 in total to finance the film 3 Day Test. He 
says: 
 

“This is one of the most positively received projects I’ve 
seen for a long time . . . Everybody seems pretty gung-ho 
about putting money . . . [into it] and seeing it happen in 
Kipling and [he says] this is thought to be a first in film, to 
have a community that works together to fund a film . . . 
[project].” 

 
The film, written and directed by former L.A. Law star 
Corbin Bernsen, is to be produced by Bernsen’s Public 
Media Works and the Saskatchewan-based production 
company Angel Entertainment. 
Shooting is to begin in March and 3 Day Test is expected 
to be released next Christmas. 

 
“In a nutshell it’s [about] a father who gets frustrated with 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

the rat race of everyday life so they see how the family can 
do by cutting themselves off from the world [stage] for 
three days.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the movie will be shot totally in Kipling. Many 
locals will be debuted on the silver screen movie. 
Congratulations to the community of Kipling and their film 
financing company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Challenges Faced by First Nations and Métis Women 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, today is the National Day of 
Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. 
Nowhere are the challenges greater than amongst First Nations 
and Métis women. There are too many Aboriginal women and 
young girls today who face sexual violence, exploitation, 
poverty, lack of access to adequate housing, overt racism, and 
chronic health problems. They have been excluded from their 
home communities, from decision making, and from having a 
say in their futures and the future of their children. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to honour the strength and 
courage of these Aboriginal women today for their 
determination to create a better and safer future for their 
children, for their families, for their communities, and indeed 
for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the challenges are huge. There is no one right 
answer. It will take all of us to resolve the issues of violence 
and gender and equality. But most of all we must never forget 
all people have the right to protection and safety. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Energy Industry in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister of Industry and Resources was asked 
why Saskatchewan doesn’t have a membership on the energy 
council. Saskatchewan is a major producer of energy and 
should be a major player when it comes to international forums 
on renewable and non-renewable resources and the security of 
supply. However the minister indicated that rather than take a 
leading role in an international organization, he would prefer to 
be like an uninvited guest at a garden party. He wants to show 
up, eat the food, enjoy the beverages without paying or 
contributing to the planning of the event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure that’s how the people of 
Saskatchewan want their province represented. We have an 
opportunity to be part of an international discussion on the 
development of the energy industry and carve our place in 
international markets, but the minister would rather play the 
role of a freeloading neighbour. 

Several energy-producing provinces are members. A number of 
the states of the United States are members, and even 
Venezuela is a member of the energy council. Our Canadian 
counterparts are wondering why Saskatchewan isn’t a 
contributing member of the council considering our vast energy 
resources. The minister’s response was that he was quite 
comfortable attending events without paying his membership 
dues. He is quite comfortable being in the shadows as opposed 
to being a full participant engaging in discussions and setting 
the agenda. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this situation is all too familiar to a 
freeloading neighbour who has overstayed his welcome and the 
other neighbours on his street can’t wait for him to leave. 
People of this province can’t wait for that NDP government to 
leave. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Addressing the Issue of Violence Against Women 
 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard this week in 
Canada we pay particular attention to the issue of violence 
against women. It is now 17 years since the awful event at the 
École Polytechnique in Montreal but clearly this is an issue that 
is not going to go away. And I think we have to ask ourselves 
what are we missing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that we have to get away from the 
concept of what is called gender mainstreaming where women’s 
issues are folded into the mandates of agencies or buried under 
government ministries. This is not working. To quote Stephen 
Lewis when he was a UN [United Nations] AIDS [acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome] envoy, “Once you have 
mainstreamed gender issues, they are everyone’s business, and 
no one’s business. Everyone is accountable and no one is 
accountable.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, violence against women is everywhere in the 
world, and governments and leaders need to focus on the 
solutions. 
 
Dismantling supports for women is not the answer. Prime 
Minister Harper’s decision to close Status of Women offices 
across the country, including the one in Saskatoon, is precisely 
the wrong thing to do and the timing is ironic. 
 
Recently in Abuja, Nigeria, the Commonwealth Women 
Parliamentarians, who represent 52 Commonwealth countries of 
the world, asked the United Nations to create a women’s 
organization within its umbrella to deal with issues affecting 
women worldwide — particularly violence against women. In a 
separate action, the business and professional women of Canada 
have done the same. Clearly, women of the world are speaking 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time to refocus our efforts and look at 
solutions that will give women the tools to live their lives free 
of violence and fear. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

New Head Coach for Saskatchewan Roughriders 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always 
good news when a former Saskatchewan resident returns to our 
province. But we have to ensure that they have every 
opportunity to succeed and that usually isn’t the case under this 
NDP government. 
 
Today Kent Austin is returning to Saskatchewan to become the 
new head coach of the Saskatchewan Roughriders. It’s not 
going to be an easy job but I believe he can succeed in turning 
Saskatchewan into a winning team. I believe he’s up to the task 
but there’s one thing that he’s going to need help with from 
every Rider fan in Saskatchewan, and that of course is the curse 
of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 46 years the NDP has been in power in 
Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Roughriders have never won 
the Grey Cup. The Riders’ only two Grey Cup victories came at 
times when the NDP has been kicked out of office. In fact every 
other team in the league has won the Grey Cup at least three 
times while the NDP was in government here, while Rider fans 
were forced to suffer year after year under the NDP curse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe Kent Austin and the Riders can win the 
Grey Cup next year. But the most important play of 2007 is 
going to be a punt — when the voters punt this NDP 
government out of office and get rid of the NDP curse once and 
for all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Communication Training for Minister 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
media reports today indicated that taxpayers in Saskatchewan 
had paid roughly $8,000 for special remedial training for the 
Minister of Community Resources. According to the documents 
released under a freedom of information request, this NDP 
government spent $8,000 on media training so that the minister 
could answer questions about his mishandling of the Oyate Safe 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister spend $8,000 on special 
media training? Mr. Speaker, why is spinning the story always 
more important to the NDP government than fixing the real 
problem and helping vulnerable children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me be clear that it is 
often the opportunity that cabinet members have to go through 

media training, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question that as a 
minister, I wanted to make sure that we were very effective — 
not only to the media, but to the public as well — that we’re 
able to communicate the facts and to make sure that we are very 
clear on what we’re trying to do to resolve the issue. What we 
wanted to do, Mr. Speaker, is to not have that party opposite 
misconstrue everything, not come out with the complete facts, 
and to begin their process of not only being political but being 
critical. 
 
At the time, Mr. Speaker, as indicated, from time to time 
cabinet ministers have the opportunity to take media training to 
make sure that they answer questions as concisely and factual 
as possible. And I had that opportunity, Mr. Speaker; I took it 
and, Mr. Speaker, it certainly helped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly a 
debatable fact. The NDP paid $4,000 of taxpayers’ money to a 
company called Gryphon Reputation Management, Gryphon 
Reputation Management, Mr. Speaker. Why on earth should the 
government, taxpayers be spending their hard-earned dollars to 
fix the minister’s reputation? And I don’t think the people of 
Saskatchewan got good value for their money. And I know for 
sure the young women who went through Oyate didn’t get a 
safe house or help they needed from this minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government spending on communication has gone 
up $4 million in the past two years. Why did this government 
have to spend even more money in a failed mission to save this 
minister’s reputation? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is really important is 
that this money was not added nor was it taken away from the 
Oyate budget, Mr. Speaker. What that member ought to know, 
Mr. Speaker, was the fact that Oyate was shut down at the time, 
and any money that we used to prepare ministers to make sure 
they were able to effectively communicate with the public, with 
the media, and many other groups out there, is to make sure that 
they know that this money did not come at the expense of the 
children. That member knows that very well, Mr. Speaker. And 
I want to point out as well what’s important is that, yes, the 
$8,000 was a valuable commitment that we made, a 
contribution that we made, and I think it’s going to pay off. 
 
But that member likes to use fairy tales in some of his 
analogies, Mr. Speaker. I heard him on the radio today. And let 
me point out the $50 million that that party cut, Mr. Speaker, it 
reminds me of the fairy tale of Robin Hood. And the Leader of 
the Sask Party, he’s the perverse Robin Hood with his band of 
cranky merry men that can’t get their act right when it comes to 
the good work that’s needed to help the poor people of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order. Order. I just 
remind the members that they are not to use other member’s 
names either directly or indirectly by insinuation in the 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

Assembly. Next question. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, this minister has been a minister within cabinet since 
1999. All of a sudden a file comes along that’s a contentious 
file and he needs help. I think he needs a lot more than the 
$8,000. 
 
The minister’s handling of the Oyate file has been a disaster. 
He’s contradicted himself and when he doesn’t contradict 
himself, his answers are incoherent. I think whoever ordered the 
training should ask for their money back, first of all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who ordered this training for the Minister of 
Community Resources? And why was it felt to be necessary to 
train a veteran cabinet minister on a subject he should be on top 
of and well aware of the facts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, again I would point out 
that this has got to be the worst critic I’ve ever met in my entire 
political career, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t have any of the facts 
right. And all he does is rant and rave, Mr. Speaker. And so 
much for their code of ethics of using the correct information to 
make their points. 
 
Again I’ll reiterate to the people of Saskatchewan, he’s got to 
be one of the worst critics I met in my entire political career, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would point out unsuccessful as well, Mr. 
Speaker, because what is he focusing on, Mr. Speaker? He is 
focused on the negative doom and gloom. 
 
In the meantime we’re building a brand new model to make 
sure that we help the people, the children that are being 
supported on our streets. We have more police officers, Mr. 
Speaker. We have Ranch Ehrlo involved, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to continue building on the First Nations strength. 
 
All the good things that we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, to move 
forward and to finally solve this problem, he’s not paying any 
attention to that work, Mr. Speaker. And that’s perhaps maybe 
where he should pay attention to. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, that 
might have been a good answer to some question, but it 
certainly wasn’t an answer to the question that was asked. You 
know, the question is — and I’ll put it very simply for him so 
he can understand and put some of that training to work — who 
gave this minister the order to get the special training? Did he 
ask for it himself or was he ordered by someone from the 
Premier’s office, an office that already spent $1.8 million 
taxpayers’ money on communications? 

Mr. Speaker, who gave the order forcing this minister to get 
training on the Oyate file? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is really important is 
that it is not unusual, and ministers from time to time may get 
professional media training, Mr. Speaker. What I’m not known 
for, Mr. Speaker, is to give very concise answers. At times I 
tend to ramble, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes a simple answer 
can take five, ten minutes. 
 
What’s important is, as a media tool, we wanted to make sure 
that we’re able to effectively communicate with the public of 
Saskatchewan so that they know (a) what the problems were, 
and (b) what the solutions are, Mr. Speaker. We want to do that 
as effectively as possible. 
 
What we didn’t want to do, Mr. Speaker, is allow the rhetoric 
and the doom and gloom and the accusations and the personal 
attacks, Mr. Speaker, and their ranting and raving, Mr. Speaker, 
to colour what is going to be one of the most exciting 
opportunities for us to help children off the streets, Mr. Speaker. 
And they refuse to recognize that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Oyate file, the 
history of this minister’s conduct is pretty much a fact. It’s a 
fact of the record, the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate has weighed in and 
talked about what a negligent job this government has done 
with respect to vulnerable kids. The auditor has weighed in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The minister hasn’t been able to answer questions correctly. 
The minister, when he has answered questions, has had to 
change his mind. We’ve had government members stifle 
witnesses at the committee of the legislature to get answers as 
to the government’s accountability on this issue. And the 
answer, Mr. Speaker, the answer is they don’t want to get to the 
bottom of the issue; they want to use 8,000 taxpayers’ dollars 
for spin training for the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yes, there is a question. The 
question to the Premier is this: will he finally do the right thing 
and fire that incompetent minister, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me tell you and tell the 
House and tell the people of Saskatchewan precisely what this 
minister has been doing. When this minister became aware of 
the circumstances at Oyate, what did he do? He closed it down. 
He closed it down to find solutions, better solutions for these 
young people that are being sexually exploited on our streets. 
 
What has he done? He has created a model, Mr. Speaker, that I 
think stands national attention. He has taken this circumstance; 
he has engaged the people of Ranch Ehrlo, the most 
professional people in our province. He is providing now with a 
new Oyate, when everything is ready and people are trained, an 
opportunity for First Nations people to remain engaged with 
essentially First Nations young people. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
minister who cares about the young people of Saskatchewan — 
not about his political future; not about some political 
gamesmanship. And if anybody should ought to be asked to 
resign, it is the member from Saskatoon who was abusing 
public servants in public in this legislature. That’s who ought to 
be asked to resign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Health Care Issues 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in 
Health estimates when I asked the minister questions about 
long-term care beds, he said and I quote: “We have the correct 
number of beds.” Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to a freedom 
of information request from every health region in the province, 
the Saskatchewan Party has learned that there are 136 fewer 
beds today than in the year 2002-2003. And, Mr. Speaker, there 
are currently today 557 seniors on waiting lists for long-term 
care beds provincial-wide. It is clear the NDP government is on 
the wrong track as hundreds of seniors are being left behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why he said we have the 
correct number of beds when we see 557 seniors waiting to get 
into those beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
average number of long-term care beds in Canada is 97 per 
100,000 population of people aged 75 and over. In 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the average number of beds per 
100,000 people aged 75 and over is 111. Mr. Speaker, we have 
higher than the national average number of long-term care beds 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the data that the member opposite is using is data 
that’s collected over the course of a year. He’s not taking into 
account the length of time that individuals might be waiting or 
whether they’re waiting for beds in their community as opposed 
to a bed that might be open and existing in another regional 
health authority. Mr. Speaker, once again the member opposite 
is using data to his and the Sask Party advantage and not paying 
attention to the circumstances in the province of Saskatchewan. 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister continues to 
fail to notice is that we have the highest proportion of seniors 
per capita of any province in Canada, so it only stands to reason 
that we have far more beds — long-term care beds — far more 
than what we have. The minister quoted in estimates this last 
week, he said, “We can’t be overbuilding long-term care beds 
so that . . . [they] have empty beds waiting for individuals who 
may come along at any one given time.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister claims we have the correct number of 
beds, and he doesn’t want to build beds to sit empty. And I 
would agree with that point. But how are they going to sit 
empty when we have 557 seniors on waiting lists, Mr. Speaker? 
There’s 113 in Saskatoon, 105 in Regina, 74 in Prairie North, 
55 in Kelsey Trail, and the list goes on and on. Why would he 
say we have the correct number of beds when we see so many 
seniors waiting on lists to get into those beds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite knows that he asked the question, how many 
seniors were waiting in the year ’04, ’05, ’06, Mr. Speaker. He 
knows that the number that he’s quoting are the number of 
seniors who may have been waiting during the course of the 
year. He does not recognize or acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that 
some of those seniors may have been waiting for a very short 
period of time or may be self-imposed waiting because they 
want a very specific bed in a specific location. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not going to do what that party did in the 
1980s and build long-term care beds in every community in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, because some of those facilities today, 
Mr. Speaker, have empty beds in it looking for support from 
this government, for continued support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to the seniors of this province. 
We are committed to the long-term care beds that we have this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to be committed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s getting harder and harder 
to believe this minister. The entire session the Sask Party has 
been raising concerns about rural hospital closures throughout 
this province. Well last week, Mr. Speaker, the minister went 
on to say that he didn’t think it was any worse this year than it 
was any other year, but now he’s changed his mind. Now it 
seems that the minister was wrong on his statement last week. 
In the Leader-Post headline, and I quote, it says: “Taylor 
concedes hospital closures is a serious issue.” Far more than 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

over the past number of years. 
 
Finally on the second last day of session he admits that rural 
hospital closures are a huge problem in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister finally admit that he’s on a roll with 
his incorrect statements and start acknowledging some of the 
reports that are put out by other organizations — whether it’s 
SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], whether it’s the Health 
Quality Council — that there are huge problems in our health 
care system under his administration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no question in my mind or in my statements that in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, hospital closures at any time are a serious issue. 
 
The member opposite is aware from questions that he’s raised 
in this House and answers that have been provided, Mr. 
Speaker, that indeed these are temporary closures. And if the 
member would care to take a look today at the number of 
closures that exist, he’ll notice that the regional health 
authorities have in fact reopened a lot of those facilities, Mr. 
Speaker. They were temporary. Officials took action, and in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that action has proved to be successful in 
those locations. 
 
He talks about reports that are coming forward. Mr. Speaker, 
last week there was a report on the national stage, the Canadian 
Institute for Health Information that the member likes to quote, 
. . . missed one last week, Mr. Speaker. The report was 
Understanding Physician Satisfaction at Work. The report 
shows in Canada 68 per cent of family physicians are happy; in 
Saskatchewan, 77 per cent are happy, Mr. Speaker — the 
highest rate in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP government is on the wrong track when it comes to nurses 
as well. Yesterday the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses reported 
that provincial-wide there are 599 RNs [registered nurse] and 
RPNs [registered psychiatric nurse] short. There are that many 
vacancies, Mr. Speaker, in our province. 
 
Nurses right now that are working the wards are getting burnt 
out because overtime is needed to cover those vacancies. They 
can’t take vacation time, injuries are skyrocketing, and the 
morale is low. The minister has only targeted to recruit 400 new 
nurses. Mr. Speaker, that is 200 short of what the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses is saying. Because of this 200 shortage, can he 
please explain to this Assembly and tell the public, the rural 
public, how many hospitals he plans to close because the 
shortage of nurses because of his government? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

legislature has been sitting since . . . over the last five weeks, 
five working days per week, Mr. Speaker, five days a week. 
We’ve actually been sitting over 29 working days . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . They talk four days in this Chamber, but the 
health system, Mr. Speaker, 29 days. 
 
If we take what the health system has done while the member 
opposite has been crying gloom and doom . . . Let’s look at 
some real numbers: 7,800 surgeries since the member first got 
up to ask his first question; 359,600 people have visited a 
physician since the member asked his first question; 7,250 calls 
have been managed by HealthLine, Mr. Speaker, since the 
member asked his first question; 8,352 CT [computerized 
tomography] scans, since the member asked his first question. 
Mr. Speaker, 72,500 people have visited a specialist since the 
member asked his first question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, not only have they failed 
people in rural Saskatchewan with hospital closures, they’ve 
failed the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses with a shortage of 
nurses. They’re failing people living with cancer. 
 
Today people like Terry Rak have to pay thousands of dollars 
out of their pocket so that they can access the drug Avastin. 
Crystal Bonderud is still waiting for answers as to why her 
husband, Doug, died needlessly before he was treated properly 
for the cancer that he was suffering under. Cancer patients are 
still waiting three months for their first visit to an oncologist — 
people like Emily Morley — which is three times the national 
average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit, like he did with rural 
hospital closures, finally, begrudgingly, that he is failing cancer 
patients in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Every question that the member has raised opposite has 
received an answer. Every request for an investigation from the 
public has received a response, Mr. Speaker. We’ve taken a 
look at every issue. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ve not been 
afraid to talk to the public and the media about the issues that 
have been raised, either in the public or across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day in this Chamber, in a speech to this 
Chamber, the member opposite talked about report cards and 
this government’s not being willing to go forward with our 
report card. The member opposite is quoted as saying that if he 
ever got an F on his report card, maybe that report card 
wouldn’t have got home. It doesn’t mean, I didn’t get an F, it 
means my mother didn’t see it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re honest, we’re straightforward, we’re 
forward with everything that we’ve got to say. The member 
opposite was not willing to stand by his own marks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Government’s Performance 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this government 
has got a failing grade on its report card and it will not be able 
to hide that report card from the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. You can have assurance of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the Weyburn-Big Muddy by-election — the 
shocking, blowout loss that the NDP suffered, finishing third in 
the home of Tommy Douglas — the Premier said it was a 
wake-up call. But apparently, Mr. Speaker, he just rolled over, 
hit the snooze alarm, and went back to sleep as a tired, old 
government is wont to do. Because, Mr. Speaker, while this 
government has set aside a billion dollar slush fund for its own 
electoral prospects, consider what we’ve learned about health 
care. Consider the fact that over 550 seniors are waiting for 
long-term care. There are 500 unfilled positions for nurses, 
according to SUN. We have too-long waiting lists for cancer 
treatment — among the longest surgical waiting lists in the 
nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the record of this NDP government here in the birthplace 
of medicare. Will the Premier answer this question: why have 
they lost their way so badly? Why are they so clearly on the 
wrong track, Mr. Speaker, and letting the people of 
Saskatchewan down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here is a government 
and here is a province who has not lost its way, Mr. Speaker. 
Here is a government and here is a province that’s moving into 
its future with confidence, with optimism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the course of this session — just note — 
during the course of this session, 21,000 new jobs created . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, during the course of this 
session, 18,000 new jobs created in the course of this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that may not mean 
much to those members opposite but that means a lot to the 
young people of Saskatchewan. That means a lot to the families 
of Saskatchewan. That means we are making Saskatchewan a 
better place for today’s Saskatchewan family and a better future 
for our young people here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, note this. I recall the spring session. I think 
members recall the spring session. Each day the Leader of the 
Opposition got on his feet. What did he say? How can you be 
losing jobs in an oil boom, he says. Well he’s not saying that 
today, Mr. Speaker. Why isn’t he saying that . . . 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the other symptom of a government 
that’s clearly very, very tired and old and past its stale date is 
that it is unable to focus on the issue at hand. 
 
The question for the Premier is about health care. Here’s what 
Rosalee Longmoore, the president of SUN, had to say in 
today’s StarPhoenix. She said, quote: 
 

Saskatchewan’s health care system is in serious trouble, 
and it is going to get much, much worse. 
 

We would only differ in one way with this quote, Mr. Speaker. 
It’ll only get much, much worse if that Premier and that Health 
minister remain in charge of this health care system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Waiting lists are getting longer, Mr. Speaker, for 
cancer treatment, for surgical care. We have a long-term 
waiting list of 500-plus in the province. We’re short 500 nurses. 
And what the Premier offers them is what exactly? He doesn’t 
even answer the question. 
 
He’s sitting on a billion dollar election slush fund while there 
are real needs in health care — for long-term care patients, for 
people that need health care from this Premier and this 
government. Why won’t he act? Why has his government lost 
its way, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
What is noteworthy of course to the people of Saskatchewan is 
that one day we have the opposition talking about health care 
and how much more should be spent in health care. But do you 
notice, Mr. Speaker, not one, not one idea from that opposition 
around what might be done in health care different than what’s 
happening today. Not one idea. Now one day it’s on health care, 
the next day they want us to spend on highways, yesterday 
spend on agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Well I know that’s what got 
us into the trouble with these people before, Mr. Speaker, and 
the people of Saskatchewan are not going to make that mistake 
again. 
 
But here’s what’s most interesting. The Leader of the 
Opposition and that Saskatchewan Party caucus came into this 
legislation, this sitting of the legislature, saying the number one 
issue, the number one issue is jobs and labour market issues. 
The number one issue. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
question periods, we’ve virtually had more questions about 
coyotes than we’ve had about jobs in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Increasing the Monetary Limit for Small Claims Court 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today 
to announce yet another measure this government is taking to 
make Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and build 
strong futures. 
 
I am pleased to announce that once again we are improving the 
public’s access to justice by modifying the Small Claims Court 
system. Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the 
ongoing operation of a Small Claims Court that is accessible to 
the average person. To do this we are increasing the monetary 
limit for cases that may be heard by Small Claims Court from 
$10,000 to $15,000 effective January 1, 2007. 
 
We will continue to review the limit with a view to raising it in 
stages to $25,000. Mr. Speaker, the Small Claims Court is 
intended to operate as a court for lay people rather than lawyers, 
and is a low-cost method of dispute resolution. These further 
changes to the limits will greatly improve the accessibility of 
this court, and are another concrete example of our 
government’s commitment to making life better for 
Saskatchewan families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this morning we received 
a copy of the minister’s ministerial statement, and about an hour 
later we received version 2.0 of the same statement. And I 
looked at the two statements and compared them, and the 
difference was, in the first paragraph he added the comment 
about making Saskatchewan the best place to live, work, and 
build strong futures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morgan: — And while I have, Mr. Speaker, some issue 
with how raising the Small Claims Court limit may make it a 
much better place to live, work, or build strong futures, I really 
was surprised to see where this was another concrete example 
of our government’s commitment to making life better for 
Saskatchewan families. So maybe this is part of a greater plan, 
to have family-friendly courthouses with a children’s room like 
they have at McDonald’s. Maybe instead of going for a family 
picnic, you go for a family lawsuit. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, I was amused and would suggest to 
the minister that he not make the job too difficult for lawyers, 
because he may well find himself back in private practice in the 
near future. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is supportive of the 
raise to the limits in Small Claims Court. We recognize and 
commend the judges that work very hard to try and mediate and 
resolve these disputes. And the opposition will be watching to 
see . . . This is a shift in workload from the Court of Queen’s 

Bench to Provincial Court and we will be watching where our 
raises go, where our resources are spent and where . . . I will be 
interested to see what happens as this unfolds and want to see 
how this works out for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Walsh Acres 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would 
like to ask leave of both sides of the House to make a statement 
regarding the murder of 14 women at École Polytechnique in 
Montreal on December 6, 1989. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres has 
requested leave to make a statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Remembering Victims of Montreal Massacre 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on this 
day all across the country, Canadians will gather to 
commemorate the lives and deaths of the 14 women 
engineering students killed 17 years ago at École Polytechnique 
in Montreal, an event that’s a particularly horrific example of 
the reality that women and girls all around the world here in 
Canada and here in Saskatchewan have to live with every day 
— the possibility of being subjected to violence, abuse, or even 
death simply because they are women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a few moments I am going to read the names of 
the 14 women killed in Montreal into the record. But before I 
do, I want to say this. The Montreal massacre changed the way 
Canadians think about gender-based violence because it brought 
home with terrible clarity the realization that gender-based 
violence is uglier, deeper, more pervasive, and more destructive 
than we had ever known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to me these 14 names have come to symbolize the 
names of all of those women from all over the world and here at 
home who have been victimized by violence or are forced to 
live with the spectre of violence in their daily lives. Mr. 
Speaker, after the member opposite has spoken, I ask that the 
House observe a moment of silence. I will now read the names 
of the fourteen women killed: Geneviève Bergeron, Hélène 
Colgan, Natalie Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie 
Edward, Maud Haviernick, Barbara Marie Klueznick, Maryse 
Leclair, Annie Saint-Arneault, Michelle Richard, Maryse 
Laganière, Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Annie Turcotte. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted for a statement and to 
observe a minute of silence after? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to join with 
the hon. member opposite and all members of this Assembly to 
recognize this day, December 6, as the National Day of 
Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women. The 
day was created to honour the memories of the women 
murdered 17 years ago by Marc Lepine at L’École 
Polytechnique in Montreal. As the member has quite rightly 
pointed out, the only reason these 14 women were murdered 
was because they were women. Unfortunately violence is still 
very real for many women in our country, in our province. 
 
December 6 allows Canadians the opportunity to reflect on this 
needless violence against women in our society and to resolve 
to do something about it. This day also provides the opportunity 
for us to think about the women in our own lives and the 
difference they make in our homes, in our communities, in the 
workplace, right across this province and this country. 
 
All women deserve to be treated with respect and with dignity. 
Violence against women is simply unacceptable in our country, 
in our province, in our communities. Saskatchewan and its 
communities should consider ways and act on ways to eliminate 
all forms of violence against women. 
 
As we approach the Christmas season, it becomes increasingly 
important for us to reflect on the many good fortunes that we 
are blessed with, the loved ones that surround us. Everyone 
should be — will be — reminded of the impact that all women 
have in our communities, in our families, in our individual 
lives. 
 
Today we should reflect and resolve to act, to do what we can 
do to help end violence against women and girls. And if the 
memory of those 14 women is not motivation enough, then it’s 
easy to reflect on women and girls in our own lives for that 
motivation. 
 
And so I join with my hon. colleague in requesting that all 
members would recognize a moment of silence out of respect 
for the victims of that terrible day, and to remind each of us of 
the importance and the impact that women have right around 
this country, and the importance to end violence against 
women. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for a moment 
of silence and reflection. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Please be seated. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions no. 329 to 342 
inclusive. Thank you. 
 

The Speaker: — Responses to questions 329 to 342 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 
Why is the member for Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Estevan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly I’d like 
to introduce two people that are very, very special in my life. 
Seated in the east gallery are my daughter, Trisha Duckarmie, 
and her son, my grandson, Beau. Beau is up here today for an 
orthodontist appointment so they stopped in to visit me for a 
while. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Assembly to 
go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 

The Chair: — The business before the committee is the 
resolutions for appropriations. And I would now recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
This Assembly has had the opportunity during this session to 
undertake some significant new programs and new measures to 
benefit ordinary Saskatchewan families, not the least of which 
have been the tax reduction measures that we have undertaken 
and of course the increases that we have been able to provide to 
the training institutions to help young people make a stronger 
future for themselves and their families here in Saskatchewan. 
 
What we are asked to do today is to approve two motions and, 
later this day, a Bill to approve the expenditures that have been 
under debate in this Assembly. I would therefore move 
resolution no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $351,055,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The motion before the committee is, no. 1: 
 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, the sum of $351,055,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
The second motion reads: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 
the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 2008, the sum of $32,000,000 be granted out of 
the General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The second resolution before the committee: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2007, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 
the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal ending March 
31, 2008, the sum of $32,000,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Opposed? Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Madam Chair, I would move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and asks for a leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Opposed? Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Committee of 
Finance has agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to 
report the same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would move that the resolutions be now read a first and a 
second time. 

 
The Speaker: — It has moved by the Minister of Finance that 
the resolutions be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Later this day. Once again the Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 3 ) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
By leave of the Assembly, I would move that Bill No. 41, The 
Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 3) be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Minister of 
Finance has moved that Bill No. 41, The Appropriation Act, 
2006 (No. 3) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly 
and under rule 57(2), I move this Bill be now read a second and 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, is leave of the Assembly granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 41, The Appropriation Act, 
2006 (No. 3) be now read a second and third time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I’m advised that 
His Honour, the Administrator, is prepared to enter for Royal 
Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:51 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour, which 
Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — The Bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 2 - The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 16 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 35 - The Infrastructure Fund Act 
Bill No. 36 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 34 - The Labour Market Commission Act 
Bill No. 1 - The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2006 
Bill No. 29 - The Labour Standards Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 portant 
modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 
Labour Standards Amendments Act, 2006 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly accorded additional supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 41 - The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 3) 
 
to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:55.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly to introduce a motion regarding the intersessional 
conduct of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested to introduce a 
motion. Leave has been requested by the Government House 
Leader. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader, the hon. member from Melfort, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That when the Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, pursuant to rule 3(3), it shall stand adjourned until 
March 7, 2007, unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker 
upon the request of the government, and if recalled, Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice if 
possible of such date and time. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, the member for Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
member for Melfort: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, pursuant to rule 3(3), it shall stand adjourned until 
March 7, 2007, unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker 
upon the request of the government, and if recalled, Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice if 
possible of such date and time. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave of the House 
to make a few comments about our Clerk who is spending her 
last day in the House today. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make 
comments with respect to the Clerk who is leaving the House 
today. Is leave granted? 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 

 
Recognition of Clerk of the Legislature 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And at the close of my remarks, I would want to move a formal 
motion of appreciation which will be seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
This is an occasion of some significance, Mr. Speaker, to this 
legislature and to this province, Mr. Speaker, as we mark the 
occasion of the retirement of an extremely distinguished record 
of service to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly by Ms. 
Gwenn Ronyk. The motion, Mr. Speaker, that I will make will 
identify that. 
 
It is my pleasure, I know, speaking on behalf of all members — 
and I’m certain the Leader of the Opposition will say the same 
— that we speak not for ourselves but on behalf of all members 
to recognize Gwenn Ronyk’s outstanding service to this 
Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 
am one of those in this legislature. 
 
[15:00] 
 
We sometimes describe ourselves as the class of 1986. That’s 
20 years ago, Mr. Speaker, that some of us were first privileged 
to sit in this House. And in thinking about Ms. Ronyk’s 32 
years of service, she had provided 12 years of service to this 
legislature before 1986. And I daresay, Mr. Speaker, that there 
will not have been a member elected in those 32 years — and I 
can say for certain in the last 20 — there has not been a member 
who has not benefited, learned from Ms. Ronyk’s work at this 
Table. I venture to say that Gwenn Ronyk knew more about 
parliamentary procedure and the procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly in 1986 than I do today. We have all, as members, 
benefited from Gwenn Ronyk’s service to this House. 
 
She was first appointed First Assistant Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly in 1974. She was appointed Deputy Clerk in 1981, 
and then Clerk on December 6, 1989, which is 17 years ago; 
she has served as our Clerk. Without doubt, Mr. Speaker, 
during that time, Ms. Ronyk has been a model of calm, reliable, 
professionalism. Her presence at the Clerk’s Table has not only 
helped uphold but indeed has added to the dignity of this 
House. 
 
Ms. Ronyk’s service and leadership has also extended beyond 
this Chamber and beyond the borders of this province. As past 
vice-president and past president of the Canadian Clerks 
Association, member of the Canadian Study of Parliament 
Group, member of the Society of Clerks at the Table in 
Commonwealth Parliaments, and honorary secretary to the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Saskatchewan 
branch, Gwenn Ronyk has represented Saskatchewan with 
grace and distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may just say, democracy depends on many 
things. Parliamentary democracy, which in my view is the best 
expression of democracy, depends on many factors, many 

people. But, Mr. Speaker, this democracy we so treasure — this 
parliamentary democracy that we so treasure — depends on 
those I call its officials. The officials of democracy in a society 
preserve for us our democratic freedoms. They preserve the 
traditions. They preserve the rights of free speech. They 
preserve process that leads to good governance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Gwenn Ronyk has been, in a Canadian context and — I would 
argue — in a Commonwealth context, a model officer of 
democracy. You have given the people of our province the 
right, through your work, to choose their own future, to choose 
their own society. And no amount of thanks, no amount of 
thanks can be offered to share the importance of that role in our 
democracy. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to take the opportunity afforded to 
me on behalf of members past, members present, Speakers — 
eight of whom I believe, Gwenn, you’ve served with. We 
learned at lunch that some of them improved. I think all of them 
improved actually. And let me just conclude by saying this: in 
about five years time or thereabouts, we’ll need another 
Lieutenant Governor. It seems to be good training. 
 
Gwenn, our very, very best to you in your retirement, to your 
husband, to your family. Enjoy the years ahead. And we have 
this formal parting today with deep, deep thanks for your work. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me make a formal motion. I move, 
seconded by the member of Swift Current: 
 

That the members of this House, desiring to record their 
respectful appreciation for 32 years of distinguished 
service rendered by Ms. Gwenn Ronyk to this legislature, 
including 17 years as Clerk, and acknowledging the 
dedication and dignity she brought to that office, 
designates her as honorary officer of this Legislative 
Assembly with an entree to the Chamber and a seat at the 
Table on all ceremonial occasions. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly, it has been moved 
by the member for Saskatoon Riverdale, the Premier, seconded 
by the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That the members of this House, desiring to record their 
respectful appreciation for the 32 years of distinguished 
service rendered by Ms. Gwenn Ronyk to this legislature, 
including 17 years as Clerk, and acknowledging the 
dedication and dignity she brought to that office, 
designates her as honorary officer of this Legislative 
Assembly with an entree to the Chamber and a seat at the 
Table on all ceremonial occasions. 

 
The Chair recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, it’s a pleasure for me to offer a few words today on 
this very special day. 
 
It’s a near impossible task, I’m sure the Premier would agree, to 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

try to do justice to these 32 years of amazing service in just a 
few brief remarks. 
 
It should be noted, obviously, that there isn’t one current sitting 
MLA that was here when Ms. Ronyk began working in the 
Assembly as a Clerk Assistant in August 1974. Not only are 
none of them here, Mr. Speaker, but the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy was not yet born, I would point out, Mr. 
Speaker. But I hasten to add that speaks more to his age than 
yours, Madam Clerk. 
 
1974 was a pretty interesting year, Mr. Speaker. There was a lot 
of political intrigue stateside with the Watergate scandal. Gerald 
Ford became the president. It was a year of new beginnings 
here in Canada. In that year, females were first allowed to join 
the ranks of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The band 
ABBA was topping the charts. I’m not . . . Happy Days made 
its debut on TV, and Global television just had begun 
broadcasting. The prime minister was Pierre Trudeau, and the 
premier was Allan Blakeney. And a young woman named 
Gwenn Ronyk was beginning what would be a very successful 
career and years of contribution to this Assembly and to this 
province. 
 
During her time, as the Premier has alluded, Ms. Ronyk has 
worked with eight Speakers. There were also four premiers and 
eight lieutenant governors. Those are many people to help train 
and help in the ways of procedure of this Assembly. And we are 
so pleased today that the Clerk you first served with was able to 
join us for lunch to also pay tribute, His Honour, Dr. Barnhart, 
our Lieutenant Governor. 
 
And of course in 1989, Ms. Ronyk officially became the Clerk 
of the Assembly. The responsibilities of the Clerk of the 
Assembly are many, and they’re varied. And you know, there’s 
a long list of those duties that political science students will 
study in our two universities. But what is not quantifiable, I 
don’t think, what may not be in the list are the intangibles: the 
integrity that’s brought to an office and the passion for this 
institution and for what it should stand. 
 
It is important also that the public of Saskatchewan understand 
the Assembly’s role and operation. And I know first-hand that 
Madam Clerk has worked hard to make sure that has been done. 
 
The Legislative Assembly has not only kept pace here in 
Saskatchewan with other Assemblies; we’ve led in so many 
ways. I think of broadcasting in that time, television 
broadcasting, and I know in addition to the dozens that watch 
this every day on TV, it’s been very important that broadcasting 
has for reportage of public affairs and a provincial government 
and opposition activities. 
 
Another very important initiative of this Assembly can mark 
under the leadership of the Clerk is the Saskatchewan 
legislative internship program. Our Clerk’s role in its 
establishment and continuing to foster and develop that 
program and the young women and men who have benefited 
from that is very significant and should be acknowledged as 
well today. 
 
I just have a few very brief personal remarks. They go back to 
1999 when I was first elected. And I remember there was an 

MLA orientation set up for us rookies in one of the rooms here 
at the Legislative Assembly, and I saw the agenda. I was, as 
new members were, we were very excited at the new roles and 
the prospect. And I have to admit to you, Madam Clerk, as I 
looked at the list when it came to your presentation, I thought 
well, she must go over all the details, all the procedures, the 
things that we must know but will I be as uplifted as I was 
going in, having just been elected? 
 
And the truth of the matter is, you should know, that that was 
exactly the case. I’ll not forget your presentation because you 
did cover all the details, the procedure, all the things that we 
new MLAs needed to know. But you also communicated to us 
the honour that had been given us by our constituents, the 
honour of working here in this building and representing 
Saskatchewan taxpayers in the affairs of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I felt better after your presentation, even 
better than I felt going in. And we were all, us rookies, on a bit 
of high I would say on both sides of the House. 
 
I also remember the strong admonition from you that should we 
lose our mace pin, it would not be replaced. As you may know, 
I am not wearing my mace pin today. But there is an excellent 
cardboard likeness of it at home that I haven’t yet had the 
courage to wear into the Assembly. 
 
We don’t know what your future plans are, Ms. Ronyk, but we 
wish you the very, very best. And we do thank you for the 
amazing contribution you have made to Saskatchewan’s public 
life, specifically to this institution, to the integrity that is its 
stock-in-trade. 
 
And I’ll leave you with this quote from a retiree I found this 
morning. She said, “We have no porch, no rocking chair — and 
no time. My biggest need is a calendar because there are so 
many things to do.” And I don’t know what your plans are, but 
I’m sure that quote would apply to you. And in all of those 
things that you choose to do in the future, we want to wish you 
the very best. 
 
We want to thank you for your service. We also want to thank 
your family for sharing you with Saskatchewan. 
Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — With leave of the Assembly it would be my 
privilege today to bring a tribute to the Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, 
from the point of view of the Speaker. As has been mentioned 
Gwenn has served under . . . Perhaps I should more accurately 
say Gwenn has trained and coached eight Speakers altogether. 
Her Speaker bosses were, starting with Fred Dewhurst and John 
Brockelbank, followed by Herb Swan, Arnold Tusa, Herman 
Rolfes, Glenn Hagel, Ron Osika, and myself, Myron Kowalsky, 
all of whom are here today. 
 
Then of course, there were a number of Deputy Speakers: Bev 
Dyck, Auburn Pepper, William Allen, Lloyd Muller, Harry Van 
Mulligen, Dale Flavel — who is here today — Kim Trew, 
Lindy Kasperski, Graham Addley, and Doreen Hamilton. Eight 
different Speakers and 10 Deputy Speakers add up to quite a 
group of bosses to adjust to, or should I say, quite a group of 
bosses just to adjust. 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

In the course of managing with, or more accurately, managing, 
eight Speakers and 10 Deputy Speakers, Gwenn Ronyk also 
served or advised at least 10 government House leaders, seven 
opposition House leaders, 10 government Whips, and 10 
opposition Whips, plus their House business staff. That’s a lot 
of advice to give. How remarkable that in 99 per cent of the 
time her procedural advice was taken with confidence and 
gratitude. Is there anyone else in this province, let alone in this 
legislature, who can claim such a record of being listened to? 
 
Many of us politicians have a willingness to give volumes of 
free advice in our fields of endeavour, but it is rarely taken. 
Regarding the ratio of advice given to advice taken, it can be 
said that we all have Clerk envy. 
 
However, Gwenn’s lifestyle is about to change. Retiring Clerks 
sometimes go through “advice dispensing withdrawal 
syndrome.” Brace yourselves, Reg and family, because you 
may well be the ones advised starting on January 1. 
 
The professional relationship between Gwenn as Clerk and her 
eight Speakers is theoretically similar to that between deputy 
ministers and the ministers of the Crown, only better. Total 
professional trust is paramount. Gwenn Ronyk is unfailingly 
dedicated to building and to keeping this trust. She does this 
because she is passionate about the importance of this 
legislature as an institution. 
 
Her efforts are consistently focused on what is best for our 
democratic system of governance. In a letter of December 4, 
2006 former Premier Romanow says: 
 
[15:15] 
 

Throughout the years Gwenn and her hard working team 
advised us on procedures and rules so as to ensure that the 
democratic process would work more efficiently and 
effectively: that the public’s support for our democratic 
institutions be protected and enhanced. 

 
Another major responsibility which Gwenn has is acting as 
head of the entire Legislative Assembly Service. This implies 
directing all operations of the Legislative Assembly Service and 
being boss to approximately 130 employees. It was my 
observation as MLA and now as Speaker that our Legislative 
Assembly employees like and respect their boss. Her thoughtful 
actions and natural sincerity have strengthened everyone who 
worked with her. Every member of the Legislative Assembly 
Service has grown, learned, and matured during Gwenn’s 
tenure. The confidence and high esteem that the Legislative 
Assembly staff have of themselves and their performance at 
work is a reflection of the high esteem in which they hold 
Gwenn Ronyk. 
 
Another former premier, Mr. Allan Blakeney, says this in his 
letter of congratulations on November 23, 2006: 
 

I would like to add my appreciation to Ms. Ronyk for 
outstanding performance during a stellar career in the 
service of the people of Saskatchewan. They owe a great 
deal to Gwenn Ronyk. On a more personal note, I found 
that in my dealings with Gwenn she was unfailingly 
helpful and graciously courteous. 

Former Premier Grant Devine also relayed good wishes to 
Gwenn by telephone. 
 
I also want to speak briefly to the role Gwenn played nationally 
and internationally through the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association and the Association of Clerks-at-the Table. I was 
very proud to experience first-hand, as did the other Speakers, 
the high regard other jurisdictions had for the Saskatchewan 
branch of the CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association]. Much of that high regard is attributable to the 
emphasis Gwenn put to cross-jurisdictional relations. 
 
Gwenn’s poise and her elegance was evident on the many 
occasions she served as an ambassador for our Legislative 
Assembly through the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association. She encouraged all of us to take advantage of 
every opportunity to host parliamentarians from away, through 
the CPA, so we could interact and influence at national and 
international levels. We admire the dignity with which she 
enabled Saskatchewan MLAs to meet people and explore ideas 
from beyond our borders. We all benefited from this, and for 
this we are truly thankful. 
 
Thank you also to Reg, Evan, Brittany, and Keith Ronyk for 
sharing Gwenn with us for 32 years. Your support of Gwenn as 
Clerk made it possible for her to enjoy a remarkable career. 
 
In summary, I wish to say that Gwenn Ronyk is recognized and 
admired for her expertise and commitment to excellence in 
parliamentary service. She is held in high esteem by her peers 
both nationally and internationally during the years of service to 
the legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan. We have 
been exceptionally fortunate to have Gwenn as our Clerk of the 
Assembly for over 32 years of dedicated service. 
 
In the coming years we wish her all the best. We wish her good 
health and good times with her family and friends. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as one of the eight Speakers 
trained by Ms. Ronyk it gives me a very distinct pleasure to ask 
for leave of the House to do something that to the best of my 
knowledge a House has not given leave in over a century of 
function of the Saskatchewan legislature. I would ask leave of 
the House to permit our Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, to address the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave of the Assembly to permit Gwenn Ronyk to address the 
House. Is leave granted. 
 
Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I invite Gwenn 
Ronyk to address the House. 
 
Ms. Ronyk: — I thought this was going to be a lot easier but 
after that you’ve made it very difficult. Thank you so much for 
your generosity and your kindness and your wonderful remarks. 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

It’s quite overwhelming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all hon. members, after hearing all that I’m 
beginning to wonder if I should talk to the Speaker about 
changing my mind. But having sat at this table for and served 
this legislature for my whole career — I never did anything else 
— 32 years, I am very much aware of the honour that you have 
bestowed upon me today by inviting me to address this 
Assembly. This is an exceedingly rare privilege for a 
non-elected person, and I am deeply appreciative. 
 
And it is so fitting today that this is my last day at the Table of 
this Assembly, as it was exactly 17 years ago today, December 
6, 1989, that I was appointed Clerk. So things come around, I 
guess. And it has been an amazing run. I started work here, as 
some of you have said, as assistant Clerk in 1974, recruited by 
Gordon Barnhart, and appointed by Speaker Fred Dewhurst, 
who was a wonderful character. 
 
I came directly out of university and very soon I found out how 
little I knew, and I have been learning ever since. And that’s 
one of the most wonderful things about this job, has been the 
opportunity to learn. Tradition and precedent play a very 
important role in parliamentary life, but it’s also a place of 
constant change and challenge. 
 
There have been some very exciting days, tremendous 
opportunities to learn, and some very interesting characters to 
work with. And I know that’s a preposition ending my sentence. 
Hansard can fix it up for me. 
 
One of the very first things I did when I started work, the very 
first week in fact, was to attend a conference of Canadian 
Clerks in Nova Scotia. It was then that I wondered what I had 
gotten into when I entered the room there to discover that I was 
the only female Clerk in the whole group. And not only were 
they all men, but they were all very senior men. The oldest 
being a 91-year old Clerk from the BC [British Columbia] 
legislature. But now I’m pleased to tell you that when the 
Clerks meet, there is a good mixture of men and women Table 
officers in Canada and across the Commonwealth. 
 
From my vantage point at the Table, I’ve seen many changes 
and as some of you have noted I’ve had the privilege of 
working with so many different members and Speakers and 
premiers and lieutenant governors. And we all know that there 
is apathy and there’s cynicism out there, and some of that for 
good reason. But from my direct knowledge of the many men 
and women who have served here over the last 32 years that 
I’ve been here, I can clearly say that the people of 
Saskatchewan have been very well served. 
 
When members look back, they probably will think about the 
programs and the public policies that they were involved in. But 
when I look back as a Clerk, it’s the procedural highlights that 
come to mind. And I think the Speakers will understand that 
and will sympathize. 
 
There were things such as filibusters, many filibusters: the 
potash Bill, the oil Bill, oil revenue tax filibusters, the 
SaskEnergy Bill, GRIP [gross revenue insurance program], 
petitions, notices, and first readings of Bills. And that delayed 
things for days sometimes. We had a tie in opposition parties 

that someone mentioned, the expulsion of a member, privileged 
cases, suspensions, bell-ringing for hours and days and even 
weeks, and mass demonstrations — all sorts of excitement. 
 
And sometimes sittings — at least one — that ran over 100 
days and into the summer including sitting the whole month of 
August from 8 a.m. in the morning until 11 p.m. at night, five 
days a week. 
 
But I also remember and think about the very positive things 
that I’ve seen that have strengthened and developed our 
democracy: establishment of our Board of Internal Economy 
that gave the Assembly the mechanism for financial 
independence; introduction of televised House proceedings and 
committee proceedings; Hansard that progressed from being a 
six-month affair to now it’s available everywhere within hours; 
other transformations in our work due to computer technology 
and even now online access to live House proceedings on the 
Internet from anywhere in the world so that dozens can really 
watch it anywhere. 
 
Also exciting times were the rules reforms and especially now 
this new committee system, an amazing potential there. And 
now that I’m finally leaving, we get . . . Well now that I’m 
leaving, we finally get a calendar for House sittings. There’s no 
justice. 
 
And of course there are other highlights, things like royal visits 
and successful conferences and seminars that we’ve hosted. My 
involvement with the independent officers of the Assembly has 
been very important and rewarding, and just being a part of the 
maturing of the Legislative Assembly Service into a modern, 
professional, and service-oriented organization. 
 
And it has been rewarding to be involved in things like the 
renovations to this Chamber — by the way, they’re needed 
again — operation of the internship program and finally to see a 
gift shop in the building. 
 
One thing that I did want to mention that has been important to 
me, to continue, was the tradition of Saskatchewan’s active 
involvement in national and international parliamentary 
activities, as the Speaker mentioned. My predecessors in this 
office — George Stephen, Bev Koester and Gordon Barnhart — 
were all committed to this work, and they were known 
throughout the Commonwealth for their dedication. Everyone 
knew where Saskatchewan was. Gordon instilled that interest in 
me. And over the years here, we have hosted seminars and 
study programs and attachments for members and Clerks from 
many parts of the developing world including South Africa, 
Malaysia, Russia, Zimbabwe, the Gambia, Ghana, Malawi, 
Botswana, the Ukraine, and Sri Lanka. And most recently, this 
year we provided technical assistance to the legislature of the 
Free State in South Africa through a CIDA [Canadian 
International Development Agency] funded program. Now 
these were a substantial undertaking for our very small staff. 
 
By now you are probably beginning to recognize the danger of 
allowing a departing Clerk to speak. She just might speak her 
mind. And at the risk of filibustering my own tea, I do want to 
leave a couple of thoughts. And I think you’ll be glad you gave 
me the standing ovation beforehand. 
 



December 6, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

We have a very vibrant parliamentary democracy in 
Saskatchewan, but there’s room for improvements. So my 
parting plea to you is risk more democracy, risk more 
democracy. 
 
Some very significant reforms have recently been done, 
especially the new committee system that was designed to 
strengthen the role of private members and to increase citizen 
participation in the legislative process. But now you have to 
make those reforms work. You have to let them work. You have 
to use those committees. Use them to involve the public and to 
enhance the roles of members and to strengthen the 
accountability of the legislature. 
 
And for our committees to really work, they must have more 
resources. One of Chief Justice Gomery’s chief findings in his 
review of the sponsorship scandal in Ottawa was that 
parliamentary committees needed to have more resources if 
they were to be effective in holding government accountable. 
That was his first recommendation. And if it’s true there, it’s 
very true here. And this is an area where we do need to risk 
more democracy. 
 
And while it may be heresy to say what I’m going to say, I 
believe strongly that our legislature is too small. We need more 
members to have an active committee system and to have a 
strong and an inclusive legislature. And this isn’t just my 
opinion; there’s lots of sound research to support the idea that a 
critical mass of legislators is needed in a modern and effective 
legislature. The taxpayers association may not understand this, 
but you don’t get smaller government by weakening the 
legislature; you only get a weaker watchdog. And that is not in 
the public interest. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And I have to say that it is the government and the cabinet who 
bear the burden of responsibility for letting parliamentary 
democracy work the way it is supposed to. In another area, the 
administration of the Assembly and the administration of 
members’ expenditure of public money, we’ve improved 
greatly in accountability and transparency. These were 
hard-fought changes. Don’t let them fade. 
 
And lastly, remember to take care of this institution. Enrich 
your vision with a broad view beyond our own borders. 
Remember to take a long-term view when you make decisions 
and take time every day to remember why you ran, and then 
you will risk more democracy. And there — I’m done 
preaching. Thank you. I think my kids thought I only did that at 
home. 
 
In conclusion now I do want to take a moment to thank a great 
many people. And I want to start by acknowledging my family 
and thanking them for their love and support and patience on 
what was sometimes a rocky road. I have been very fortunate, 
and I thank them so much. 
 
And here at work I owe so much to my team, the staff of the 
Legislative Assembly over the years. Some of my former 
employees are here as well as current ones. The staff always 
came through for me — always. These are people who take a 
great deal of pride in their work for the Legislative Assembly, 

and I very much appreciate their dedication and their 
competence and their loyalty and their hard work. And I 
especially need to thank the direct staff in the Clerk’s office 
over the years who had to deal with me every day. Members of 
the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan are very well 
served by the staff of the Assembly. 
 
And I want to thank my colleagues here at the Table for their 
commitment and their very sound work. They have carried a 
heavy load in last year or two, but I know I leave the office in 
good hands. And I also extend my appreciation to my 
colleagues in other legislatures who have always been willing to 
share their ideas and their experiences and their advice and to 
help when called upon. And lastly, I do want to recognize that 
special relationship that must exist between Speaker and Clerk. 
All eight Speakers that I have worked with have been very 
special members to me, and each one of them has proved to be 
a strong supporter of parliamentary institutions, and they 
deserve our appreciation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you and all of the members of this 
House. It has been a great privilege to serve the servants of the 
people. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been duly moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, the Premier, seconded by the member for 
Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That the members of this House, desiring to record their 
respectful appreciation for the 32 years of distinguished 
service rendered by Ms. Gwenn Ronyk to this legislature, 
including 17 years as Clerk, and acknowledging the 
dedication and dignity she brought to that office, 
designates her as honorary officer of this Legislative 
Assembly with an entree to the Chamber and a seat at the 
Table on all ceremonial occasions. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that 
that motion be recorded as nemine contradicente. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we end the session, this fall session, with 
full appreciation to the many, many who are involved in 
supporting the function of this Legislative Assembly and with 
wish for all of the members as we return to our constituencies 
that we’ll have opportunity over the Christmas season to spend 
some valuable time with those who are closest to us and for safe 
travels, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion shall be recorded as nemine 
contradicente. 
 
It has been moved by the Government House Leader that this 
House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2006 

for Melfort, the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before 
we adjourn, I would like to join with the Government House 
Leader in saying a couple of thank yous. 
 
First of all to everyone in this building, to both of our caucus 
staffs and all the legislative staff, to thank them very much for 
making this session very productive. To all of our colleagues in 
the House, our gratitude and the support and appreciation for all 
that you’ve done to make this first new calendar session I think 
a tremendous success. 
 
I want to also wish everyone in this Assembly, in this House, 
and in this province a very Merry Christmas. You know, I think 
it’s appropriate that the message of Christmas, of love and 
peace, was brought to us by a child. And sometimes we forget 
that we too have to remember the message given to us by that 
very special child some 2,000 years ago. 
 
So as we adjourn from this House and go to our communities, 
to our families and friends, we would certainly wish everyone a 
very Merry Christmas with their families and their friends. And 
a final comment would be when you are enjoying your family 
and friends, please be safe. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion by the Premier, seconded by 
the member for Swift Current, the Leader of the Opposition, the 
motion has been carried. 
 
The motion is now that we do adjourn, moved by the 
Government House Leader. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until March 7 or the call of the Speaker. I would like 
to invite all guests, MLAs, Legislative Assembly and building 
staff to tea in room 218 in honour of the retirement of Gwenn 
Ronyk. This House stands adjourned. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:35.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................699 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................699 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................699 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................699 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................699 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................699 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................699 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................700 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................700 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................700 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................700 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................700 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................700 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................701 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................702 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................702 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................703 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................703 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................712 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................704 
 Christmas Greetings for Canadian Troops in Afghanistan 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................704 
 Film Financing Company Launched in Kipling 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................704 
 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Energy Industry in Saskatchewan 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................705 
 Addressing the Issue of Violence Against Women 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................705 
 New Head Coach for Saskatchewan Roughriders 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................706 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Communication Training for Minister 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................706 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................706 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................707 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................708 
 Health Care Issues 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................708 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................708 
 Government’s Performance 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................710 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................710 
 



 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Increasing the Monetary Limit for Small Claims Court 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................711 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................711 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Remembering Victims of Montreal Massacre 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................711 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................712 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................712 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................712 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................712 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................713 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 41 — The Appropriation Act, 2006 (No. 3 ) 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................713 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................714 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................714 
 Recognition of Clerk of the Legislature 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................715 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................715 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................716 
  Ronyk .........................................................................................................................................................................................717 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


