






















































Hansard: March 23, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 26A  THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 735 
 March 23, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of individuals from the constituency 
of Cypress Hills that are very concerned about the condition of 
Highway 32, especially the stretch from the town of Cabri 
through to Leader. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Prelate, Eatonia, and 
Leader. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
regarding the possible reduction of health care services in 
Biggar. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least the current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Biggar. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today with petitions from people concerned about health 
care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least the current level of service. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Not surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, these petitions all come from the 

town of Biggar. I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour today to 
rise on behalf of residents of the province concerned about the 
Highway No. 5. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
necessary action to upgrade and widen what is the very 
narrow Highway No. 5 from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
[Mr. Speaker] And as in duty bound, your petitioners will 
ever pray. 
 

All of the petitioners that I present for today come from the 
great city of Humboldt. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition for the widening of Highway 5. The citizens who have 
signed this petition are concerned about a number of issues, one 
of which is that the current condition of the highway makes 
passing hazardous. The prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of signatures on this petition 
from Humboldt, as well as the communities of Saskatoon, 
Preeceville, and Annaheim. And I’m pleased to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
present a petition on the basis of these people writing in about 
Highway No. 5, and the concern about the safety thereof. And 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And this petition is signed by a broad range of people from 
Regina, Cudworth, but especially as far away as Camrose and 
Edmonton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present a petition regarding the Highway No. 5 condition. The 
highway is narrow; it needs to be widened. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon 
and Humboldt. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I along with 
my colleagues have several pages of a petition of citizens who 
are concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, LeRoy, 
Watson, Dundurn, Preeceville, Saskatoon, Regina, and St. 
Albert, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned 
about the safety of travelling on Highway No. 5. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, as you might expect 
are mostly from the city of Humboldt but also from Saskatoon 
and Middle Lake. And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 
present a petition from constituents who are opposed to possible 
reductions of health care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Ruthilda and Biggar and district. 
I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of 600 children — and their 
parents — under six years of age in the Saskatoon Silver 
Springs constituency regarding a much-needed elementary 
school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Lashyn Cove, Berini Drive, and 
Cowley Road in Northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens that are very concerned 
about the safety of Highway 5 between Humboldt and 
Saskatoon. And I read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Humboldt, 
Muenster, Prud’homme, and Air Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to present a petition today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan, 
remains open so as to ensure the safety of all motorists and 
Saskatchewan Highways employees who would be 
affected by such a possible closure. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are all from 
Watrous. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
bring a petition that is on the poor conditions of Highway 5 that 
has been very unsafe. The prayer reads as follows: 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by the good people of Saskatoon and Humboldt. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve SaskTel cellular service in rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
all the necessary actions to install the technical equipment 
necessary to ensure that all rural areas of Saskatchewan 
are protected by reliable cellular phone coverage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Jansen and Drake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding autism spectrum disorders. It is the first time this 
petition has been presented in the House, so I will be reading 
the entire petition for this time only: 
 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and 
legislature assembled: 

 
The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 
Whereas people who have an autism spectrum disorder are 
some of the most vulnerable in our province, and in 
Saskatchewan the number of children being diagnosed 
with an autism spectrum disorder is high — 1 in 251,203 
— and the rate of increase is alarming, 159 per cent over 
six years up to March, 2004; and 

 
whereas until the cause and cure of autism are found, 
research has shown that children and adults who have an 
autism spectrum disorder can benefit from the provision of 
intensive behavioural intervention therapy based on the 
principles of applied behavioural analysis, speech, 
communication, and occupational and physical therapy as 
well as medical attention for autism spectrum related 
conditions. As a result of the effective treatment, 50 per 
cent more people with autism spectrum disorder develop 
speech. Sixty-six per cent have more typical IQs, and 230 
per cent more adults with autism spectrum disorder 
achieve some degree of independent living; and 

 
whereas for a variety of reasons including lack of assigned 
resources and delegation to ministries with little or no 

expertise, the provision of IBA/ABA therapy to people 
with autism spectrum disorder is not available on a 
provincial basis with the provision of other therapies being 
either not available or subject to unconscionable . . . the 
long waiting lists, and that Saskatchewan is the only 
province without a current or planned provincial autism 
effective treatment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will now read just the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendation made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on Human Services to 
the Saskatchewan Minister of Health. 
 
The presentation from Saskatchewan Families for 
Effective Autism Treatment concerned issues surrounding 
the support of autistic children and adults that need review, 
one in particular being the availability of behavioural 
therapists. The committee was impressed with the 
commitment of the parents and families of people with 
autism and encourage you to look to ways to improve their 
lives from diagnosis to therapies, work opportunities, and 
family support by doing the following . . . 
 

And it lists the specific items, Mr. Speaker: 
 

coordinate among the departments of Health, Learning, 
and Community Resources and Employment with input 
from stakeholders to formulate a provincial comprehensive 
autism spectrum disorders treatment program, provide . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I have given the 
member considerable extra time. I would like him to bring this 
to a close. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m reading the petition as it was 
provided to me. I have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member to bring this to a 
close. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the petition seeks various types 
of relief and support for autistic family. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 8, 12, 64, 67, and 27. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: to date 
how much money has your department given to the 
provincial youth advisory committee? 
 

And also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: to date 
how much money has your department given to the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism? 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: did management of 
the department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect fraud in the 
years 2002-2003, 2001-2002, and 2000-2001? 

 
[13:45] 
 
I also have another question: 
 

For the Minister of Northern Affairs: how did management 
of the department monitor any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect 
fraud in the years 2002-2003, 2001-2002, 2000 and 2001? 

 
I also have another one, Mr. Speaker: 
 

For the Minister of Northern Affairs: does management of 
the department have any knowledge of any actual or 
suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2002-2003 and, if so, what is the nature of 
this activity? 

 
I have also another one for 2001-2002 and also 2000 and 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: what did management 
of the department find as a result of its monitoring of any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
detect fraud in the year 2002-2003, 2001-2002, 
2000-2001? 

 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2002-2003 such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of this 
activity? 

 
I have the same question for years 2001-2002 and also for the 
year 2000-2001. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a number of written questions also, and I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activities within the department or its agencies in 
the year 2002-2003 such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2001-2002, such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activities within the department or its agencies in 
the year 2000-2001, such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 

 
I give notice that I shall on day 31 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: what did management 
of the department find as the result of its monitoring of 
any established programs and controls to mitigate fraud, 
risk, or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 

 
And to the same minister, for the year 2000-2001, the same 
question and the same question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
the Environment for the year 2001-2002. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day no. 31 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: does management of 
the department have any knowledge of any actual or 
suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2001-2002? If so, what is the nature of the 
activity? 
 

Same question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of the Environment 
for the year 2000-2001 and the same question to the Minister of 
the Environment for the year 2002-2003. 
 
And I give notice on day no. 31 I shall ask the government the 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: did management of 
the department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or help prevent or detect fraud in the 
year 2002-2003? 
 

And the same question to the minister for the year 2001-2002 
and the same question to the minister for the year 2000-2001. 
 
And: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: how did management 
of the department monitor any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risk or to help prevent or detect 
fraud in the year 2000-2001? 
 

Same question for 2001-2002 and the same question to the 
minister for the years 2002-2003. I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and all members of the House 19 grade 9 students from 
Churchill Community High School in La Ronge. Ta wow. And 
accompanying them is their two teachers, Christine Ravenis and 
Susan Greene and also chaperone, Ms. Regina Poitras. 
 
I’d like everyone to welcome them to the House. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the House 
seated in your gallery this afternoon, George and Esther Haas 
from Esterhazy are joining us this afternoon. George and Esther 
have had a keen longstanding interest in public affairs in the 
province and more currently in changing the nature of public 
affairs and the delivery of those public services in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And many in this Assembly will know that George is a recipient 
recently of a medal of bravery, of the Carnegie Medal. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask members to join with me in 
welcoming George and Esther to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
probably the best part of our work as MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] is the friendships we form with people 
around this province, old and young. And on that note I’d like 
to introduce in your gallery, Riley Simonite who is 14 years old 

in Grade 9 at École Valois in Prince Albert. Riley’s mother 
Barb Riley is attending the Saskatchewan school board 
meetings here today. And Riley is here to observe the work of 
this Assembly. 
 
I will tell you as well that Riley is a member of the Parlement 
jeunesse fransaskois. He is active with that group — has been in 
the past — and will be at the Assembly in the fall, at which time 
he expects to be the minister of health. I will indicate as well, 
Mr. Speaker, I will indicate as well that Riley enjoys debates 
and enjoys politics and is an active and ardent supporter of the 
New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say here in this House, watch out for Riley 
Simonite. I’d like members to welcome Riley to the Assembly 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. CC, Lorie, and Buzz 
are connecting with Z99 listeners as only this zany trio can. 
And Z99 listeners are connecting with the Hospitals of Regina 
Foundation for Regina General’s neonatal unit as only those 
listeners can. 
 
The radiothon started, Mr. Speaker, 19 years ago. Now what a 
credit this is to local radio, the Z99 support team, the Z99 fans 
who donate so generously, but especially what a credit this is to 
CC, Lorie, and Buzz, who are the friendliest and most caring 
team in radio today. 
 
The radiothon speaks to character. Imagine — 19 years ago, CC 
came up with a great idea, a great idea that gets better each 
year. Thanks to all of the support and all of the listeners and all 
of the generosity, thousands of babies benefit from the Regina 
neonatal unit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to congratulate southern Saskatchewan for responding so 
generously to save and improve babies’ lives. I want to remind 
everybody that they can still contribute for quite a while yet; 
this goes till 6 o’clock tomorrow. And you contribute by calling 
522-KIDS — that’s 522-5437. Please dig deep, donate 
generously. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Second Annual Torch Awards 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening I had 
the opportunity and privilege to attend the Better Business 
Bureau’s second annual Torch Awards, along with two of my 
colleagues, the members from Moosomin and Wood River. 
 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

Several hundred people gathered to witness the events of the 
evening, representing the best of the business community from 
towns and cities throughout the province. The eligible 
candidates were thoroughly evaluated by an independent panel 
of judges from the business and academic community, whose 
identity remained a secret until the event last night. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the criteria for consideration of the Torch 
Awards really are rigorous. They include high ethical standards 
of behaviour towards customers and others with which they do 
business, the demonstration of ethical practice in their business, 
a reputation for such ethics in the marketplace, and a 
recognition of same by their peers, as well as truth in 
advertising. 
 
Now out of the 22 companies and organizations that were 
nominated, the winners included the following Saskatchewan 
businesses and organizations: Regina Auto Body Shop Ltd., 
South Hill Inn from Prince Albert, Superior Cabinets from 
Saskatoon, Regina and Region Home Builders’, Brothers & 
Tyler Financial Consultants in Regina; Automobility Medical of 
Regina, and McKenzie Plumbing and Heating of Regina. 
 
Our congratulations go to each of the winners of this year’s 
Torch Award. 
 
An added feature of the evening was an address by the founder 
of the PhoneBusters anti-fraud call centre, Detective Sergeant 
Barry Elliott. His talk covered several potential means of being 
defrauded and action that one might take to avoid such unhappy 
and costly episodes personally and in business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an event well worth attending, and I would 
like to congratulate the Better Business Bureau on its 
outstanding event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Celebrated Saskatoon Athlete Wins 
Bronze Medals in Turin 

 
Hon. Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Colette Bourgonje is a Paralympic athlete from the great 
constituency of Saskatoon Centre. At the recent Winter Games 
in Turin, she captured bronze medals in both the women’s 5 K 
and 10 K sit-ski events. 
 
Colette is a dedicated athlete who always looks for the positive 
and stays focused on her goals. She competed at the national 
level in cross-country running before a car accident left her 
paralyzed when she was 18 years old. She has since gone on to 
even greater achievements in wheelchair racing and 
cross-country skiing. Mr. Speaker, Colette has won numerous 
national championships, three world championships, 
participated in four Paralympic Winter Games, three 
Paralympic Summer Games, and she has captured two silver 
medals in Nagano in 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she’s a member of the Saskatoon Hall of Fame 
and was named Saskatoon athlete of the year in 1996. The city 

of Saskatoon has honoured her by naming a city street after her. 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, Colette was the recipient of a 
Breakthrough Award which was presented by the Canadian 
Association for the Advancement of Women and Sport and 
Physical Activity in Ottawa. And when she’s not training, Mr. 
Speaker, she teaches the fourth grade at Fairhaven School in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Colette’s own words: “Work hard, train hard, 
and don’t forget to thank the people that helped you along the 
way.” Well I would like to invite the members here to join me 
in thanking Colette for her commitment to our community and 
in congratulating her for a truly inspirational performance in 
Turin. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

New Democratic Party’s Tactics 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
just when you thought the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government couldn’t get any lower or more ridiculous, they 
demonstrate once again that there is no act of desperation too 
low to which they won’t sink, too low that they won’t sink in 
order to distract the public from their own disastrous record of 
accountability. I’m speaking of course of the Minister of 
Finance’s journey yesterday into the 1980s in the NDP’s way 
back machine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret to anyone in this province who has 
watched this government fail time and again on creating jobs or 
stopping out-migration that the NDP have not had a new idea 
on growing this economy since the 1970s. And now, and now 
we know why they just can’t get their heads out of their past, 
Mr. Speaker. How else can you explain the fact that it’s just a 
couple of weeks before the budget when the Minister of 
Finance should have been sitting down with business owners 
and other stakeholders, he chose instead to sit on his mountain 
of cash, reading 20-year-old memos and watching reruns of 
Fantasy Island? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time to turf the ABBA. It’s time to turf the 
shag rug and let voters turf this NDP government and turn the 
management of this province over to the one party in this 
legislature, the Saskatchewan Party, that is focused on the 
future, not the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Draganfly Innovations 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. I want to take a 
moment today to recognize the recent successes and ingenuity 
of Draganfly Innovations, a business owned, operated, and 
located in my constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

Draganfly Innovations is owned by an engineer and Saskatoon 
resident, Zenon Dragan, who began simply as a hobby in 1997. 
But the company’s flying machines and unique accessories 
quickly found popularity with families, hobbyists, and even 
international agencies like NASA [National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration]. 
 
In addition to its already impressive catalogue of small 
helicopters, remote-control airplanes, blimps, and even flying 
saucers, Draganfly Innovations recently developed an aerial 
photo plane to be marketed this spring. This plane’s unique 
ability to take high-quality photographs has made it an 
appealing invention for a wide variety of clients — from 
military and police to the agricultural sector. 
 
The originality of Dragan Innovations has garnered 
international media attention from The New York Times, CNN 
[Cable News Network], the Space Channel, the History 
Channel, Popular Mechanics, and Popular Science, and has 
also led to local recognition in 2004 when Dragan Innovations 
was a finalist for two Saskatchewan achievement in business 
awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend my congratulations to 
Dragan Innovations on their great success and entrepreneurial 
spirit. And I’m confident that this positive endeavour in our 
province will lead to a future which is equally bright for all 
Saskatchewan business people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Members’ Comments 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a sign of just how 
desperate the NDP have become. Usually they wait until 
election time to pull out the gutter politics, but I guess they 
must have seen the latest polling numbers that show the 
dynamic, young leader of the Saskatchewan Party pulling 
further and further ahead of the tired, worn out leader of the 
NDP. 
 
And now the NDP have two choices. They could come up with 
a plan to try to make the Premier look better — but of course 
that’s impossible — so their only choice is try to smear the 
Leader of the Opposition. Just one day after they were forced to 
admit to 42 cases of fraud within the NDP government, the 
Minister of Finance falsely accused the Leader of the 
Opposition of fraud. Then a few minutes later, the Premier 
himself decided to join the Minister of Finance in the gutter and 
started to make similar accusations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was trying to think of the right word to describe 
this act of political desperation. There’s sad, pathetic, sleazy . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. The 
member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we 
could describe it as sad, pathetic, sleazy, scummy. But you 
know what the right word is? Typical. Typical of an 

increasingly desperate NDP Premier who will say anything to 
cling on to power. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I want to have the situation 
where the member can be heard and that I can hear the words 
that a member is saying. The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — In fact it’s not the least bit true, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier this week the Leader of the 
Opposition made this statement in the Assembly and I quote: 
 

. . . 30 years from now, there might be a movie made about 
politics today. The Premier himself might be portrayed in 
the movie. I would want . . . that portrayal to be accurate. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the Premier doesn’t share the 
same commitment to telling the truth and will stoop to the 
lowest form of gutter politics, a gutless, drive-by smear against 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Financial Accountability 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier said this yesterday and I quote: 
 

. . . anybody that works in my office has a pretty good idea 
[of] what goes on in my office. 
 

Given that comment, we can conclude the Premier knew 
everything that was going on and so did everyone else in his 
office. That being the case, I’m sure this government will have 
no problem revealing all instances of fraud dating back to when 
the Premier took office. And since everyone knows everything 
already, it shouldn’t take long to answer the questions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will this government commit to taking the 
standards they outlined this week for public reporting on fraud 
and apply them to the entire period since the Premier took 
office? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — You know, I appreciate hearing from 
the member opposite at some point because there seem to be 
many definitions on that side as to what fraud is. I look forward 
to them defining this for us. 
 
I’ll tell you what I thought was very interesting yesterday in 
terms of what we heard. What we heard was a rationalization 
coming from the Leader of the Opposition about what it was 
that he learned while working for John Gerich. And what was it 
that that member said? That member actually said in the scrum, 
that you know what, it was a great thing that he got a chance to 
work with Grant Devine. He says, quote: 
 

Frankly — I think it’s an asset that I was involved in a 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

government that lost its way on these issues. 
 

That’s what he said. He said, I thought it was an asset that he’d 
worked for that government. 
 
Two weeks from now, Mr. Speaker, I will table a budget in this 
House that will ask taxpayers to commit more than half a billion 
dollars to continue paying interest on a debt that was built up by 
that government that lost its way. I don’t know that taxpayers 
and voters are going to think it’s such an asset. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the official opposition is 
making a very simple request on behalf of the taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan. If these new standards are good 
enough for the future, certainly they must be good enough for 
the past. And if everyone in the Premier’s office knows about 
everything, it shouldn’t take long to compile this information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government has nothing to hide, why not 
apply those standards of public reporting for fraud right back to 
when the Premier took office? Mr. Speaker, will this 
government commit today to a full reporting of instances of 
fraud back to the date when the Premier took office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
were earlier accusing me of using the way back machine by 
going back to 1989, 1990 and taking a look at what the 
Provincial Auditor had to say then. The Provincial Auditor has 
clearly been reviewing it. Provincial Auditor has said today in 
the paper that he’s aware of all the incidents involved. If the 
members have a question, they need only go to the Public 
Accounts Committee, of which they chair, and ask the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
But what I find more interesting is just the general lack of 
credibility that the opposition has on this issue — a complete 
lack of credibility. Because what is it they say when confronted 
with this issue? They say, you know what . . . they don’t say, 
I’m sorry about that; they don’t say that this was wrong. They 
don’t say anything other than . . . You know what the leader 
says? He says, “. . . I think it’s an asset that I was involved in a 
government that lost its way on these issues.” I would add 
parenthetically, and along the way lost $7 billion worth of 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, frankly we expect better from the opposition. We 
expect an end to the double standard, and we expect some 
questions that are credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s incredible the comments we get from this 
government. 
 
The official opposition asks 580 questions. It took this 
government months and months and months to come up with 
answers. There has been an increase in the Premier’s staff to 
ensure that answers are supplied in a timely fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, delay after delay after delay and finally we’re told 
that there are 40 examples of fraud, some that had not been 
disclosed. In some cases charges were laid. In some cases they 
were not. In some cases employees were dismissed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can anyone on that side of the House tell the 
people of Saskatchewan how many of those people could get 
their jobs back as a result of a grievance or any other action? 
And how many of those who were dismissed are working for 
the government in some other capacity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well speaking of second chances, I 
find it interesting that the Leader of the Opposition is out there 
saying, you know what, I know that he was part of a 
government that, as he says, quote “. . . lost its way . . .” And 
what is it that he says? He says, you know I think it’s an asset 
because, quote, “. . . I know . . . [that] I’ve resolved to never 
allow that to happen again . . .” 
 
I want to let the Leader of the Opposition in on a secret — so 
too have the voters. Hence why for four terms they’ve returned 
an NDP government and will not make that member the 
premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if that Finance minister or that 
Premier are so sure of that proposition, that Premier ought to 
screw up his courage and call a general election, and we’ll find 
out who switch places, Mr. Speaker. That’s what ought to 
happen in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s also why, it’s also why, by the way, Mr. Speaker, we saw 
them sink to new lows and be as desperate as they were outside 
the House. 
 
Part of the reason that we want change in the province of 
Saskatchewan is for health care. And nowhere is the issue more 
acute perhaps even than in my own constituency of Swift 
Current and in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP Health minister, Mr. Speaker, has admitted to no plan 
for a target for nurses — nurse recruitment and retention in the 
province. Meanwhile doctors on the Cypress Hills medical 
advisory committee are saying that the nursing shortage in the 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

region, the nursing shortage in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: —Order please. Order. Order. I would ask the 
Leader of the Opposition to put his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The doctors are saying in Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker, that the nursing shortage will limit the number of beds. 
We appreciate the new health care facility that’s being built, but 
what good is it, Mr. Speaker, if there aren’t beds, if there are not 
nurses to staff the beds for patient . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order please. I ask the Leader 
of the Opposition to put his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the new hospital in 
Swift Current, but what good are the new beds if there’s not 
nurses there to keep those beds open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
will repeat what I have said for a week and a half in answering 
questions to the members of the opposition. Nursing, Mr. 
Speaker, nursing is an honourable and respectable profession. 
We expect quite a number of young people in Saskatchewan to 
seek nursing as a career. Mr. Speaker, we intend to ensure that 
the facilities that the nurses will be working in when they 
graduate are amongst the best, if not the best, in North America. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are doing all that we can to ensure the 
recruitment and retention strategies are in place to ensure that it 
continues to provide a career for people who are compassionate 
and care about the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, those words ring very hollow 
indeed for the people of southwest Saskatchewan, for people 
across the province who languish on the longest waiting lists in 
the Dominion of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is saying that 
our region in southwest Saskatchewan, the Cypress Hills 
region, needs 15 more nurses just to meet professional 
standards for client care. Nurses in the region have raised 
similar concerns about shortages in the past. Last May I rose in 
this Assembly to express them. They were worried that they 
were asked to cover ICU [intensive care unit] even if they were 
not trained to do so. And the minister, certainly the former 
minister, will remember that. 
 
A shortage of nurses means a shortage of beds. In Swift Current 
and across southwest Saskatchewan, that is the case today. 
What is this minister doing about it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
members opposite and the health care community knows that 
we’ve been working with that community since 2001 to prepare 
an action strategy with regards to dealing with the recruitment 
and retention of physicians, nurses, technologists, and 
pharmacists in this province. We released a report in December 
and we are in the process of implementing that report, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re in a globally competitive environment for professionals. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote. National studies 
supporting that there are declining numbers of nurses, RNs 
[registered nurse], licensed practical nurses, and RPNs 
[registered psychiatric nurse], and the risk to safe client care 
include recent nursing sector study 2005 and the Canadian 
nursing advisory committee final report. These studies both 
support efforts towards the retention, recruitment of nurses 
including implementation of workload measurement systems, 
increasing the number of full-time positions, examining 
absenteeism, hiring nurse mentors, increasing educational seats, 
and incentives to delay retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Health Workforce Action Plan 
has included all of these matters . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The Chair 
recognizes the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, may I say on behalf of the MLAs 
that represent the Southwest and Cypress Hills region, and more 
importantly on behalf of the people who need good health care 
in the Southwest, if this is the minister’s plan, if this is the 
NDP’s action for strategy, they ought to stop helping because 
it’s actually getting worse under this government, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the fact of the matter. 
 
SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] is saying there aren’t 
enough nurses there. We have the medical association, doctors 
in Swift Current saying the problem is acute. There aren’t 
enough beds. There aren’t enough beds and not enough nurses 
of course to staff them — that’s the problem. In the meantime 
the government’s building a new hospital and is readily 
admitting — seems to be readily admitting — that they won’t 
have enough nurses to open the beds. 
 
What is the point of that? What part of the planning and 
strategy of this government does that fit in under? Do they have 
a category for incompetence, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Since 2003 this government has hired 260 additional nurses. 
Mr. Speaker, there are currently 230 nurses in the nursing 
education program who will graduate this year, Mr. Speaker. 
We are in a position to ensure that every one of those nurses 
will be employed in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, the region in Swift Current, the regions in Rosetown, 
the regions in Lloydminster, the regions in Meadow Lake are 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

going to be well served by the principles and practices of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My office in Swift 
Current, I think the constituency offices of my colleagues in 
southwest Saskatchewan, are fielding an increasing number of 
calls of people in southwest Saskatchewan — and frankly 
across the province — frustrated with health care here in the 
birthplace of health care, under this NDP government. 
 
The situation, the frustration is, in addition to the acute care bed 
shortage or at least the nurses to staff them, is long-term care 
beds. We’ve got a long-term care bed shortage there as well. 
And what happens then, Mr. Speaker? Well patients that should 
be in long-term care are in medical beds; they’re in acute care 
beds. 
 
These are real problems going on in Swift Current. And all of 
the paper and all of the booklets that the minister could point to 
— and action plans, and strategies for this, and points about that 
— don’t matter a lot to those people who are being short 
shrifted on health care in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
To the minister: what is his plan for the Cypress Hills region to 
ensure that there are medical beds there for patients who need 
them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very proud of the work of the people in the Cypress Hills 
Health Region. The CEO [chief executive officer], the president 
or the Chair of the board, the members of the board, the 
volunteers for the hospital foundation — these are very caring 
people who are planning to ensure that the long-term needs of 
the people in that region are well taken care of. 
 
The province is putting together the priorities and strategies and 
financial support networks that they need to deliver the kinds of 
programs that are necessary in the region. I have complete 
confidence in the region administration, staff, and volunteers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we learned that the minister and SUN had a meeting. 
And what came out of the meeting was that this minister simply 
does not keep his word, Mr. Speaker. The only commitment 
that came out of that meeting was, from this minister, more 
meetings. 
 
Well here’s what one of the nurses had to say about the 
minister’s lack of commitment, and I quote: 

. . . as one of your constituents from North Battleford as 

. . . a Registered Nurse. I was extremely disappointed to 
learn that you, as our Minister of Health don’t believe the 
nursing shortage . . . [is] “critical.” 

 
Jennifer Hanna-Woodworth works in the ICU and the CCU 
[critical care unit] care unit in the Battlefords hospital . . . says 
that the shortage is in a crisis situation. They’re so short of staff 
that half the beds have had to have been closed. Patient care is 
being compromised. That’s what nurses in your hospital, in his 
hospital, Mr. Minister, are saying. 
 
When will the minister commit today to filling the nursing 
vacancies in his own city? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact I had a meeting with the Chair of the board of Prairie North 
Health Region this very morning, Mr. Speaker. We discussed 
some of the vacancies in Prairie North. The Prairie North 
Health Region, Mr. Speaker, is very much aware that I consider 
this to be an issue of priority. 
 
I am confident in the regions to address the vacancies. I made 
the commitment to SUN and I make it again in this Chamber as 
I have before. We are committed to filling the vacancies that 
exist within the system today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve heard from this 
minister so far is absolutely no targets, no goals, and no plans to 
fill the vacancies. And what nurses are feeling around the 
province is no hope from this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
This young nurse goes on to say, if the Minister of Health was 
sincere about his commitment to nurses, he would start by 
visiting the Battlefords hospital in his own constituency. 
 
Will the minister finally get in touch with the situation in his 
own constituency and talk to the front line workers that deliver 
health care in that facility? Will he visit the Battlefords Union 
Hospital and see first-hand the effect that the lack of nurses has, 
the nursing shortage has, on patient care and the attitude of the 
nurses because of the shortage in his own hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll visit there this weekend 
with the same commitment that I’ve made to this House, I will 
make to them. Mr. Speaker, I value the work that nurses are 
doing in this province. I value the work that the health regions 
are doing to deal with a critical problem in a global scenario, 
Mr. Speaker. I will work in North Battleford and around this 
province to ensure that there’s quality health care for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this young nurse says that 
there is no support from this . . . the nurses feel absolutely no 
support from this government. When she hears the minister say 
that Saskatchewan is better off than other provinces, she goes 
on to say, I quote: 
 

. . . [it’s] like a slap in the face to all nurses who are 
enduring this shortage everyday. 

 
That’s what the nurses are saying in our health care facilities. 
Nurses are working overtime to fill 12 vacant time rotations 
within that hospital in North Battleford. They are burnt-out. 
They are being denied holidays or having holidays cancelled. 
They are concerned about patient safety. She goes on to say, 
and I quote: 
 

You, Mr. Taylor as our MLA for North Battleford and 
Minister of Health have a responsibility to get . . . [the] 
facts straight [right here in this hospital] . . . right here at 
home. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will he go and visit with the front line care 
workers — not just the health district board Chair — but the 
front line care workers to see the situation that they are facing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The implication 
of the question is of course that I haven’t been there. And of 
course I’ve been there on a regular basis. I’ve met with people 
who work within the hospital. I’ve worked with the volunteers. 
I’ve visited with patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are vacancies throughout the province. We acknowledge 
there are 250 vacancies. We are prepared to work with the 
health regions to ensure that those vacancies are filled. Mr. 
Speaker, I met with the Minister of Health from the province of 
Alberta this morning, Mr. Speaker. Speaking of vacancies, the 
city of Calgary has 500 vacancies at this very moment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the very point. 
He stands in the House and says there’s 250 vacancies. Is he 
meaning 250 RN vacancies, or is he grouping licensed practical 
nurses in that whole number? And that’s the whole issue with 
SUN. Come clean with your numbers and show us where you 
come up with the 250 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member will remember to speak 
through the Chair. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Will the minister come clean with his 
numbers and show us where he comes up with the 250 
vacancies? Is it RNs or RNs and LPNs [licensed practical 

nurses] combined? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday when I met with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, 
we talked about comparative number calculations. In that 
meeting I suggested that we would sit down together and 
discuss these numbers — whether they come from the 
department, Statistics Canada, surveys. Mr. Speaker, I read in 
the collected media summaries today that the representative 
from SUN who was present at that meeting indicated that she 
was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I would ask 
members . . . I would ask members to pay attention to the 
question and to the response. The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to make it clear that I’m prepared to work with 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses on identifying exactly where the 
vacancies exist and work with them to ensure that we’ve got the 
proper strategy to replace people that are in that place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I want to share the 
views of Anne Guest, a nurse here in Regina, who in a letter to 
the Regina Leader-Post, said she feels: 
 

. . . privileged to be part of the process of caring for 
cardiac patients and their families in the hospital. Nursing 
is an honourable profession . . . I am proud to serve my 
community. I am . . . very proud of our younger nurses . . . 
[that] I see . . . continuing the nursing legacy — nursing 
with humility and dignity. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we need more nurses in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just the 
Battlefords Union Hospital that has a severe staff shortage. The 
Saskatchewan psychiatric hospital in North Battleford also has 
an extreme staffing shortage. 
 
Currently there are 18 nursing vacancies, Mr. Speaker, but what 
this government has done is gone and filled six of those 
positions with non-nursing professionals. Is that the way of 
filling vacancies into the future? Because now they’re only 
showing 12 vacancies. Is that the minister’s plan to fill some of 
the vacancies that RNs have . . . some of the RN vacancies, is 
with non-nursing professionals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
know the members opposite don’t like to hear the word 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

challenge, but there is one challenge that our regional health 
authorities have and the CEOs of our regions and the health 
facilities have, Mr. Speaker, and that is ensuring that all of the 
vacancies can be filled. There are service needs that exist 
throughout the system, Mr. Speaker, and our health regions are 
doing an admirable job finding ways to ensure that the 
challenge is being met. 
 
This does not replace a long-term plan to ensure that nursing 
positions are filled with nurses to the full scope of their 
practice, Mr. Speaker. I have full confidence in the regions to 
do the job that they have been asked to do and that is to ensure 
that there is proper care for the residents, the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan psychiatric 
hospital in North Battleford has an alarming rise in overtime 
and sick time hours. Morale is at an all-time low. From 1999 to 
the year 2003 — get this — overtime has increased by a 
whopping 106 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 106 per cent increase in 
overtime. Sick time has increased by 51 per cent during that 
same period. These are symptoms of a critical illness called 
nursing shortages in Saskatchewan. How can the nurses give 
proper care when they are feeling burnt-out and sick 
themselves? When they’re tired, Mr. Speaker, they can’t give 
the care that they want to. 
 
Will the minister commit today to finally start with some base 
numbers, some base numbers on the vacancy rate with SUN? Is 
it 250 combined or 250 just RNs? Because that’s what SUN is 
saying. You’ve got to start with a base number before you can 
start setting targets and then meet those targets, Mr. Speaker. 
Will he commit to that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
know that there is a significant challenge in recruiting and 
retention, not just in Saskatchewan but across Canada and 
North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve been addressing this issue since we put 
the action plan together and we have taken steps, Mr. Speaker, 
that are going to have some very significant impacts on this 
province. Mr. Speaker, last year alone in our budget we put an 
extra 100 nursing education program seats in place. We now 
have more than 400 seats. A year from now, Mr. Speaker, we 
will be graduating 300 nurses per year under the nursing 
education program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please. I would 
ask the member from Arm River-Watrous to come to order. 
 
[14:30] 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
New Computerized Tomography Scanner in Lloydminster 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
speaking of health care, I’m pleased to able to share some very 
exciting news concerning the progress this government 
continues to make in improving access to quality health services 
for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just returned from the city of Lloydminster 
where I joined community members and the Prairie North 
Health Region in celebrating the opening of a brand new CT 
[computerized tomography] scan in the Lloydminster Hospital. 
It’s an exciting day for residents and health care professionals 
in the west central area of our fine province. And it comes only 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, after the health region hosted a similar 
celebration in North Battleford where I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Apologies to the minister. The 
apology should really be coming from the members of the 
House for interrupting. Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
of course this announcement comes only weeks after the health 
region hosted a similar celebration in North Battleford in the 
hospital — during which I also attended that — where a new 
CT scan is now serving patients for the Battlefords Union 
Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the residents of these communities will notice the 
immediate and positive effects of having state-of-the-art CT 
service available close to home. Most importantly patients will 
have quicker access to CT scans and will save time, money, and 
the stress that’s often involved when they have to travel long 
distances for service. The quicker access will help not only the 
patients, Mr. Speaker. These new diagnostic imaging suites will 
also relieve pressure on scanners in other centres and ultimately 
reduce the number of people waiting for a CT scan. 
 
The benefits, Mr. Speaker, do not end there. We all know it’s a 
challenge, as I said during question period, to attract and keep 
medical specialists, technologists, nurses, pharmacists here in 
Saskatchewan and across North America. This new CT suite 
makes Lloydminster Hospital an even more attractive 
workplace — a facility that offers stable, state of the art 
diagnostic imaging service that can only have a positive effect 
on recruitment and retention in the Lloydminster area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s significant investments in 
diagnostic imaging capacity are paying off for Saskatchewan 
residents who want to see improved access to these services. 
This year alone, we provided funds to upgrade CT scanners in 
Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina and to open the two new 
scanners in the Prairie North Health Region. Thanks in part to 
these and other measures and to the dedication and support of 
our medical professionals, we are making great progress on 
wait times and wait-lists. 
 
This year we expect to do more than 103,000 CT scans in 
Saskatchewan. That’s an increase of more than 9 per cent from 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

last year. Our wait-list for this service continues to shrink in 
spite of increasing demand. We’re not only keeping up, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re gaining ground. It’s heartening that the numbers 
tell us we’re heading in the right direction. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing more than buying and 
upgrading diagnostic imaging equipment. We also want to 
ensure this equipment is put to the best possible use to provide 
fair and efficient access to these services. Our province’s 
diagnostic imaging network comprising medical imaging 
specialists, family physicians, and representatives from the 
health regions and the public will advise us on a strategy to 
ensure that this is accomplished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to travel to Lloydminster 
today, and I’d like to acknowledge and thank the leadership, 
management, staff, and physicians of Prairie North Health 
Region who contributed their time, effort, skill, and 
commitment to this significant enhancement of health services 
in the region. 
 
I look forward to future visits to other of our beautiful 
Saskatchewan communities as we continue to invest in 
sustainable, accessible, high-quality health services for today 
and for years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
respond to the ministerial statement. And I thank the minister 
for sending over a copy of what he had to say today because it’s 
interesting to compare what he had to say today and what the 
reality is out there and the challenges that are faced. 
 
And I said the word. You know, Mr. Speaker, heaven help this 
government if you ever rule the word challenges out of order 
because honestly they would not be able to describe, not be able 
to say a word about the health care system if you ever ruled the 
word challenges out of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about a new CT scanner 
opening in Lloydminster and Prince Albert. And certainly we’re 
in favour of more diagnostic devices that can certainly shorten 
the waiting list. 
 
There’s a couple of issues that come into mind though. We just 
finished talking a lot about the lack of and the shortage of 
registered nurses. We talked a little about the shortage of 
psychiatric nurses, you know. And one thing that I have learned 
from this government is they’re great on making 
announcements, but they’re not so good in fulfilling those 
announcements with staffing in behind. 
 
Not very long ago did they talk about opening up more beds in 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health District. And what we have 
found out since then is they hadn’t planned on a nursing 
complement to cover those beds, and they’ve had to take from 
other wards. And we’ve heard from nurses on those wards on 
how disastrous that has been. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we also know that there is a lack of 
professionals to cover off some of these scanning, whether it’s 
an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] or CTs. The government 
will say that they can’t operate the MRIs 24 hours a day 
because they simply don’t have the professionals. So it’s one 
thing to go out and open up a bunch of other facilities, but I bet 
any money that this government has not done the homework to 
guarantee the health care professionals are there to back it up. 
 
But even more important . . . And it’s interesting — especially 
this minister — to stand there and say, we are proud of the 
investment we’re making in these communities. I think it’s 
extremely important that the public knows who helped make 
this investment. Mr. Speaker, Husky Oil put $350,000 into this 
CT scanner. Border Credit Union put 200,000 into this facility, 
Mr. Speaker. I was very interested to hear this minister talk and 
pound his chest on what a great job he’s doing, but he failed to 
mention the private partners that are funding it. It’s just typical 
of this minister and this government to go out and make 
grandstand announcements but not give credit where credit 
really is due. And it’s the private investors that have made this 
possible. 
 
And it’s private investors all throughout the province. I know 
I’ve attended health care, health foundation dinners here in 
Regina. I know the members from Saskatoon on this side of the 
House attended the health foundation dinner in Saskatoon. Not 
an NDP member was there in Saskatoon or in Regina when 
these foundations have raised hundreds and hundreds of 
thousands of dollars to put equipment into our hospital. And not 
once have I heard that NDP government give one ounce of 
credit, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s absolutely appalling. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I 
would table written question 595. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 595 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 28 — The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 28, The Veterinarians Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s some obvious things in here that are 
noteworthy that needs to be done, that any self-regulating 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

organization needs to do. And I really don’t have much of a 
problem with the rules that the association is wanting. But we 
take considerable exception to many other items in this Bill. 
And quite frankly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Member for 
Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to point 
out a number of areas that we have great concern with and not 
only . . . that have been brought forward to us by the producers 
and the livestock associations of the province, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
interesting to note in the Minister of Agriculture’s comments 
concerning this Bill in second reading that he said — and it’s 
right here in Hansard — that: 
 

These amendments are being presented to the Legislative 
Assembly following extensive consultation with 
stakeholder groups including the Saskatchewan Veterinary 
Medical Association, the Dairy Farmers of Saskatchewan, 
Sask Pork, the Western College of Veterinary Medicine, 
the Saskatchewan Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals, the Saskatchewan Horse Federation, [and] the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would have to say that the minister 
has misled the House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. The member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
with thanks to my colleagues for giving leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your west gallery is my mom. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
pretty rare when we have an opportunity for family to come and 
spend part of an afternoon with us here. My mother, Maxine 
Curts, who now resides in Indian Head and has for a number of 
years, I’m very pleased to have her here. And I hope she can 
spend a little bit of time this afternoon so we can maybe duck 
out for coffee, Mr. Speaker, if the House Leader will let me. 
But please, I would ask my colleagues to welcome her here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, just about one minute ago 
before you interrupted the hon. member opposite for Biggar? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Biggar. The hon. member for Biggar. He 
just used the phrase . . . His final phrase he used before you sat 
him down was that the minister has misled the House. Mr. 
Speaker, you will recognize I know that this is a phrase that is 
not permissible in this House. And I would ask that you would 
require the hon. member to withdraw the remark, to apologize 
to the House, and then to proceed without these unnecessary 
interludes that are blatantly contrary to the rules of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — The member is wishing to speak to the point 
of order? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. What I was saying is that 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar on the point of order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw those 
words and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member, and I recognize the 
member for Biggar. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture in these second reading 
remarks spoke to all the various groups that he and his 
bureaucracy and department has spoken to about this Bill. And 
we have been approached by a number of organizations. One, 
the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association which certainly 
has told us a different story about the input that they gave to the 
minister and nowhere in their comments to us that they have 
agreed to any of these changes and amendments in this Bill. 
 
Also the minister also did not say that the department officials 
have met with the Saskatchewan Equine Ranchers Association 
which you would think that the department and the Minister of 
Agriculture would speak to that particular group concerning 
horses and equine dentistry and all those types of issues. 
 
And another very important group in Saskatchewan which the 
minister and his officials did not speak to is FACS [Farm 
Animal Council of Saskatchewan], the Farm Animal Council. 
And the Farm Animal Council is made up of practically I 
believe every livestock association in the province, and the 
minister did not go and speak to that group as well. 
 
We know speaking to the producers and the producers group 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

that this veterinarians Bill has many, many flaws. Now just to 
point out some of the flaws. When we have sat down with the 
Saskatchewan Equine Ranchers Association, the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association, they have pointed out some glaring 
problems with the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the history of livestock production in this province 
and this country goes back many years. As a rancher, myself as 
a rancher and a livestock producer, I was very surprised to find 
out, Mr. Speaker, that individual producers can’t basically, 
under the law, under this law can’t look after their own cattle. 
They can’t castrate the animals. They can’t preg test their 
animals and — it was a shock to me to learn — even doing 
Caesareans, which is a bit more of a technical procedure. But 
still, producers and ranchers have been doing these operations 
on their livestock for generations. 
 
And it’s very surprising to find out when speaking to the 
SVMA, the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association, 
they will admit that yes, those restrictions are in the existing 
Bill but they say, well don’t worry; we will never act on those 
particular types of procedures. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that really doesn’t speak to the concern that 
we have. It’s not that the association recognized that that’s 
something the producer should be doing. It is actually in the 
Bill. And at some point — who knows when? — those items 
may be considered illegal. Producers may be charged for 
actually working on their own animals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and again, who has the Minister of 
Agriculture been talking to? It doesn’t make any sense that this 
Bill would be brought forward with those types of items in the 
Bill, in the existing law, and let alone in The Veterinarians 
Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other very obvious and serious concern here is the 
procedure of equine dentistry. And in this Bill these 
amendments, Mr. Speaker, are really taking that right away 
from equine dentists. And there’s a number of very professional 
people that do this procedure in Saskatchewan, in Western 
Canada for that matter. And under this Bill, they will not be 
allowed to do equine dentistry. 
 
Now it’s an interesting situation. Now I understand from the 
SVMA, the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association, that 
their concern is — and I think it’s a legitimate concern — that 
there’s a shortage of veterinarians in Saskatchewan and in 
Western Canada. And I agree with that. Their take on it is that 
they need more opportunity to do more services so that 
basically they could create more income for their operation 
which will attract more veterinarians into their profession. And 
I agree totally with that. They’re a very important part of the 
livestock industry, and we need to support them. 
 
The other side of the issue, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a 
shortage of veterinarians in Western Canada and in 
Saskatchewan in particular. And so there’s a lot of these 
procedures like equine dentistry that they’re not able to do. 
When students go in to get their degree in veterinary medicine, 
they only spend a very limited time on items like equine 

dentistry. And by their own admission, they’re not experts in 
that area. And so there are people out there that are doing that 
on a full-time basis. 
 
And I only need to look at my own operation. My daughter has 
a horse, and it was noticed that there was scars inside the 
horse’s mouth. And it was recommended to us to take this horse 
to a equine dentist. And the dentist was able to give the horse a 
sedative and he has very expensive, special tools that they use 
to grind down the teeth and actually pulled out, I believe they 
call the eye teeth out of the horse that was causing the damage 
and the scraping inside of the horse’s mouth. 
 
And all these things, you know, just make the life better for the 
horse. And when someone’s riding the horse, sometimes you 
wonder why a horse isn’t performing as well as the horse 
normally performs. And you have to look at reasons, what 
things are bothering the horse. And in this case, my daughter’s 
horse was being bothered quite a bit by these problems inside 
the horse’s mouth. 
 
The other issue around equine dentists is in many cases they are 
also farriers. They shoe horses. They trim horse’s hooves. And 
going back again to what the equine dentists say and the 
Saskatchewan Equine Ranchers Association have said, that 
there isn’t enough vets. So there’s really a void in the livestock 
industry in that area that needs to be filled and these people are 
filling it. 
 
In my operation and in many operations, we still use horses to 
move cattle. We have a feedlot, and we have horses that our 
employees ride every day, in the winter and the summer, and 
they need to be shod. So we need to hire a farrier to come in on 
a regular basis to trim the horse’s hooves, to put shoes on the 
horse. And in the wintertime of course the shoes need spikes so 
that they don’t slip on the ice and snow. 
 
And it’s really a profession, Mr. Speaker, that is becoming . . . 
well there’s a shortage of people in that profession. There’s 
more and more people going out of that profession. And when 
we speak about the equine dentist, I think in all cases, they’re 
also farriers as well. So that’s the part of the industry and the 
business that will employ people full-time in that pursuit. They 
can be a equine dentist as well as a farrier. And I haven’t 
spoken to very many veterinarians — if any, quite frankly — 
that want to take up that profession because they are busy and 
it’s a very specialized form of enterprise that you need the 
proper tools — very expensive tools, quite frankly. And quite 
frankly it’s a lot of hard work. 
 
And these people really earn their pay when they deal with 
horses because a lot of horses aren’t . . . either not well-trained 
properly or even well-trained horses will not stand when they 
need to lift their legs up to shoe the horses and to trim the 
horses’ hooves and to pound on the shoe. And the same thing 
applies with equine dentists. I know watching the procedure 
done to my daughter’s horse, not only the horse was given a 
sedative, but it was also put in a kind of a restraint. And there’s 
an element of danger that the horse lashes out, that these 
professionals know how to handle horses and are very . . . 
actually take a lot of care to make sure not only the people 
involved don’t get hurt but as well as the animal is looked after. 
 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

Which brings up another point about the Bill is the need for . . . 
Well I guess the question is, how do we get around these 
conflicting viewpoints where the veterinary association says we 
don’t have enough vets in the province — which we all agree 
there is not enough — and from the other side practitioners, the 
dentists, equine dentists and farriers and other people that work 
in other parts of the livestock industry see a void and a need. 
And how do you fill that void? 
 
And what was suggested to us, Mr. Speaker, was that in 
particular these equine dentists, most of them or many of them 
have taken courses in the United States where they’re offered 
and they’ve gone to colleges in the United States and got proper 
training. And what is being suggested that the equine dentists 
which I . . . When I asked the association, they say there’s about 
six full-time equine dentists in Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 
What was suggested to us, that these six individuals — or 
maybe there’s more — they basically be grandfathered in to 
being a technician. And future technicians would take a course 
that should be and could be offered by the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for Saskatoon 
Massey Place on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member may 
proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank 
you to my colleague, the member from Biggar, for letting me 
intervene during his very interesting speech. 
 
I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to other members of the Assembly, Mr. Kevin Graham, 
who is sitting in the west gallery. And he is the 
vice-president of marketing for a company called Whitemud 
Resources, and they’re trying to develop the resource of 
kaolin, which is commonly known as white mud, in southern 
Saskatchewan near Wood Mountain. And I’ve toured this 
site with Mr. Graham and geologists from our Department of 
Industry and Resources, and there’s great potential there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as you will know, Saskatchewan is the number one 
producer in the world of potash and uranium, and we’re 
hoping that with the good work of Mr. Graham and his 
colleagues we may become the world’s largest producer of 
kaolin as well. So I’d like all members of the Assembly to 
join with me in welcoming Mr. Graham here today. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 

Biggar. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was talking 
about the relationship between and the concerns of not 
having enough veterinarians and giving the veterinarians 
more business in order to attract more veterinarians to the 
province and to the university at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] and the void that is out there where 
technicians fill that void in horse equine dentistry, and also 
farriers with shoe horses and those types of issues. And as 
I’d mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, allowing, grandfathering 
the six or more equine dentists into technicians and in the 
future setting up a course either through SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
or the veterinary college at the U of S to train more 
technicians in the future to be specific for equine dentistry, 
being farriers, horseshoeing, those types of issues. 
 
And in that way, Mr. Speaker, these technicians could work 
with or under a licensed veterinarian. And that would also 
get around the concerns about using sedatives and drugs that 
may or may not be available to someone that is not a 
veterinarian. 
 
And we know, we’ve all heard the stories about — typically in 
animal health — drugs, you know, coming across the border, 
coming across from the United States. And certainly we 
wouldn’t want any individual to be in a position that they’re 
breaking any laws concerning this. But it just speaks to the fact 
that there is a considerable void in the industry that needs to be 
filled, and we need to do something about that. And I think that 
would be a good compromise to allow these people to be a 
technician. 
 
And these existing six or eight people that would be 
grandfathered in, they could just come in and write an exam 
because they’re experts in their field. Quite frankly they 
probably should be the people that would develop the program 
and the examination and training to bring more people into this 
field. So it’s not something that they would . . . They shouldn’t 
be left out of the process. They should be really part of the 
process and be allowed to take part in this whole support and 
training in this future course that individuals could take to 
become equine dentists and farriers. 
 
And certainly it also speaks to the concern as I mentioned about 
drugs that these people need to do the job, two reasons: safety 
for the individual that’s doing the shoeing and the dentistry 
work, but also the safety of the horse that’s being worked on. 
And it’s very, very important that this takes place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Bill that speaks to it, that it would include 
specifying dentistry on animals as within veterinary scope of 
practice, removing the exemption of castration of horses, and 
clarifying that all procedures for the diagnosis of pregnancy, 
sterility, or infertility in animals are included in the veterinary 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

scope of practice. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have watched horses being castrated. And 
certainly it takes somebody that’s very careful and expert in that 
field. In the, I’ll call it, the old days — unfortunately I’m 
getting older that I remember the old days — horses would be 
thrown with ropes and basically tied down, and then the 
castration would take place. Nowadays with drugs, they would 
be sedated, basically put under, and the castration would take 
place. It’s much easier on the animal — for man and beast as is 
said back home — and much safer for everyone concerned. And 
again these people that are doing this in the industry have been 
doing this for years. And I don’t see any reason why they do not 
continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing that is very amazing about this Bill which we 
have found through discussion with the stock growers and 
others is that producers can’t do pregnancy tests on their own 
animals. It’s actually not in the . . . They’re not allowed to do it. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is unbelievable to find out that 
producers can’t do that type of thing on their own animals 
because this is a practice that’s been going on for generations. 
This is not new. But to find out now that it’s not allowed under 
the Act is shocking to producers across this province. 
 
[15:00] 
 
We have been told that there’s not a problem by the vet medical 
association; that it’s not a problem with the individual producer 
doing their own work. But what they have said that there’s at 
least one individual’s been prosecuted, that a non-veterinarian 
going out, doing preg testing services. They’ve hired people to 
follow this individual around. They’ve saw him go to ranchers, 
saw him work there and they made a record of it. They hired a 
private investigator to follow this person around and they 
charged this individual and he was convicted of performing 
these operations, this preg testing. So there’s a balance to what 
we’re saying here. Possibly that individual should not be doing 
that work unless they were also considered a technician. 
 
There is courses for the last 30, 40 years teaching individual 
producers about AI [artificial insemination], about preg testing. 
And then to find out now that these individuals, they have to be 
so careful about where they do their work that they could be 
charged. You would just assume the neighbours would help 
neighbours. And why not somebody that has a special expertise 
in that in the community, why wouldn’t that person be the one 
that everyone would get to preg test their animals? 
 
So there’s many, many questions concerning that area too. And 
it’s really disconcerting actually to find out that many of these 
procedures that producers have been doing on their own for 
generations, to find out now that they’re basically illegal. 
 
And even though the Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical 
Association says, well don’t worry; we won’t pursue these 
people in the court — that’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 
Those procedures have to be taken out of the Bill. There needs 
to be amendments to be taken out of the Bill to allow producers 
to do their own work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that is of great concern is producers 
doing their own Caesareans, and this is not uncommon for 

producers to do their own Caesareans. And there’s many 
reasons why this should be allowed. Individuals that have quite 
a number of animals that calve out 200, 300, 4, 5, 1,000 head of 
cattle naturally will learn how to do Caesareans because every 
year not only do they breed cows that calve in the spring, but 
there’s also a replacement factor that they breed a number of 
heifers, and there’s generally a higher rate of Caesareans in 
heifers. So these producers become quite I would say expert in 
doing Caesareans. But again we find out now that they’re not 
legally allowed to do that, and I’m sure they’d be quite 
surprised to hear that. 
 
The other thing is with doing Caesareans, there’s certain drugs 
that need to be given to the animal. And again it has the 
potential of having problems getting the proper drugs to give to 
the animal, to sedate the animal for freezing where the incision 
is made, and those types of operations and procedure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hard reality is even though we’re 
through the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] crisis for 
the most part — animals that are 30 months and younger are 
able to be exported to the United States — we still do not have 
the border open to the United States to export cows. And at the 
worst, at the depth of the BSE crisis, they were worth 10 to 15 
cents a pound. That’s 100 to $150 on a 1,000-pound cow. Now 
the prices for cows have come up somewhat, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re around that 35 cents a pound. But on a 1,000-pound 
cow, that’s $350 that an individual would get for a cull cow. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if this cow or heifer needs a Caesarean, well 
I checked into the prices. A Caesarean costs about $335. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, you know what’s going to happen if a producer 
has a cow that needs a Caesarean? It’s going to cost $350 . . . or 
it’s only worth $350 and it’s going to cost $335 to do the 
Caesarean. Well he has two options really, Mr. Speaker. One is 
to gain the knowledge and ability to do the Caesarean himself 
or let the animal die or just put the animal down because it’s not 
worth saving. Now, Mr. Speaker, that certainly isn’t good 
alternatives. 
 
And I believe that this Bill should address that type of situation 
that would allow a producer . . . first of all, the producers that 
are already doing Caesareans, to make it legal for them to do it. 
And also open the door up for technicians that may do it for a 
reduced rate, either working through or with a veterinarian in 
the busy season when the veterinarians don’t have the time, 
especially in single-person practices that just don’t have the 
time and the energy to cover the area that is needed. 
 
And again it goes back, Mr. Speaker, to the point that there’s 
not enough veterinarians in the province. And producers from 
all over the province have said, well they can’t get a vet; when 
they go out to check your cattle at midnight or 2 in the morning 
and there’s an animal that needs a Caesarean, well it’s obvious 
that a veterinarian that’s working long, long hours in a 
single-person clinic is not going to drive 20 to 30 or 50 miles — 
and in some cases even greater distances than 50 miles — to do 
a Caesarean because they are just plain exhausted from being up 
many, many nights in a row. So those are the issues that we see. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this also speaks to why we don’t have 
enough veterinarians in the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, there 
is an agreement that I believe Alberta, Saskatchewan, and 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

Manitoba commit so much funding to the vet college at the U of 
S. And we’re very fortunate in Saskatchewan to have that 
college training veterinarians in the province. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the government has let the vet college be run down. Now they 
have committed resources recently to it, but it got to the point 
that the vet college was working with equipment that was really 
30 years old. 
 
And there’s been many innovations in the livestock industry. 
You can just go to any feedlot that’s been recently built and 
you’ll see that their handling facility are state of the art. And in 
our own vet college at the University of Saskatchewan this 
college to this day does not have that state of the art equipment. 
So there’s a concern there. Students that are going there, are 
they getting the best training that they could, given that they 
have antiquated equipment to work with — fencing, squeezes. 
 
And then we find out, Mr. Speaker, because there is a shortage 
of veterinarians, that the Alberta government is now in the 
process of building their own vet college for large animals, even 
though I understand they are still going to continue to commit 
resources to funding their share of the vet college at the U of S. 
But this is not a very good sign, Mr. Speaker, when one of the 
partners at the U of S is going on their own to build a 
large-animal vet college. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is quite 
disconcerting because what does that say about the future of the 
U of S vet college? What does that say about the future of the 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan when one of the partners is 
basically on the verge of pulling out of the whole partnership? 
 
The other issues that are around that is veterinarians are trained 
for large animals and small animals. But we have seen through 
the last really 20, 25 years, for various reasons, more of the 
veterinarians are wanting to specialize in small animals. And 
it’s understandable. Working with large animals is very 
physical and demanding, and working with small animals is 
much better as far as . . . usually the dog and cat owners will 
bring their animals into the clinic. And they can deal with the 
animals in their clinic, in where it’s warm, dry, all the 
equipment and everything is there. Large-animal clinics and 
operations, they’re certainly, they’re certainly . . . it’s a different 
type of business where it’s more demanding, and that’s 
something that has to be addressed as well. And I’m not sure if 
this Bill is addressing that to date. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, talking to the Saskatchewan Equine 
Ranchers Association, they are producers that have PMU 
[pregnant mare’s urine] lines, and their industry has been 
devastated in recent years. And they have come to us, the 
official opposition, and said this is the last thing they need is to 
have to, in their eyes, hire more expensive — through the local 
vet — the more expensive procedures in order to look after their 
horses. And they’re very upset that this Bill has been introduced 
and the amendments to this Bill because really they have been 
in an industry that’s been really hurt in a big way in the last few 
years. And I believe that it’s up to this government to support 
the members of the Saskatchewan Equine Ranchers 
Association. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, going back to that balance between 
veterinarians and technicians that I was speaking about, since 
the onset of BSE, I believe that we have to be very concerned 
and the government needs to really look at the effects of 

disease, not only to the safety of the food chain for human 
consumption, but also what that does in relationship to our 
trading partners. 
 
As we all know, Mr. Speaker, when we found that we had BSE 
in Saskatchewan, in Canada, the borders were closed to the 
United States market. Since then we know the borders have 
been partially opened to 30 months and younger last spring. The 
markets have come back to a more or less normal situation in 
those younger age groups. 
 
But still for the cull cows, that hasn’t returned to normal 
markets. And it’s interesting to note that ranchers and livestock 
producers, about 10 to 15 per cent of their income comes from 
the sale of cull cows. So it’s a very important part that is still 
closed to the border, to the United States market. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about our trading partners, 
one of the big concerns is the health of our product, naturally — 
the safety of our product. And we have been told — and from 
my point of view as a livestock producer from working with 
veterinarians — that because there is a shortage of 
veterinarians, that it’s putting strain on our system to deal with 
outbreaks of disease. 
 
BSE was bad enough, but what if there was an outbreak of 
foot-and-mouth in North America, in Canada, in Saskatchewan? 
Do we have enough veterinarians on the ground to deal with 
that type of a very contagious disease? BSE, as bad as it was, is 
not a contagious disease. Quite frankly many people think it’s a 
kind of a phony situation to begin with. But it’s recognized that 
it’s a disease that can be transmitted to humans. And so 
obviously we needed to take precautions to make sure the food 
safety was looked after. 
 
But what if we had a very contagious disease breakout? And by 
all accounts we don’t have enough veterinarians in this 
province. Now that would be a very, very serious problem. 
 
The other part of that equation is why we would have an 
outbreak of disease. Well bioterrorism is something that is a big 
concern in the world. And any terrorist would see that spreading 
a contagious disease like that in North America would be 
devastating to our economies in the United States and Canada. 
 
The key, Mr. Speaker, is to have enough trained veterinarians 
and technicians on the ground basically to come in and sort that 
situation out if there is an outbreak of — as I used the example 
— foot-and-mouth. 
 
As we know back in the 1950s, there was an outbreak of 
foot-and-mouth near Regina. And at that time the authorities at 
the time came in and really cleaned up the situation. They 
slaughtered animals. They buried animals that could have been 
infected with the disease and did a very good job and stamped 
the disease out. And we’ve never had it since. So there’s an 
example of what was done in the past but given enough 
resources and that’s why it was looked after. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Nowadays I’m told by industry officials and veterinarians that 
we really don’t have enough people on the ground in order to 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

look after a serious outbreak of an infection in our livestock 
industry. And that’s a great concern to me. And again it goes 
back to maybe we don’t need all veterinarians. Maybe we need 
more technicians as well to help with that type of a serious 
situation. 
 
And again it speaks to our relationship with our trading 
partners. As we know, look what’s happening with the bird flu 
that’s coming across the world. Really it’s a matter of when, not 
if, it arrives in North America. And we need the people on the 
ground to deal with outbreaks of those types of contagious 
diseases or viruses that may affect human health as well as 
obviously the health of livestock, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you look at our society in 
Canada. And I just need to go back to the history of my own 
family on both sides of my family. On one side of my family, 
they originally emigrated from Greece, and my grandfather was 
a really a peasant farmer in the mountains of Greece. They 
raised goats and milked goats and raised sheep for food. And 
when they came to Cambridge, to the United States, worked on 
the railway, immigrated to Canada I believe in 1906, worked 
for awhile on the railways in Canada and started farming in 
Canada, and that’s what they raised. They raised mainly sheep 
and hogs. 
 
And there was no — at that time, Mr. Speaker — there was no 
discussion about whether they can look after their own animals 
or worrying about being prosecuted just looking after their own 
animals, Mr. Speaker. They slaughtered sheep and lambs for 
meat, sold the meat around the community. They lived near 
Biggar by a community called Springwater. My grandfather 
used to set up a booth at the Springwater fair days and sell hot 
dogs that they made on the farm and different types of meat. 
And it was just an accepted fact and a right, quite frankly, that 
individual producers could do that, while nowadays there are so 
many rules and regulations that it’s practically impossible other 
than certain individuals with a lot of capital behind them in 
order to do that process. 
 
And I think there has to be a balance, Mr. Speaker, so that we 
still allow the entrepreneurial spirit to flourish in this province 
like my grandparents had when they first came to this country, 
to make a good living. They went on to have a slaughterhouse 
and did custom slaughtering of hogs mainly and again, sold 
meat around the community. 
 
My other grandparents on the other side of the family, the 
Weekes side, they emigrated to Canada in 1921. He was a 
British marine that fought in World War I. They came to 
Canada and homesteaded north of Purdue. They had the horses. 
They had the livestock, the chickens and pigs. But what my 
grandfather did was lease and buy land in a certain area — in a 
block — and fenced it and really became a pasture manager. 
 
Many people grazed their cattle and livestock on his pasture. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, if these types of laws were enforced in 
those days, my grandfather wouldn’t be able to work and to 
make a living in those early days. It was just a foregone 
conclusion that you could look after other people’s cattle, 
livestock, do any veterinary procedures that needed to be done, 
and it would be accepted and approved by everybody 
concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

Through the years when my father first started farming, when 
he was 16 years old, he always had the dream of being a feedlot 
operator, of feeding cattle. And in the mid-to-late 1950s, he 
moved to the present location near Biggar where he started 
building corrals and set up a small feedlot to begin with. And in 
the early 1970s, he expanded the feedlot to where he was 
feeding up to 10,000 head of cattle at one time. And as I grew 
up as a teenager and as a child, I always helped around the 
feedlot and the farm, and it was a foregone conclusion that we 
would do our own procedures. 
 
One of the jobs we had . . . I have two brothers and one of the 
jobs we had as kids growing up is on Saturdays, that would be 
the weekend that we would process cattle. And when I say 
process cattle, my dad bought steers and heifers and brought 
them into the feedlot. They needed to be processed which 
would include vaccinations, possible castrations, ear notching, 
implants, and deworming, those types of things. And it was my 
brother who was probably 15 years old and I was 12, and we 
were processing cattle. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, really when we look at it in detail 
what . . . The laws that’s in this Act would make that an illegal 
operation. And I find that very alarming to see that type of Bill 
in this province where it’s just been a foregone conclusion that 
producers could do their own type of work with their own 
animals. 
 
In later years, Mr. Speaker, my dad’s operation expanded. We 
hired actually the vet college out of the University of 
Saskatchewan to come out on a herd health, to do our herd 
health. And what they provided for was really a . . . I guess I’ll 
just go into the details of what they did. Any time we had an 
animal that died, we would call the veterinary clinic and they 
would come out and do a post-mortem on the animal. And they 
would take pieces of the animal back into the university, do 
tests on it, and try to find out why the animal died. 
 
And it was very important. When we first got involved with the 
U of S and particularly Dr. Janzen, there was a disease, a virus 
that was going through the livestock industry in Western 
Canada called IBR [infectious bovine rhinotracheitis]. And it 
quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it looked very much like a normal 
pneumonia or shipping fever that is very common in livestock. 
But the problem is, normal shipping fever you give an animal 
antibiotic and generally, if the animal is caught quick enough 
that you could . . . The animal would respond to the medicine, 
to the antibiotic, and recover. 
 
This disease called IBR is a disease that didn’t respond. It was a 
virus. They would come down and show many of the same 
symptoms as shipping fever but wouldn’t respond so the death 
rate became a problem. And many of the animals that had the 
virus did not do well after . . . even though they lived, they 
survived, did not do well, and in many cases never did finish 
when we were finishing animals for slaughter. 
 
So this herd health program that we had with the University of 
Saskatchewan was very valuable and it’s really expanded. With 
the growing feeding industry in Western Canada, that’s 
essential to have some kind of a herd health program, either 
with the veterinarians or skilled people in herd health, in feedlot 
situations. 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

And there again, that’s another example, Mr. Speaker, of the 
need of veterinarians in this province. And also, whenever the 
veterinarians came out to diagnose an animal they would . . . 
Because the university vet college is a teaching college, they 
would bring students out to the feedlot. And they would get the 
students . . . They would train the students really on the ground. 
They would get the students to help doing the post-mortems. If 
there was any castrations or operations needed to be done, they 
would show the students, train the students how to do it as they 
went along. So it was very valuable both for the vet college and 
for my dad’s operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in the 1970s when the exotic cattle first 
arrived in North America, many producers, including my father, 
began to AI, artificial inseminate, livestock to try to breed up to 
a purebred animal in various different breeds — Maine-Anjou, 
Simmental, Blonde d'Aquitaine, Chianina, Charolais, 
Simmental. And my dad built up a herd of well over, I believe, 
at the peak of 500 cows. At the time there was a brucellosis 
outbreak in Western Canada. And again it’s a serious disease 
for animals, but it’s also a disease that can be transmitted to 
humans. 
 
And at that time the Health of Animals, which is the CFIA 
[Canadian Food Inspection Agency] now, they took the 
approach that they would try to basically not eliminate the 
disease. Well I guess they were always trying to eliminate the 
disease, but the approach they took wasn’t working. What they 
would do is come in and ask — well ask —demand the 
producer that has the disease in their herd to clean their corrals 
out, to segregate animals that have the disease, cows and heifers 
that have aborted fetuses. And that’s the main way that this 
disease was passed on, through aborted fetuses. 
 
And we went through all that work and finally the powers to be 
and Health of Animals and the Government of Canada decided, 
well the only way to eradicate the disease once a herd has it is 
to slaughter all the animals. And it’s very devastating to the 
producer, but Health of Animals at the time learned the proper 
way of doing it and to their credit did the right thing and came 
in. And when the herd had brucellosis — they were tested for it 
— they’d come in and slaughtered the whole herd. They’d give 
compensation. Compensation is never enough but I’d think that 
we were happy considering the devastation of this disease. 
Came in and slaughtered all these animals and cleaned up the 
disease and eventually eradicated brucellosis from cattle. We’re 
free from the disease and that certainly was one of the trade 
irritants with the United States, when we had brucellosis. 
 
There’s other diseases. Bluetongue is a disease that United 
States has. And so certainly if diseases are not looked after 
properly by the powers-to-be, that they really cause huge trade 
distortions and affect the producers of the day. 
 
When the Charolais, probably the most prominent exotic breed, 
came to Canada, rate of gain was the big thing in the feeding 
industry. So my dad went out and bought the highest gaining 
bull at the test station at the U of S — Charolais bull. And this 
bull gained when he was on feed, gained nearly five pounds a 
day — I forget the number, but it was a huge, huge number. 
 
So we bred this bull to our cows. Of course these cows that we 
had were British breed cows and never been bred to a larger 

exotic bull. And what we found out, to our dismay, that that was 
a big mistake. This bull really had big large calves. There was 
calves that were coming out of cows that were 100 pounds plus 
and so there was a lot of calving problems. There was a lot of 
caesareans that had to be done and we learnt the hard way about 
breeding our cows to easy calving bulls. 
 
And there’s another example, Mr. Speaker, of a producer 
needing to do his own vet procedures, needing to be able to 
have the tools, the knowledge. And now I see — after we see 
what’s in the Bill, in the Act — the legal right to work with 
their own animals. 
 
And it’s the same thing, Mr. Speaker, with the AI-ing, artificial 
insemination. Producers have been always doing this with their 
own cattle. They’ve, I don’t think it was even . . . There was 
courses given around the province teaching individual ranchers 
and producers about artificial insemination so they could go 
back and do there own AI. And now to see that this Act really 
outlaws many of these procedures is very, very alarming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, going back again to what the Saskatchewan 
Equine Ranchers Association have told us, to the stock growers 
what they have been telling us, FAC, the Farm Animal Council 
— we certainly have a lot of problems with this Bill. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have been told in a meeting that the 
Minister of Agriculture has said that the Bill would be pulled, 
and these changes would be made in a new Bill. Now we’ve 
been told that the Bill would proceed, and these amendments 
would be brought in through committee. 
 
Well again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot of confidence in the 
Minister of Agriculture. It’s amazing to me to see, Mr. Speaker, 
that his department have spoken to all these different groups 
before this Bill was introduced and still left out all these very 
glaring examples of problems in the Bill, and not only the 
amendments in the Bill but going back again to the existing Act 
where producers are not allowed to do their own work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a letter from the 
Saskatchewan Equine Ranchers Association to Dr. Robert Kerr, 
the provincial veterinarian of Saskatchewan Agriculture and 
Food. And it says: 
 

Dear Dr. Kerr: 
 
Re: Proposed changes to The Veterinary Act, 1987, as it 
relates to equine 
 
It has come to our attention the Saskatchewan Agriculture 
and Food has initiated a review of The Veterinary Act, 
1987. This letter is in response to proposed equine-related 
amendments to that Act. While we understand some of the 
amendments are being considered in efforts to eliminate 
non-licensed personnel from illegally accessing and 
administering pharmaceuticals, these changes have raised 
animal care concerns with us, as equine owners. 
 
As an industry, the Saskatchewan Equine Ranchers raise 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

and care for over 2,000 horses. As responsible horse 
owners, our interest is to always provide our animals with 
the best care possible. To ensure that we are current in our 
management practices, we [continue to] . . . invest 
considerable resources and time into advancing our skills 
and knowledge with regards to a variety of issues from 
nutrition to animal care. 
 
As with any livestock operation, periodically we require 
outside experts to assist us in ensuring our animals remain 
healthy. Although we’re often challenged to find 
experienced veterinarians in rural Saskatchewan, they play 
a significant role in our business. We rely on veterinarians 
to assist us with many issues [with] . . . disease control to 
assisting mare/foal care issues, etc. On most occasions we 
find veterinarians very helpful and dedicated. However, 
we are often challenged with locating experienced and 
knowledgeable veterinarians in a timely fashion, due to the 
shortage in the rural communities. 
 
In addition, on some occasions we find veterinarians do 
not have the skills to efficiently deal with various tasks, 
such as equine dentistry. Therefore, when we require 
dentistry services, reputable and experienced ‘equine 
dentists’ are our preferred choice. It is our experience that 
equine dentists are able to perform dentistry in a 
responsible and timely fashion, which assists us with 
ensuring our animals are receiving the best care possible. 
 
In discussing this issue with a number of veterinarians . . . 
[we] have voiced concern about the equine dentists doing 
inadequate jobs, which may cause additional trauma to the 
horse, and not having the knowledge to address their 
mistakes. As this may very well happen, inadequate jobs 
can also occur by veterinarians, who are not skilled, 
experienced and lack equipment in the dentistry field. As 
well we are finding fewer veterinarians are able to provide 
teeth care services, which creates more of a dilemma for 
horse owner, particularly those who own large . . . 
[quantities] of horses such as members of SERA. 
 
With regard to . . . [the change in your] Act re: equine 
dentistry, SERA suggests [Saskatchewan Agriculture and 
Food] consider other solutions to this issue such as, 
providing regular dentistry courses for all professionals 
including equine dentists and Veterinarians. Providing 
incentive programs to veterinarians to establish practices 
in rural areas, increasing dentistry teaching within the 
College of Veterinary Medicine to ensure all veterinarian 
students have adequate knowledge and have developed the 
skill set they need to provide equine dentistry. 
 
Although we do not have the solution to the concern of 
some equine dentists illegally acquiring and administering 
drugs, we do not realize this may occur and cause concern. 
However, until skilled and willing veterinarians are more 
readily accessible in rural areas, horse owners need to 
continue to keep animal care paramount in their 
operations. To this end, it appears that keeping equine 
dentistry a viable option for horse owners needs to remain 
an option. 
 
We cannot and will not endorse the changes in the above 

mentioned areas. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Shane Boyes 
SERA President. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that pretty well speaks to their 
concerns which I’ve tried to outline so far. Mr. Speaker, they’re 
speaking to mainly equine dentistry and equine concerns, but 
also, Mr. Speaker, the Bill also is moving horses from livestock, 
which it has always been considered livestock, to a companion 
animal. And really moving it . . . the definition of a horse from 
livestock to companion means it’s put in with dogs and cats and 
those types of animals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that there are many 
horse lovers in this province and Western Canada. And it’s true 
enough, Mr. Speaker. There are probably as many horses, I 
understand, today as there were in the ’20s and ’30s and ’40s. 
It’s just that back in those days horses were used on the farm for 
farming activity, for pulling sleighs and wagons, but nowadays 
they’re more of a pleasure animal. There’s still some horses 
being used, as I mentioned, in my operation and many other 
operations and ranches, horses still being used as working 
horses. 
 
But more and more of the horses are being used basically as . . . 
are kept as pets for riding. They’re a very wonderful animal. As 
I mentioned, my daughter really loves her horse. And people 
really want to look after their animals, give them proper care 
and nutrition, and it’s interesting to note that this concern with 
equine dentistry has become a greater and greater concern, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now also, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my own operation 
and many other ranches and feedlots, that we have very skilled 
people that are not veterinarians delivering antibiotics, 
vaccinations, doing castrations, dehornings on cattle in the 
feedlot. And as far as I can see, that is not permitted under this 
Act. And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly it’s not acceptable to have 
that type of law in place in this province when we want to grow 
and expand the livestock industry in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the government needs to do 
considerable work and thought into this Bill before it is either 
reintroduced or amended because obviously the government 
hasn’t done its homework at all with this Act. And really it’s 
quite alarming what this Bill will do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We received a letter, an anonymous letter from a practicing 
veterinarian, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan. And it’s quite 
interesting to see this person’s point of view. Again they restate 
what I’ve been saying, but it goes on to say that the 
Saskatchewan Veterinary Medical Association wants 
government regulation that effectively will be a direct transfer 
. . . cash from the livestock producer’s pocket to that of the 
veterinarian. 
 
And again it goes on to say . . . Talk about timing. Well I’ve 
just spoke to the . . . No kidding, the timing is devastating when 
the cost of a Caesarean is three hundred and thirty-five, 
twenty-five dollars and the price of that cow would be around 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

the same price, $350 depending on the weight. So that’s 
certainly a serious, serious consideration. 
 
It goes on to say that this government . . . they want this 
government to make it illegal for a producer to administer 
penicillin or any other drug to livestock they produce. They will 
have to pay a veterinarian to do this for them in the name of 
public interest. And it goes, it says . . . Oh dear. Mr. Speaker, 
the information goes on also to say also a non-veterinarian may 
administer . . . 
 
It also goes on to say that there’s a concern with neighbours 
helping neighbours, giving medicine and those types of things. 
And the Act, as we know, states that the fine for the first 
offence is not more than $1,000. Second and subsequent 
offences are not more than $2,000. So it’s a very serious, 
serious concern to producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and as we try to develop our livestock, intensive 
livestock operations . . . cattle and livestock is something I 
know more about. But we have many hog barns have been built 
in this province. We have a number of chicken feather 
operations, eggs operations as well. So these are very, very 
critical to those producers as well, and all those producers have 
associations that belong to the Farm Animal Council. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my operation also belongs to the Farm 
Animal Council. And this group was set up really to be the 
focal point to really push back to certain overzealous farm 
animal welfare groups that really . . . well as producers we 
know that their position is not, quite frankly, acceptable. It’s not 
even factual, Mr. Speaker. The PETAs [People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals] of this world that . . . we know how 
extreme they can get. And the Farm Animal Council have great 
concerns with this veterinary Act. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that we have to have certain standards 
in our livestock industry. We all know that animal welfare is 
very important. It’s not a matter of just being cruel or giving 
punishment to an animal. It’s an economic reality. If a producer 
doesn’t treat his animals properly, doesn’t look after his animals 
properly, this producer isn’t going to make any money at the 
job, at his business. So it’s certainly . . . The two things go hand 
in hand. And there’s always bad apples out there. 
 
But I think the livestock producers of this world are the best 
producers of this province, or the best producers in the world 
quite frankly, and go to great lengths in order to look after the 
animals properly because first of all they’re producers that like 
animals. They like working with animals. They naturally treat 
their animals well. And in order to make money, they know 
they have to look after their animals to get the best performance 
and weight gain and those types of things. 
 
So I think fact that the Farm Animal Council is the group that 
really keeps an eye on practices in the livestock industry. And 
they’re really the group that speaks, in my mind, to many of the 
potential problems and concerns that may arise. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that over the years there’s been 
development of other livestock industry, as I’m also aware of 
the game farming industry, the elk industry —raising of elk. 
And it’s interesting that in the elk industry, again an animal that 

does run in the wild will be the most . . . well let’s say take a lot 
of consideration because of the fact they were once a wild 
animal. And there’s a lot of people concerned about the welfare 
of elk or game farm animals in particular. 
 
And I have a bit of a knowledge about the elk industry. The elk 
are raised for a number of reasons. One, for breeding — you 
raise elk to sell to other producers to expand their herd. You 
raise elk for meat. It’s an expanding industry as well. But the 
one interesting aspect of raising elk is the cutting of the horn 
and the value of the horn. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the elk industry has gone through some 
trying times as well with chronic wasting disease and . . . But 
there’s still some value in the horn. And the process around 
cutting the horn, Mr. Speaker, is an interesting one. And the 
producers have to be very, very concerned about the proper 
procedures so that the animal does not suffer, that the animal 
does not die, and the best humane practices are applied in the 
cutting in the horn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cutting of the horn from the male elk take 
place in the spring. And depending on the age of the animal, 
sometime they will start, Mr. Speaker, in April, May, June, 
July, depending on the age of the animal. And in elk operations 
there’s always a concern about the hardship on the elk bull 
when the horn is cut. And that is a problem because the elk horn 
is cut at the velvet stage. And it’s interesting when you touch 
the horn of an elk when it’s in the velvet stage, it is . . . The 
reason it’s called the velvet stage is because when you touch it, 
it’s just like velvet on the outside. But on the inside, it’s full of 
blood. It’s a part of the animal that is growing quickly and it’s 
full of blood. And to the touch, it has that velvet touch to it. 
And also it’s very warm — actually hot, quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And so producers, when they go to cut the horn off at the velvet 
stage, have to be particularly careful in how they do that. And 
there is a device called the Stockstill. And the Stockstill is 
really a piece of equipment that gives a very light electrical volt 
to the animal. And you hook it up to one end of the animal. 
There’s different ways of doing it. When it was first started in 
the industry, they would say you should do the whole body of 
the animal. So you’d hook up the Stockstill on the tail of the 
animal and on the ear of the animal on the side you’re cutting 
the horn. And you would just turn it up and give a slight 
electrical shock to the animal, and it would take away the pain 
of cutting the horn. 
 
But in recent years, it’s been refined to putting it on . . . hooking 
one piece of the equipment onto the ear and the other just to the 
skin of the animal. And it’s amazing when you hook that up, 
you turn the electricity on. And then you would put a rubber 
band around the horn and turn the power up when you’re 
actually cutting it off, with either a mechanical saw or a 
handsaw cut the horn off. And when you shut the power off, the 
animal would stop bleeding. So it’s very safe. It reduces the 
amount of bleeding the animal would have. It would certainly 
reduce the shock or the sensation and the pain of the cutting of 
the animal. 
 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

So these are types of practices that producers are using in other 
types of operations, in game farm operations. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, does this Bill, does this Bill prohibit those types of 
operations? And as we try to diversify this province — as we 
know agriculture’s going through some very tough times — 
producers are looking for diversification into other livestock 
and other crops so they can make ends meet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a good example in my area, there’s not only my 
livestock operation . . . but producers have diversified away 
from grain farming as we know because of the, just the 
devastating prices in grain farm to livestock, particularly cows 
and calves. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the Biggar constituency I believe I have 
two veterinarians that work in my constituency. One’s located 
in Biggar and another one is close to Saskatoon. And I know 
during calving season these people are just run right off their 
feet, Mr. Speaker. And certainly, certainly we need more 
veterinarians. 
 
And I know in other provinces, we’ve been shown the map by 
the SVMA about the areas that veterinarians cover in the 
province. And there’s certain areas — especially in the South, 
Southwest — I believe there’s huge areas that one veterinarian 
will look after. And quite frankly it’s impossible that these 
veterinarians can get around to all the producers’ ranches in 
calving season. So it’s pretty imperative that ranchers . . . Well 
they always have been self-reliant and looked after their own 
veterinary work and certainly speaks to that in today’s situation 
where they will need to continue to be able to do that. And it’s 
certainly disconcerting, as I mentioned, that these producers 
may be actually breaking the law by working on their own 
animals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that producers always have 
got together —neighbours, friends — got together to process 
cattle, castrate, brand calves in the spring and normal work 
that’s always been done. And to find out now, Mr. Speaker, that 
these procedures may become or may be illegal is very 
disconcerting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is cow-calf operations and feedlot and 
ranching operations, but there’s purebred producers in the 
province as well. And one of the things that purebred producers 
do naturally is breed breeding stock, mainly bulls. Producers 
will have their own bull sale or go together with other producers 
and have a bull sale or just sell bulls off the farm. And one of 
the things that they have to do is get the bulls’ semen tested to 
see if the bulls have strong semen so that these bulls will breed 
the animals that the producer wants bred in their herd. And 
that’s certainly a procedure that veterinarians do. 
 
And as we hope the livestock industry expands in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, the need for this type of service is going to 
increase. And again there is that balance between veterinarians 
that do that work, Mr. Speaker, and are they able to get around 
and do all those particular procedures. And again it’s very 
seasonal work. Bull sales take place in the spring so all that type 
of work needs to be done in a very short time. And so that’s a 
concern as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other aspect of the livestock industry is preg testing. And 

years ago producers wouldn’t get their animals preg tested. 
They would just, well they would see which animal didn’t have 
a calf in the spring and then decide at that point whether they 
were going to keep that animal, rebreed it, or sell it. Now most 
producers get the animals preg tested in the fall and sell them as 
cull animals because they don’t want to feed that cow 
throughout the winter and find out that they don’t have a calf 
and then have that extra cost of feeding that cow all winter. And 
so this again speaks to this real big problem where the Act . . . 
the veterinary association wants this restricted to only 
veterinarians. And again, Mr. Speaker, allowing technicians or 
just producers themselves to do that type of procedure on their 
own ranches and farms. 
 
And I personally think there needs to be more co-operation 
between the SVMA, number one, which really highlighted is 
working with the Saskatchewan Equine Ranchers Association, 
working with equine dentists so that these people can be either 
grandfathered in now or new technicians come along, they get 
the proper training that they need in our own university. Or 
SIAST for instance could give the training to these people and 
work together. Where these individuals, both in the horse 
dentistry areas but also ranchers or technicians, could go out 
and do preg testing in the fall which as we know a lot of the 
veterinarians can’t get around to all the ranchers that . . . Again, 
a seasonable type of procedure that needs to be done. 
 
And I think there needs to be a lot more co-operation first with 
the government of the day. The NDP government obviously has 
dropped the ball on this Bill, not realizing first of all what’s 
already in the Act that’s very detrimental to the industry but 
also dropped the ball. They claim to have spoken to all these 
livestock groups, but I know there’s a number of these livestock 
groups were very surprised to see what’s in this Bill. 
 
So the government needs to work with producers, needs to work 
with livestock associations and work out some type of 
mechanism to allow the veterinarians to really try to get what 
they need — which I agree — to encourage more veterinarians 
in the province but also to fill the void, the gap in some services 
that are out there that is being filled by equine dentists, by 
ranchers doing preg testing and those types of things. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s a number of other members 
that would like to speak to this Bill. And it’s going to be 
interesting to see how the government deals with this Bill in the 
future because I certainly know that producers will not stand for 
the amendments that is being brought in. And once producers 
have learned that actually everyday procedures they’ve been 
doing for years is also illegal, potentially illegal, that there’s 
going to be a grave concern in the livestock industry about this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to let one of my other colleagues 
speak to this Bill at this time. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to add a 
few points that . . . My colleague had talked about the Bill quite 
extensively, but he did miss a couple of points, concerns about 
this particular Bill. This government has talked about making 
amendments on this Bill but like I say, they won’t bring them 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

forward yet. And there’s concerns out there. There isn’t a lot of 
trust in this government. They’re looking at 42 fraud cases that 
are out there. And over the years we’ve talked about trust in this 
government, and it’s slipping at that end of it. 
 
But there’s one particular thing in this Bill here that deals with 
. . . It’s being amended on striking out the word horses. And it 
goes on to say, under explanation, horses today are often 
considered pets rather than livestock. So I would like to tell a 
few stories out from my area that kind of refute that fact. That 
horses are considered working animals. 
 
And I showed this to some ranchers and I’ve had a few calls on 
it. And even vets . . . We don’t have many vets out our way 
unfortunately. I think in my constituency right now I only have, 
that I know of, one vet that’s set up in Watrous. We have one 
that services out of Lumsden, is hoping to set up a satellite 
office in Davidson, and I hope she does that. 
 
But one of the concerns is dealing with PETA any time you 
change a little bit of legislation dealing with the word pets 
because they’re always looking to stop the use of animals. And 
when I say any kind of use of animals, I don’t even think they 
like people to have pets. I really don’t. You look at their 
website and you see the people demonstrating. I think basically 
— they, in themselves — they don’t even believe that people 
should even use animals for pets. That fish shouldn’t be in an 
aquarium. That you shouldn’t have dogs; you shouldn’t have 
cats. And specially large animals, they’re opposed to that, of 
any kind of use for animals at that end of it. 
 
And by bringing this kind of legislation in, will that give them a 
doorway to start bringing a lawsuit against some ranchers for 
using horses or will that maybe bring a lawsuit . . . Maybe not 
so much. Right now they’re not going after ranchers. That’s 
further down the line for them. 
 
One of their steps is rodeos. That’s their first step is what they’d 
like to end. And by bringing that forward, would that give them 
some kind of a leeway to bring in a lawsuit or to cause trouble 
for people that use them in rodeos, people that ride horses in 
gymkhana? I have 4-H clubs out throughout my constituency, 
as many members do, where horses are used in gymkhana. It’s a 
sport that, you know, they compete in it and that end of it. 
 
So that was a great worry, changing that, because where would 
it stop? The next step is also then are you going to maybe 
change it where they can’t be used for any work? Would that be 
further down the road? We talk about working horses. There’s 
lots and lots of people in my constituency, they use horses a lot 
more for work than they do consider them for pets, even though 
they treat those animals very, very well. There isn’t any horse 
owner that probably treats his horse any better than a cowboy or 
anybody that’s working with horses. 
 
You take in my constituency, Arm River constituency, I don’t 
know if you . . . I’m going to tell a few stories. And I hope you 
allow me a little bit, but it does tie to this particular Bill. This 
valley that I represent along here that runs between Regina and 
Saskatoon . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh you said, Arm 
River valley. If you ever look at it when you’re travelling on the 
highway, it does come up to Aylesbury, Chamberlain. You can 
look down in there. 

Along that valley is cattle country. That’s all it can be used for. 
It’s not farmed. It’s cattle country. It’s privately owned 
pastures. It’s co-operative owned pastures. It’s community 
pastures. There’s some provincial pastures set up. There’s also 
some federal community pastures that are set up all along that 
base — all along that whole river bottom there. And there is a 
river that runs through it year-round. It’s spring-fed, and that 
river never, I’ve never, ever in my life have ever remembered 
that ever going dry. There’s always places that, along there, it 
may get down to a trickle some dry August and July, but there 
is always water running through there. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And that’s one of the reasons the only way that you can work 
that particular valley is on horses. I mean that’s it. You get 
down along the river; it’s boggy. You can’t take a four-wheel 
drive, ATV [all-terrain vehicle] and . . . down in there working. 
The sides are too steep. There’s bramble bushes, buck brush, 
trees, small brush. The only way to work that cattle out of that 
country is on a horse. And so when they’re working that 
particular in the fall, when they’re rounding up cattle or when 
they’re checking cattle, the fence lines, that’s the only way 
they’ll check fence lines, water holes, take salt out. 
 
I know of cowboys in the PF [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration] pasture. We used to put our cattle in the PF 
pasture at McCraney years ago. Now I have more of my own, 
so I don’t use it anymore. But I can remember as a kid going 
there and in the fall rounding up the animals you . . . horses, 
they were . . . and it was all done, it’s still done on horses. 
 
And I’ll tell you what. There isn’t anybody that probably treats 
their horse any better than a cowboy. I’ve seen them work in the 
saddle, you know, 10, 12 hours in the day, dog tired, and yet 
when they bring that horse in, they take the saddle off it, 
blanket. They rub it down. They make sure that horse is cooled 
down, watered, and fed properly before they eat and they rest. 
 
So at that end of it, it worries me that PETA is always saying 
that horses . . . and when they’re used for work or they’re used 
in rodeos, they’re mistreated. I’ve been involved in rodeos. 
Horses are looked after very well on rodeos. The stock 
producers that take the animals to the rodeos, them horses are 
very well looked after. They’re looked after by vets. They’re 
looked after by the owners. They are very well fed, very well 
maintained, and anything that they need in the way of 
medicines or injuries that may have occurred they are very well 
looked after. And yet there’s that perception out there in the big 
cities — not so much in Saskatchewan and Alberta, Manitoba 
and BC [British Columbia], but maybe down east and in the 
states in the big cities that — that they’re mistreated, that 
they’re ill-treated. 
 
So anything change in that, that worries the producers out there 
because as a rancher you’re always fighting PETA. That’s in 
the back. They’re out there trying to . . . And they will use any 
little thing to start with, and then they just keep going. And they 
want to eliminate the use of horses, cattle for meat, horses to 
ride. I mean that’s their long-range goal. And if anybody thinks 
any different, they’re misinformed because if you follow them, 
if you watch their website, that is a goal that they want to push. 
They will take a little step at a time. And we have steps here in 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

the province that protects the mistreatment of animals which we 
have, which is good. I mean them laws there. It is. If anybody is 
inhumane to an animal, we have societies, we have laws that 
protect that, already in place. I would say we have some of the 
best laws in the country dealing with that. 
 
And I don’t think we need to have that particular clause in 
there. I think it should stay the way it is because of that. We 
already have laws that deal with inhumane treatment of 
animals. But changing wording, trying to . . . And that’s what 
PETA would like is to make the perception that something’s a 
pet, and then once it’s a pet then it’s classified different than a 
working animal. Then all of a sudden, oh you shouldn’t be 
using it as riding or roping or using it for work. 
 
The member before me talking about feedlot operators, I mean 
that’s the only way you can check animals is on a horseback in 
a feedlot. And that’s what they do. There’s riders . . . I’ve got a 
feedlot not that far from me. I mean that’s . . . They got two or 
three riders. That’s their job every morning, get on the horse 
and check the pens, check the animals. They have the medicines 
with them. Whatever needs to be treated — whether it’s foot 
rot, whether it’s a shot of penicillin or respiratory disease that’s 
showing up in an animal — well that’s when they can treat 
them particular animals. 
 
And it also deals with another little issue of that Bill. When you 
talk about feedlot operators, does that mean then they maybe 
they can’t treat them animals? Because that’s how they . . . 
that’s how it’s done. It’s not by the owner because they’re 
dealing with 10,000 head of cattle. The owner can’t personally 
treat every animal at that end of it. So it’s done by the cowboys 
that are working the pens. They’re the ones that are treating the 
animals. So does that mean then, under this law, that they won’t 
be able to treat them animals at that end of it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And that’s also a concern that was raised by some feedlot 
operators because, I mean, you can’t have a vet that runs 
around. They just don’t have the time. There isn’t a vet there. 
And the cost would be . . . And these cowboys do the minor 
treatments. They’re the ones that administer the medicines. 
They’re the ones that treat for foot rot, for various simpler 
things along there that could be . . . You know, this Bill could 
say maybe, no you can’t do that because you don’t own them 
cattle; you’re just working for the owner. 
 
And that also deals with the ranchers. Does that mean that the 
cowboys can’t treat an animal in the PF pasture, that every time 
they run into something that they’re going to have to call a vet? 
And lots of times you can’t find vets. They’re just busy. Out in 
our area, they’re just . . . especially when it comes to calving 
time, at that end of it. 
 
But getting back to working, there’s various things of working 
horses, you know. And it’s just not to Saskatchewan and 
Alberta and different places. I was in Hawaii two years ago, and 
I wanted to see the interior of the country. It’s a beautiful 
country, Hawaii. I was in Oahu. But yet you know, it’s pretty 
mountainous. And I really didn’t want to take a vehicle there; 
you can take an ATV there or some things. 
 
But there’s a ranch just outside Oahu about, oh about half-hour 
drive away, along that. It was started by a whaling captain 

years, years ago. It’s been in the family for generations and 
generations. And it’s a working ranch, but also they turned it 
into a tourist one on the side. And they have, you can rent a 
horse for the day and you can ride the trail. So I did that, Mr. 
Speaker. And basically, that is considered a working horse. 
 
There were people there from the city that probably would 
consider that horse a pet. And they were there that day. But that, 
basically to the owners, that is a working animal because when 
they’re not doing tourists, taking them out, if they’re short 
horses in . . . [inaudible] . . . they grab them to move the cattle 
around. They will use them horses in that end. And also that’s 
an extra set, extra money being brought in from that particular 
ranch or whatever. It’s another source of income around that. 
So that is basically what you would call a working ranch. 
 
Them horses, they probably don’t think they’re working. I mean 
they enjoy being there. I was there that day. They enjoyed . . . 
You know, you could tell when a horse . . . If you’re familiar 
with animals, you can tell when an animal isn’t under stress and 
enjoys doing what it is doing. And they enjoy getting out and 
going along there, the mountain trails. We did a ride up, did a 
ride back. Cattle were spread out over the side there in the 
grassy place. It was very beautiful. But dealing with PETA, that 
is things that they would like to shut down. 
 
There’s also, if you look at outside of Craik, there’s trails in . . . 
same thing. There’s different places that people are setting up 
places where you ride horses for recreation even though it’s a 
source of income for the ranchers on the side. And that is 
worrisome to them, that this may be opening up, may be 
making it harder for them to actually use that as a working 
horse, even though that’s what it’s classed as. For the owner, 
that is a working animal — not a pet — even though it’s treated 
just as good as anybody would treat their cat or their dog and 
that. But it’s still a working animal; it is not a pet. 
 
So to classify it into the pet range is troublesome to a lot of 
people. You show this Bill to a lot of ranchers. And on that 
side, there probably isn’t. But the member from Yorkton, he’s 
got some farmland in that area and he’s got some cattle owners. 
And I think if he showed that to them, I’m pretty sure that they 
would be a little concerned with that end of it, that there isn’t 
many members that do, but there is a few that reach out. 
 
The member from Meadow Lake, that’s a lot of cattle country 
in that area. I think if his producers and ranchers knew about 
this, they’d be a little concerned. I think they would want that 
striked out. They would want this not basically changed 
because basically, I think when you’re doing that, you’re 
opening the door for organizations like PETA. And I mean, you 
have to remember that these people are humanely treating their 
animals. It’s not like they’re not, I mean. 
 
So that’s one of the concerns with that particular Bill at that end 
of it. It also deals with vets at that end of it. And I have nothing 
but respect for vets. Like I said, my area, I wish we had more. 
We’ve only got one that I know of. I can remember lots of 
times needing a vet and phoning and you can’t get one. 
 
And one instance, there was a vet one time. We had a heifer 
calving. And it was 30 below. It had been storming for a day, 
day and a half. I mean, there was roads blocked. It was like 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

midnight when I went out and checked. And so, managed to get 
it in. All I could do was, I couldn’t run it in the open pen where 
the chute was and the head gate. All I could was get it in the 
barn, throw a rope on it, and started to pull the calf. I couldn’t 
get it to come. 
 
You know, I phoned my vet. And he says, can you bring it in, 
which normally I can do most times. I said, you know . . . I look 
at my trailer. It’s buried in a snow bank. It’s 30 below out. I 
don’t think this tractor’s going to start, it’s a diesel. I don’t 
think I’m going to. I know that I’m not going to. There’s a bank 
in front of that barn. I’m not going to be able to back the truck 
and the trailer up and load this animal. And it’s already down. I 
don’t think we’re going to get it. And I said, you know, the only 
other option . . . He says, I’ve worked on ice. I can’t get out. 
 
I could shoot it, you know, because I don’t want to see an 
animal suffer. Nobody wants to see an animal suffer. And he 
says no. He says, I’ll be there. And it was storming, and I said, 
well, I don’t know. The highway’s pretty rough. And he says, 
I’ll be there. He had a four-wheel drive. I haven’t met a vet yet 
that doesn’t have a four-wheel drive, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan because they need one out there. 
 
And he was there. And we worked on it. We worked on that. 
Remember bringing it in there, and it was like 30 below. And so 
we got the calf puller out again and he’s trying. I’m pulling and 
he’s got his hands in there and it’s not coming. And he says, I 
think we’re going to have to perform a Caesarean. And he says, 
you know, he says I don’t do many of these out in a barn almost 
in the middle of nowhere, he says, but I think we’re going to 
have to. And I says okay, I’ll help you any way I can you know. 
I mean that’s dedication. 
 
So we get ready. We get set up. You know we get the animal. 
There’s a drug he gives that kind of sedates it a bit, just so it’s 
not wild because we got to have some movement on it. You 
don’t want to have it choke down. You know we got to shave 
the area where we’re going do the Caesarean. He then puts 
antiseptic on it, and then we start . . . he cuts it. And by this time 
we don’t know if the calf’s alive. We pushed it back. We knew 
when we started it was, but we’ve got to push the calf back, 
back into the cow because we only had basically two feet 
showing and a little bit of the nose. We had to get it back in the 
cow, and then he starts cutting, and you don’t know if the calf’s 
alive. But to make . . . it was a good story. The calf did . . . we 
did get the calf out. 
 
But that’s dedication. He was there in the middle of the night; 
probably didn’t leave there until 3:30. And I’m not the only guy 
that has cattle in trouble out there. I mean I asked him, how 
much sleep do you usually get? And he said in calving, he said 
not much. He said I’m on call basically 24 hours a day. And 
they go 24 hours. They go. When they’re out there, they go 
hard. And I have a lot of respect for my veterinarians. 
 
And I know on this Bill that some of them are a little bit 
concerned with it because I mean they . . . there’s various 
aspects of it. The pet one is that. That’s a big concern to them. 
And also at the end of it I think this also deals with horse 
dentistry, I understand at that end of it. And it also deals with 
. . . 
 

Another thing talking about vets, because there’s times when 
I’ve phoned a vet and he can’t come. I remember the one that’s 
in Lumsden now, phoning her one time and she said, I’m on a 
call. I’ll get there, you know she said. And before that she said, 
I’m already two calls behind. 
 
So I mean I got to phone, there’s always somebody you know in 
the area that can help you. And basically they have to be . . . 
And a lot of them won’t take cash but I mean you got to give 
them something. I mean these guys sometimes travel 30 miles. I 
know some guy that’s very good with animals that basically 
knows how to do a lot of that stuff. And you will . . . You know 
a lot of them won’t take cash but you’ll say listen . . . you know 
other guys have gotten them, and you know just because they 
need to. Nobody wants to see an animal suffer. 
 
Now what’s this going to . . . like this is also a concern to raise. 
Will that affect that, that somebody is helping somebody else 
and maybe only charges for gas. You know I need some gas 
money because I’ve been out doing this quite a bit. Will that 
affect them, you know. And that happens lots out in rural 
Saskatchewan. I mean people, you just help one another. I mean 
you know somebody that’s in trouble. I’ve gone and helped 
neighbours with their cattle. That just the way it is out there in 
rural Saskatchewan at that end of it. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So there is some concerns with this particular Bill. And I know 
that they said they were going to bring some amendments. Well 
let’s look at them first or let’s just pull the Bill off the order 
paper. Why is it coming back all the time? And now why not 
. . . why can’t they show us the amendments, like before it gets 
to committee? You know, when all of a sudden then they are 
saying, well let’s vote on it. Let’s do this, you know, let’s . . . 
You know, they’re pushing it. So we’d like to see the 
amendments so we have time to get them out to my vets and get 
them out to the producers at that end of it. So at that end of it I 
hope they do. 
 
Talking about horse dentistry at that end of it, I understand that 
it is different than veterinary. There is . . . I don’t know in 
Saskatchewan if you can take courses at that particular end of it 
but I know in the States you can. 
 
There was a guy — I didn’t know him that well but a buddy of 
mine knew him — and he was a horse dentist, you know. He 
had taken a course. He wasn’t a vet, but he’d taken a horse . . . 
for dentistry. And I remember him telling the story because that 
his . . . he was joking with him. He says, I need some work 
done on my teeth. Because it was his fault. Or he said to the 
dentist, it’s your fault I’ve got this tooth knocked out, and 
maybe I’ll tell you the story that ties in with this horse dentistry 
and telling a little bit about the horse dentistry’s past. 
 
The story is the buddy, they rodeo a bit down in Texas and this 
is where this horse dentist was. And he’s like most vets, or 
people that are into dentistry, or into owning horses. They have 
cattle on the side, most of them do. Even the vets around here, 
our vet around here, they have animals. They usually like to 
have cattle on the side and animals. And he happened to be 
down there staying with him when he was rodeoing down there 
for a week or two. And one morning he said, well we’re going 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

to move some of my cattle to another pasture and would you 
like to help? He says, yes okay, I’m down here. Yes okay. You 
got an extra horse for me? He says, yes, oh yes, yes. 
 
So they saddle up and it’s early in the morning. Because in 
Texas if you’re going to move cattle, you got to move them in 
the morning. You got to work with them because if you work 
them in the heat of the afternoon, I mean it stresses the animals 
out, it stresses the horses out; you’ve got insects. So any work 
they do with cattle is early in the morning. 
 
So it’s about 5, 5:30 and they’re going to move these particular 
cows to another pasture. And where they’re moving them out 
of, there was a kind of a thicket of trees and buckbrush and a 
kind of a long, little creek and stream. And he says, well do you 
want to go this way? And there’s usually . . . sometimes early in 
the morning there’ll be a few cows, they’ll be laying in the 
shade and that, and just kind of bring them out in the open. And 
we’re moving them up west, he said, towards the direction 
there. 
 
So my buddy, he’s kind of like riding. It’s early in the morning 
and he’s half asleep. And he’s got his, you know, hat kind of 
pulled down a little low and he’s riding the horse. And all of a 
sudden the horse just stops. It just tenses up. And if you’ve ever 
ridden a horse, that means a couple of things. I mean, one, it’s 
hit unfamiliar territory, or it smells another animal. There’s 
danger. It’s alert, eh? So he kind of . . . You know in Texas, I 
mean, that can mean a snake. If you’re in up in the western part, 
the highlands, Texas, or in the mountains, it could be cougars, 
stuff like that. So anyways he kind of perks up, he looks, and 
he’s eyeball-to-eyeball with a possum. Now the possum is like 
he is — it’s half asleep. So the possum kind of like . . . And if 
you’re familiar with possums, they sleep upside down in trees, 
hanging by their tail. So the possum all of a sudden, it wakes 
up; it panics; it drops on the horse and the . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I just want to say to the 
hon. member, while his stories have entertainment value, I 
don’t think they’re closely enough related to the Bill. So I just 
remind the member that we are dealing with The Veterinarians 
Amendment Act and I have been patient with the member, but I 
would ask him to try to draw his remarks to the Act. Thank you. 
 
I recognize the hon. member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, why I tell it like this, this person 
that was a vet is a horse dentistry which also deals with this 
Act. And he talked a little bit things dealing with this Act. 
Anyways, getting back quick, story short, possum . . . The horse 
started bucking, my buddy’s trying to keep the horse from 
bucking, slap the possum off. Anyways he falls off. He hits a 
tree, catches his mouth, knocks a tooth out. So the vet comes 
back — this is horse dentistry — and he said jokingly, he says, 
well, you do horse dentistry. You know. He says, is this 
anything like a real dentist? And he said no, we do take courses. 
It is different than that. It is different, he says. But he’s not a 
vet. 
 
Now under this law then he wouldn’t be able to treat horses. He 
wouldn’t be able to do that any more. He wouldn’t be able to do 
any horse dentistry because he is not a registered vet. Even 
though that’s all he did — he only worked basically on horses’ 

teeth. And you may say in Texas they may not do a lot of that, 
but close to Houston, there’s a lot of money, and there’s a lot of 
people that have horses. 
 
Even around Saskatoon, acreages that look after . . . that is a big 
demand in a lot of the big cities and acreages. They will look 
after their horses to the T. I mean these horses are in 
air-conditioned barns. They are like looked after very well, and 
yes, they have teeth and they will have people that come and 
look at their teeth at that end of it. So under this law, that 
wouldn’t affect him. 
 
Now I haven’t been down there for a long time and I don’t 
know if they’ve actually changed the ruling on it, but I just 
wanted to tell the story of that. Because he made a living on the 
side doing that. That was his living on the side, doing horse 
dentistry. He learned it from his dad and had taken some 
courses. So his dad did in the ’30s and ’40s and basically back 
then they just pulled teeth that were rotten on horses. I mean, 
you know abscess, same as you. I mean, there’s nothing worse 
as a person if you’ve got an abscessed tooth, how much it hurts. 
Well it’s no different on an animal. They feel pain like we do. 
And that means somebody has to be able to do that. Somebody 
has to have that knowledge of taking that tooth out or working 
on that tooth. So there is a place for them. And maybe it’s not a 
huge place, but it is a place. If you care about animals, it is a 
place in society for them. And they did that at that end of it. 
 
And I know . . . I’m sorry about the story but I’m just tying that 
when we deal with legislation, when we deal with legislation, 
we bring forward legislation such as this Bill, it deals with 
people. These aren’t numbers. They’re dealing with people. 
And that’s why sometimes I like to tell a story that relates to a 
particular piece of legislation. Because you bring forth a 
particular piece of legislation, you alter people’s lives. If it’s an 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] Bill, doing a 
driver’s licence, you alter the way you do things. If it’s a Justice 
Bill, you will alter the way they may have to do things, you 
know. 
 
And with this Bill, you may alter the way things happen to a 
certain person’s life. So when you do that you should have full 
knowledge of that and know that how is it going to affect it 
further down the road. You have to look . . . you have to be able 
to . . . When you bring forth legislation, you have to look just 
not how it’s going to deal with today. How is it going to deal 
with six months down the road or a year or two down the road? 
How is it going to affect people? Is it going to put people out of 
business or is it going to cause concerns? 
 
I mean you know if a particular . . . With horse dentistry, I 
mean if these people can’t practise it, I mean yes it will affect 
the way it is done. And there is . . . Horse industry is an 
industry. It’s just not cowboys that use them. I mean, there’s 
riding schools. I come up here to Regina. There’s equestrian. 
And that’s where some of the dentistry is done, on them kind of 
horses because all . . . And show horses. When you do the 
Regina Exhibition, there’s horses are brought in for show. 
 
And part of it is looks. And yes, if you’ve got a swollen jaw on 
a horse you know you don’t want that. If you have maybe a 
tooth that needs to be filed — there’s just not pulling teeth. 
Sometimes on some of them they will file teeth that a horse 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

broke, which they will on certain things — if they’re eating 
something or whatever, just like a human you know — and it 
causes them a bit of pain. They’ll file it down. They look after it 
at that end of it. 
 
And these are people that care about animals. I mean you’ll . . . 
Because that’s one of the things we have to deal with, whether 
it’s vets or whether it’s the horse dentistry or that. The main 
thing is people care about animals. These people all care about 
animals. They all care about their welfare, and any way that 
they can help them you know at that end of it. 
 
And dealing with that end of it, I’ve never had a lot to do with 
horse dentistry. I’ve only talked to the one horse dentistry at 
that end of it. 
 
But another aspect of it is then, where else are you going to stop 
this? There’s also people . . . I’ve got a guy that used to trim 
hoofs. I mean, I know of people that did that. They went 
around. They trimmed hoofs for horses. And that wasn’t a vet, 
but that was separate. And there was always people that did 
that. They came around once a year. If you wanted your hoofs 
trimmed on your horses, they trimmed them. They had the 
tipping cage, you know. They knew what had to be done. But 
yet they weren’t vets. They weren’t vets. You have to remember 
that. They weren’t doing any veterinary work other than, you 
know . . . They weren’t doing any other treating. But they also 
trimmed hoofs. So does that mean then, is that going to be the 
next thing that you will say no, that these people can’t go 
around trimming hoofs, that only vets can do? 
 
Another one is shoeing. I mean, years ago people used to do 
that and there still is. And they’re harder and harder to find, 
them kind of people that’ll shoe horses, but they go around and 
they shoe horses, you know. They trim the hoofs, and some 
horses they still shoe them. And is that going to come further 
down the road, where all of a sudden no, you can’t do that end 
of it? So that worries the people here, where you’re bringing 
forth the legislation . . . 
 
I don’t think there was a problem in the industry when I talked 
to anybody. I’ve talked to vets. Unfortunately I’m probably 
going to be talking to one or two this spring because that means 
I’ve got trouble with a cow or a calf, and I’ve got to talk to 
them at that end. And I’ll be talking this. 
 
But it’s not a problem that’s ever . . . And over the years I’ve 
known a lot of vets, and it’s never been a concern. In the last six 
years, they know I’m an MLA, you know. I’ve talked to them, 
and they said that, you know, it’s never a concern with the vets 
in my area at that end of it. 
 
I know that there was the member from Nutana that said, well 
we’ll send it to all the vets. Well I’ll take it. I’ll take my speech. 
I’ll take Randy’s speech and give them to my vets at that end of 
it because to them this isn’t a problem that needs to be fixed, 
you know. All they want is . . . They’re like us. They want more 
. . . [inaudible] . . . with the shortage of vets in there, at the end 
of it. And that deals with money in the country. 
 
BSE hurt. Right now farming industry is in the toilet. BSE hurt 
the cattle industry. I mean, you try to save as much money as 
you can, you know. And unfortunately that is at any way you 

can, and there’s been less demand for vets. In fact, you know, 
guys have . . . because guys are getting out of the farming 
industry, getting out of the cattle industry . . . BSE, there was 
less cattle being out there. And guys phoning, maybe not 
phoning the vet as much as they should have or could have, you 
know. They would only do if they were just backed in the 
corner with an emergency at that end of it. They would only try 
to phone them only when it was an emergency rather than 
before; guys would phone them for anything, you know, just 
come out and for doing some castration or whatever or to even 
look through the herd. 
 
I can remember guys just bringing a vet out and say, you know, 
let’s spend some time. Let’s go through the herd and take a 
look, maybe do some planning for next year, you know, and 
what I should do at that end of it. But that’s a concern. That’s 
more of a concern to the vets and the producers out there . . . is 
probably that there isn’t the money for them at that end of it. 
And that’s something I think everybody would like to see is 
getting more money into producers’ pockets at that particular 
end of it. 
 
Now this Bill also goes on . . . like, where would it stop? We 
talked about with horses. Well how about cattle someday? 
Talking about hogs, I mean right now there was that miniature 
pig craze, when they had them little miniature pigs, and they 
were sold as pets. So how about if all of a sudden in a few years 
they say well now all hogs will be more considered pets 
because there’s more pet hogs in the world than there are 
actually raised for food. Does that mean that they’re going to 
fall into a different kind of category? 
 
And a guy can think, well here in Saskatchewan that’s not 
going to happen, but you have to remember in parts of the 
country that there probably is more pets for hogs, these 
miniature pets. In fact I just read somewhere that they were 
breeding, crossbreeding pigs and they had these little ones. And 
they were only this small. I remember seeing them. It was only 
in the news about six months ago. They were. Honestly. A 
couple of members are laughing but this is true. It’s true. And 
they were trying to get them a little bigger, and it was basically 
pot-bellied pigs, and they were for the pet industry. That’s how 
they were crossbreeding them at that end of it. So is this going 
to deal with this particular Bill at that end of it? Because this 
particular Bill also could deal with that further end of it. 
 
But anyways, getting back to this particular Bill, I may be 
varying a bit at that end of it, but this is the things that can 
happen further down the road with this industry at that end of it. 
But talking about this particular Bill at that end of it, I think 
them amendments should be brought forward. I think that we 
should be able to see them in advance, so we can show them to 
the vets and the producers at that end of it. I don’t think that’s a 
bad request at that end of it. And in fact I don’t think that’s an 
unreasonable request at that particular end, that it should be 
brought forward at that end of it. And I would urge the 
government to bring in amendments so we can look at them, 
rather than say, well let’s bring it to committee and then trust us 
and then we will try to deal with it there. And by that time, then 
they’re going to say, well there isn’t enough time. 
 
[16:30] 
 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

We want it passed right away. And also in committee, they can 
push stuff through. And so that’s my request to the minister, 
that he would deal with the amendments — bring the 
amendments forward — and basically pull the Bill at that end of 
it. 
 
So with that, I think there’s a couple more speakers that want to 
address this particular Bill, so I will sit down with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I enjoyed the member. His stories were very 
entertaining and interesting and, I thought, did stay on the point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a shortage of large animal vets, and we’re 
trying to address this shortage by putting a Bill that will maybe 
put more money into their hands. I don’t see that happening. 
When you see the vet students that are training, the majority of 
them are training for small animal vets. They have no interest in 
the large animal vet business because there are no dollars in it. 
There is no profit to be made. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I would ask hon. 
members to please give the floor to the hon. member for 
Batoche. And I recognize the hon. member for Batoche. All 
members to just keep the noise volume down please. The 
member for Batoche deserves the right to be heard, and I 
recognize the hon. member for Batoche. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The price is the 
factor. The dollars and cents are what’s causing the situation. 
And making a Bill where the vets would be able to pull more 
things under their umbrella and make more profit is not going to 
help the situation. 
 
For example, my brother-in-law had his dog attacked by 
coyotes or whatever, and he had to take it in for stitches, and it 
was $400 to stitch up his dog. Now 1,000 pound cow at 35 
cents a pound today’s market, that’s 350 bucks. So the price of 
the livestock doesn’t justify a vet. And yes, the producers care 
about their animals, but the bottom line has to be the dollar 
because that’s the business they’re in. So as a result, the 
producer ends up diagnosing with the gun. 
 
We’re hearing now that the price to have a dog neutered is 
$150. Now if this Bill moves into the livestock industry, can 
you imagine the producer that has 500 calves and he has to get 
the vet in, instead of being able to do it himself or bring a 
neighbour in. That’s $75,000. He can’t afford it. The market 
can’t bear it. 
 
As a result the ranchers have become more and more 
self-sufficient. For calving they call in neighbours. Oftentimes 
they call in a neighbour when they can’t get a vet. Due to the 
shortage of vets, it’s hard to get a vet all the time. And like 
some of the other members mentioned the hours that the vets 
are already spending trying to cover a large area, so you call 
neighbours. And they usually end up calling . . . Everyone calls 
the same neighbour because he’s the one with the longest arms 

and probably the most experienced. He’s the one that’s calved 
more cows so that’s the one they call. 
 
And I know of a particular case that the local neighbours have 
called time and time again and not once have they been able to 
call the vet who arrived later and have the vet able to deliver the 
calf if that farmer couldn’t. He had as much practice as the vet 
had. So if he couldn’t get it out, the vet couldn’t, and they had 
to go to a C-section [Caesarean]. 
 
One neighbour becomes better at it and as a result they have to 
give him some restitution of some kind, so they end up paying 
him. And this Bill would make that illegal. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
how do you justify that? He’s helping his neighbours out, and 
he’s putting so much time into it that he’s losing time on his 
own operation, so they’re trying to help him out. 
 
Another example is hoof trimming, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve 
spent a fair deal of time at the veterinary college in Saskatoon. I 
know a lot of the vets there. And I’ve seen producers bring in 
animals for hoof trimming, beef animals. And the vets trimmed 
them, and they don’t have the experience that a lot of the 
professional hoof trimmers that make their living just trimming 
hooves. 
 
So if this Bill starts to move into their jurisdiction, we’ve got 
the same thing there. These guys can actually do a better job of 
hoof trimming. Yes, the vet does a better job of a lot of other 
things. But when it came to this particular animals, the hoof 
trimmers are better at it because they’ve spent their entire life. 
In fact I’ve seen the hoof trimmer come to the vet college and 
he was teaching the vets how to trim feet. So how can you say 
he shouldn’t be licensed and he shouldn’t be working? 
 
Another one is AI work — artificial insemination. There’s 
people that have taken that training course and they make their 
living on the road with the cryogenics tank and they’re doing AI 
work. Well, Mr. Speaker, they are far, far better at it than 
someone who is just doing a little bit of it. That’s full-time work 
for these people and in the States they are licensed and they do 
the travelling and that’s what they do. 
 
Preg testing is another situation. It gets expensive. It’s difficult. 
And if you’ve only got a few animals it doesn’t take much basic 
training for a rancher to do his own preg testing. But there again 
that gentleman with the long arm who is doing the calving, he’s 
probably the one that’s best at it again and he’s the one coming 
around doing the preg testing. 
 
We’re also now . . . when the treatment of animals. You wonder 
about a simple case of mastitis. And to the average rancher, 
farmer, dairyman, whatever, that’s a pretty simple case. And if 
he’s going to have to get a vet in to deal with it, it’s going to be 
time consuming. And when will the vet get there? And it’s a 
simple practice that he can do himself. 
 
A new one now that most ranchers are learning to handle is the 
new treatment of pink eye where you can roll over the eyelid 
and inject up under the eyelid. And with a little practice any 
rancher can do that in no time flat and then they put a patch 
over the eye and turn them out and it’s a new thing. It’s a 
one-time treatment. Whereas it used to be you’d bring the 
animals in once a day, and if you could even twice a day, and 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2006 

you would have to treat that eye to try and keep it from 
spreading. And now with the home remedy system, it’s working 
much better. 
 
So I’m thinking if we had certified training courses for some of 
these people to justify it. I mean most ranchers now, they’ve got 
a stethoscope and they’ve got all different kinds of syringes and 
scalpels and needles and in some cases the vet has worked with 
them and trained them and show them. Okay. 
 
In fact the last member had a story and I won’t go into one but 
I’m just going to . . . a short one, the vet who did a little human 
medicine, went under the influence of alcohol. So it does 
happen the other way, but that’s another story. 
 
Ranchers are homegrown vets out of necessity. Dollars and 
cents have dictated the practice of ranchers doing vet work. 
Some say it’s cruel for ranchers to do their own vet work. Mr. 
Speaker, ranchers care very much about their animals. Rather 
than penalize them, let us train and equip them so they can 
legally do the work. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Why is the hon. 
member for Indian Head-Milestone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — With leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Indian Head-Milestone has asked for leave to introduce a guest. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is agreed. I 
recognize the hon. member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
To you and through you to the rest of the Assembly I’d like to 
introduce someone who is sitting up in the Speaker’s gallery 
and has been following along I think quite intently with the 
debate on the veterinarian Bill — is Don Saelhof, who is a 
constituent in Regina Wascana Plains, has been involved in the 
agriculture industry for many, many years as a consultant. 
 
But the other most interesting point of Don is that he is also a 
candidate in the Saskatchewan Party nomination race for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the seat of Regina Wascana Plains. And 
I know he’s been doing much work and unbelievable . . . The 
amount of support that he and other candidates are finding in 
that constituency is overwhelming, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
sure the membership sales have gone very, very well. Certainly 
there is a large amount of support there and I certainly, from the 
past job that this government has been doing, I can certainly see 
why. 
 
So I’d like all members to welcome Don Saelhof to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
(continued) 

 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
asking them that we train these people and make it legal for 
them to do the work that they’re already doing and they will 
continue to do due to the economy. Profit margins and losses 
are what have forced the situations. Ranchers are like farmers. 
They are the bottom line producers. They cannot pass the 
expenses on to the consumers. They have to absorb the cost 
themselves. 
 
Now if you administer penicillin to an animal and the animal 
goes into shock, which is not so uncommon, the animal dies 
unless a vet administers epinephrine within 15 minutes. Mr. 
Speaker, epinephrine is illegal for a farmer to have but a lot of 
ranchers have epinephrine. Their vets have given it to them 
because without it that animal would die. There is no way the 
vet can get to the rancher’s place in 15 minutes. So the ranchers 
and the veterinarians have found a compromise and I think 
more of these issues have to be looked at a compromise, a way 
of making this work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before a Bill like this is passed, the government 
should have really consulted with ranchers. They did not go to 
the grassroots of the industry. They did not go to the people 
who are paying the bills, to the people who are on the front line. 
Why would you not listen to the people who it affects the most? 
It has a large effect on the group of people who are just starting 
to recover from the BSE crisis. I think you should start at point 
A before you try to introduce a Bill that affects this group of 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also told now that cattle going into the United 
States, we’re looking at . . . they will not accept an animal over 
30 months of age. Well how do they determine the age of this 
animal? They determine the age by a system called mouthing 
the animal. And that entails someone looking into the mouth, 
looking at the growth of the teeth, the shape of the jaw, and 
determining the age of the animal. Now in order to meet 
standards, are we going to have vets doing this or are we going 
to certify some people that have trained and studied and learned 
how to do this and have them at the border doing this? 
 
So this again shows that . . . I mean we’ve got brand inspectors 
doing this kind of work and we could have guys that are doing 
the mouthing. And there are different systems that we can have 
other people doing it. Because cornering the veterinary 
association into being able to push the prices up in order for 
them to survive is not going to help our bottom end producer. 
And that’s key — the bottom end producer. 
 
Many producers are worried about the clause that this Bill will 
require for a vet for the castration of horses and they fear that 
this is a precedent-setting thing. They’re saying it’s a hill to die 
on. They’re worried that first it’s horses, then it could be 



March 23, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

yearling bulls, next hogs, and keep moving in that direction. 
 
We’re concerned because it appears that the minister did not 
consult with these people and who would be most affected by 
this legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Batoche has moved that the debate on The Veterinarians 
Amendment Act, Bill No. 28 be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
Government House Leader that the Assembly do now adjourn. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. This 
House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:45.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Wakefield...................................................................................................................................................................................735 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................736 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................737 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................737 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................737 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................737 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................738 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................738 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................739 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................739 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................739 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................748 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................750 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................764 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Z99 Radiothon 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................739 
 Second Annual Torch Awards 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................739 
 Celebrated Saskatoon Athlete Wins Bronze Medals in Turin 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................740 
 New Democratic Party’s Tactics 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................740 
 Draganfly Innovations 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................740 
 Members’ Comments 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................741 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Financial Accountability 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................741 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................741 
 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................742 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................743 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................744 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Computerized Tomography Scanner in Lloydminster 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................746 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................747 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................747 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................747 
  Hagel (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................748 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................757 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................763 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


