






















































Hansard: November 29, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 21A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 605 
 November 29, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
petitions today to present to the Assembly in regards to dialysis 
availability in Broadview Union Hospital. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement a strategy that will see a 
dialysis unit placed in the Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present today is signed by the good 
folks from the communities of Broadview and Whitewood. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present a 
petition returning to the topic of highway repair in southwest 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this page of petitions is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Maple Creek and Claydon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
rise again today on behalf of people who are concerned about 
Highway No. 49. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington 
and Lintlaw and Preeceville and the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
from Saskatoon, from Lintlaw, from Okla, and from Hazel Dell. 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
several petitions of citizens concerned with the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, again demonstrate how 
well-used this particular corridor is. They are from St. Gregor, 
Viscount, Prud’homme, Wadena, Rose Valley, Carmel, 
Saskatoon, Humboldt, Kelvington, Quill Lake, Fulda; Sylvan 
Lake, Alberta; Vegreville, Alberta; Morden, Manitoba; 
Wainwright, Alberta; and Calgary, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of mine and 
others who are very concerned about the condition of Highway 
18. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan and Alameda. 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today 
to present another petition from the citizens of Biggar 
concerned about possible health care service cuts in their 
community. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue and Biggar and district. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2006 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
once again rise in this House and present a petition on behalf of 
parents across Saskatchewan who for the past seven years have 
been lobbying this government for a dedicated children’s 
hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the constituencies of 
Saskatoon Eastview, Saskatoon Sutherland, and Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s two-tier health system. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from Carnduff. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens calling on this government to maintain the 
Department of Highways section shop in Watrous: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous and Wakaw, Regina, Simpson, and Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present yet another petition requesting an 

allocation of funding for a provincial children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. I will read the prayer for relief, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, 
Osler, and Big River. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have 
petitions to present on behalf of constituents from Carnduff. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions come from the communities of Carievale, 
Carnduff, and Bellegarde. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to join my colleagues to present a petition requesting 
allocation of funding for a provincial children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon. And I’ll read the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people of Saskatoon, 
Vanscoy, and Martensville. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today to 
be able to present a petition on behalf of people of 
Saskatchewan who are very concerned about the future of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all Western Canadian farmers to decide 
the future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 



November 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

government. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned about the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all Western Canadian farmers to decide 
the future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I’m proud to stand in the Assembly today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned with the government’s failure to fund cancer drug, 
specifically Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the city of 
Regina and the town of Balgonie. And I’m happy to present it 
on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are very concerned about the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
continue to actively and strongly support the position that 
it is the right of all Western Canadian farmers to decide 
the future of the Canadian Wheat Board, not the federal 
cabinet. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And because members opposite are so curious, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to note that the . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
Order please. I would . . . Order please. I would like to advise 
the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley that the switching 
system had cut him off before he was able to finish, and I would 
invite him to read the names into the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from Regina, 
rural route 3, Mossbank, Alameda, Hodgeville, Mortlach, 
Mankota, Herbert, Kamsack, Consul, Arcola, Cardross, 
Lestock, Benson, and Tyvan. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. And now I would like to remind 
the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley that during his 
remarks he ought not to engage in debate. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hereby present 
a petition for a private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the Full 
Gospel Bible Institute of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the gist of 
the petition is that the Full Gospel Bible Institute is desirous of 
amending the said Act to change the name of the institute and 
provide for clarification of the definition, roles, and 
appointment of members, trustees, and directors of the institute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the president of the 
college, and I am pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I hereby present a petition for a 
private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the Hotels Association 
of Saskatchewan of which they ask a name change of the 
association to the Saskatchewan Hotel and Hospitality 
Association: 
 

And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

[13:45] 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) are hereby 
read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great pleasure 
today to introduce some students seated in the west gallery. 
These students — their teacher is Brian Marin — they’re from 
Archbishop O’Neill High School in the constituency of Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
I’m delighted to report that I’ll meeting with this group after 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2006 

question period. We’ll have pictures and then an opportunity to 
have an exchange of, presumably, questions from them and 
hopefully answers from me. I’m sure we have some orange fruit 
drinks lined up as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the Assembly to welcome 
this fine group from Archbishop O’Neill. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce five 
constituents of mine in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re here 
representing the Southwest drought disaster committee. And we 
have Eileen Davidson, Vern Davidson, Orin Balas, Laurent 
Thibault, and Doug Davidson. 
 
They’re here to watch the proceedings today, Mr. Speaker, and 
hopefully there’s some answers that come from the 
proceedings. And I would like to ask all members to please 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also 
like to welcome those who are here from the Southwest drought 
committee. I had opportunity to meet with them some time ago. 
But I also want to particularly congratulate the Davidsons for 
their excellent showing at Agribition with their cattle this year 
and welcome them and ask all members to welcome them and 
congratulate them today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, four individuals seated in the western gallery. 
If they could please rise as I call their name. They are Brian 
Seidlik, Brian Novak, Scott Zepick, and Kirby Benning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are four members of the Saskatchewan 
Professional Fire Fighters Association. Kirby is the 
vice-president of said association. They’re in the Chamber 
today as part of the after work, I guess, of their very informative 
and interesting lobby. Certainly it’s an event that is always 
looked forward to on the legislative calendar each year, and this 
year was no exception. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to join me in thanking these 
members for the work they do in terms of serving and 
protecting the people of Saskatchewan, and to welcome them to 
their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, I would like to extend a warm welcome to our 
firefighter friends as well and join the minister and invite 
members to extend another warm welcome to those who 
represent us and protect us through the firefighters’ services. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the member for 
Coronation Park in welcoming the students from O’Neill High 
School here today. It was the high school that I attended. And 
you’ve picked the right high school; it’s the best one in the city. 
So congratulations and welcome to the Chamber today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Definition of Community Support 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have some sad news and some good news for 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
I have a constituent, Mr. Speaker, who suffers from melanoma 
and did manage to make it into Regina to have his cancer 
operation. But, Mr. Speaker, this person is not employed, and 
there is a cost associated with staying in Regina at the cancer 
clinic, and he was struggling with this and was having 
difficulty. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when one of his former employers found out 
about this, they volunteered to pay for his costs to stay in 
Regina here, including his transportation to Regina and back. 
You know, listening to some of the members and their 
supporters talk about greedy corporate hucksters, here’s an 
example, Mr. Speaker, of someone, an entrepreneur who takes 
his community service personally and commits himself and his 
financial resources to aid those that are not able to help 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Fast Trucking from Carnduff, Tony and Vi Day, Dennis and 
Linda Day are very community concerned, very conscious. And 
this person was a past employee of theirs, and provided for that 
gentleman even though they had no reason to do so other than 
the fact that they knew him. That’s community support, Mr. 
Speaker. Congratulations to Fast Trucking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 



November 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

Judge Appointed as British Columbia’s 
Representative of Children and Youth 

 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to announce 
that Saskatchewan Provincial Court Judge Mary Ellen 
Turpel-Lafond has been appointed to act as British Columbia’s 
representative of child and youth. 
 
In her new position, Judge Turpel-Lafond will review, 
investigate, and report on the critical injuries and deaths of 
children in the child welfare system in British Columbia. She 
will also collaborate in research to improve services and address 
the needs of children and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Judge Turpel-Lafond is a distinguished academic. 
She holds a B.A. [Bachelor of Arts], a Bachelor of Law, and 
Master of Law degrees, plus a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in 
law from Harvard University. As a member of the Muskeg Lake 
Cree Nation, Mr. Speaker, she became the first First Nations 
person appointed as judge in the history of Saskatchewan. 
Before appointment to the bench, Judge Turpel-Lafond 
practised law in Nova Scotia and Saskatchewan, representing 
both First Nation individuals and organizations. 
 
She has said that she believes the future of our country will be 
built through the involvement of First Nations in all facets of 
Canadian society as equals and with recognition of this distinct 
heritage and rights of all peoples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of our government, I would like to 
congratulate Judge Turpel-Lafond on her appointment and wish 
her the best in her new position. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 

 
LeRoy Resident Recognized for Great Volunteerism 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon to pay special tribute to Bev Thoen, award winner of 
the SaskEnergy Recreation Award of Merit. 
 
Bev was born in LeRoy and raised on a farm south of Romance. 
She received her education in LeRoy and participated in almost 
all school activities. After graduating high school, she attended 
St. Peter’s College for office education. She married in 1977, 
and her and her husband began their life together as residents of 
LeRoy. 
 
As her children grew, Bev was involved in almost every aspect 
of her community. To list a few, it didn’t matter if it was 
skating or dance costumes to be sewn, music to be played, 
snacks for the hockey team, snacks for the volleyball team, 
helping with babysitting courses, or family Christmas. She’s 
always made herself available on the executive of the curling 
rink, the memorial rink, school of dance, recreation board, and 
skating club. 
 
She’s the organizer of the Terry Fox Run for nine years and 
raised money for cancer research, has been involved in the 
LeRoy leisure lotto. She’s involved in the planning of dinner 
theatres at her school. She’s been involved in skating 

competitions, winter games, and Sask open skating 
competitions since the 1990s. She’s been involved with the 
Saskatchewan Winter Games, Saskatchewan co-op youth 
parliament in Candle Lake, the LeRoy enhanced school project. 
She’s organized inheritance days and has been involved in 
almost every aspect of her community — too many to mention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to recognize Bev Thoen and ask 
all members to recognize her great volunteerism in the 
community of LeRoy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Improved Road Access for Big River First Nation 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
November 16 I had the pleasure of attending the signing of an 
historic partnership agreement between Big River First Nation, 
the RM [rural municipality] of Canwood, and the province to 
pave Cyr Road, the 11-kilometre road into Big River First 
Nation and improve access for the 2,200 residents who live 
there. 
 
Saskatchewan will fund the project, and the RM will administer 
the road building contract on behalf of the province and, Mr. 
Speaker, work has already begun. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
province and First Nation have signed an MOU [memorandum 
of understanding] to seek federal funding to pave the remaining 
8.5 kilometres of gravel road into the heart of the First Nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this partnership to pave Cyr Road will result in 
greater economic development and tourism opportunities, as 
well as easier access for ambulance and health care services, 
and it will allow all residents to play a bigger role in the social 
and economic life of this province. Mr. Speaker, we believe that 
all citizens of Saskatchewan deserve safe and reliable access to 
vital services. By improving roads leading into First Nations 
communities, Mr. Speaker, we’re making life better for children 
and families while paving a brighter future for our young 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Chief Bruce Morin and the 
Council of Big River First Nation, and Reeve Richard Porter 
and the RM Council of Canwood for their hard work and 
leadership in making this historic agreement possible. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Record of a Meeting 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his famous book 
Nineteen Eighty-Four, George Orwell explained the meaning of 
the word doublethink. He said it is the power of holding two 
contradictory beliefs in one’s mind simultaneously and 
accepting both of them. 
 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2006 

This week, the Minister of Community Resources took the 
concept of doublethink to a new and never before imagined 
height. For weeks, the opposition has been asking for any 
minutes or notes taken at meetings between the minister and 
members of the Oyate Board. All have been provided save for 
two meetings — one in March, the other in May. 
 
Two weeks ago, the minister rose in the Assembly and said: 
“. . . the minutes of that meeting are mystical, Mr. Speaker, 
because there was no meeting.” When questioned again, the 
minister said: 
 

. . . this has got to be one of the worst critics I’ve [ever] 
met in my entire life, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t get it at all 
. . . So I’ll say [it] again: there was no meeting at all . . . 

 
The deputy minister however promised to search for any record 
of a meeting. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? He discovered 
there was a meeting between the minister and some of the 
Oyate Board, and he found there was a record of that meeting. 
 
However there is more. This minister placed his senior 
bureaucrat, his partner in developing and delivering assistance 
to the neediest people in Saskatchewan, in the most 
uncomfortable situation. The poor man was instructed to tell the 
Public Accounts Committee that yes, there was a meeting even 
though the minister denied there was a meeting and yes, there 
are notes taken at that meeting. 
 
But here’s the kicker, Mr. Speaker, the poor man was instructed 
to say that he couldn’t release the nonexistent minutes for the 
nonexistent meeting because the minister told him not to. Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the House we say shame on the 
minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Policy Development 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Last week something kind of funny 
happened to the Leader of the Opposition on his way to a 
scrum. He had to stop for a minute to make up some party 
policy. 
 
Let’s review. On Thursday of last week the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena noted the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
accepted end-prohibition-of-marijuana advertising in one of our 
party’s publications. However as the Minister of Healthy Living 
Services pointed out in his scrum, the Saskatchewan Party took 
a $10,000 donation from Imperial Tobacco. The member from 
Kelvington-Wadena was struck by this fact, and she tried to tell 
us that this all changed back in 2003 when they had their old 
leader and their old policies and now, according to her, 
everything is different. 
 
But the problem is that they were still accepting tobacco money 
in 2005. So the question was asked of the Leader of the 
Opposition, when did this policy change? And he told us it 
happened when he found out about the $10,000 donation, but he 
admitted he only found out about that donation when the 

Minister of Healthy Living Services pointed it out to him. 
 
So let’s review. So basically in between the time of our 
minister’s scrum and time the Leader of the Opposition’s 
scrum, he just made up that policy. No messy democracy for 
that party. No consultation with their party members. No voter 
discussion of their party executive. Just leader’s fiat, Mr. 
Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition’s way or the highway. 
No wonder they oppose the right of farmers to vote on the fate 
of the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. They’ve forgotten 
what democracy looks like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

New Democratic Party Leadership 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, a few weeks ago a number of the members opposite, 
such as the Minister of Highways and the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, were leading a movement to dump 
their leader and bring back Dwain Lingenfelter to replace him. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it turns out there’s two problems with 
Dwain Lingenfelter leading the NDP Saskatchewan. Number 
one, he doesn’t live in Saskatchewan. Number two, apparently 
he’s not even an NDP. According to a caller on the Dave 
Rutherford show on CJQR radio in Calgary, Dwain 
Lingenfelter is now actively working for Jim Dinning in his bid 
to become leader of the Alberta Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it must be looking pretty bad for the NDP these 
days when so many of their own members think the best person 
to lead the Saskatchewan NDP [New Democratic Party] is an 
Alberta Conservative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Support for Farmers in Southwest Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a group in your gallery who have come to their 
legislature today to seek fairness. This group is from the 
southwest disaster assistance committee, and I had introduced 
them earlier. They have come here today expecting to have their 
case heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the drought in the Southwest is real and 
significant. For most of this year and last there has not been a 
decent rain. Can the minister please tell these people here today 
why he will not recognize the southwest drought and declare 
the area an emergency. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 



November 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have clearly recognized the drought and extra damage that 
there is in the Southwest. I have met with the group, the 
southwest drought group. And we have also pursued with the 
federal government what potential avenues there might be to be 
able to provide support for these folks in the Southwest. And 
certainly they’re facing issues, from drought to a large 
infestation of gophers. And we are pursuing support on a 
number of fronts. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister has 
recognized that there’s a drought in the Southwest, and he 
believes the farmers and ranchers in the Southwest, why will he 
not move ahead on this file himself? Why doesn’t he let the 
farmers and ranchers meet with the farm support review 
committee? This way the southwest drought disaster committee 
can at least have a vehicle for their concerns to be heard. And 
also this way maybe some solutions will surface on how to 
handle the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister set up a meeting between the 
southwest drought disaster committee and the farm support 
review committee? Will he commit to that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to that 
is no, I will not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have met personally with the drought group, and 
we have heard clearly from them what the issues are. I have 
also met with the farm support review committee and talked to 
them about this situation. 
 
There are also a number of avenues, which the members 
opposite should know about, for speaking to the farm support 
review committee, and those have been used through members 
on the farm support review committee from SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and from 
APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 
and also just the farmer representatives. So it’s received 
thorough discussion there. And in the meantime we have been 
moving ahead on a number of fronts. One of them is in 
relationship with crop insurance. We have also been pressing on 
issues of trying to get support for further work around the 
Canada-Saskatchewan water programs. Thanks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this spring farmers in 

the Northeast were devastated by flooding. That was declared 
an emergency. Mr. Speaker, the group here today are seeking 
the same status. All they want is to be treated fairly. It was the 
farm support review committee that recommended a payment to 
be made to farmers in the Northeast for flooding. Why hasn’t 
the same committee heard the concerns of the farmers and 
ranchers in the Southwest? Can the minister please tell the 
people here today why that is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, as I just finished 
indicating, the case of the southwest drought situation was 
presented to the farm support review committee. We have 
talked about that. And as I’ve also indicated we have been, as a 
department and a government, moving forward on this front to 
see what levels of support we can get. 
 
One of the things that is coming forward as well is the disaster 
program, the federal disaster program which though, at first 
indication, looking at the framework this fall, does not look like 
it would apply as fully as we had hoped. I have asked the 
federal minister if we can use this situation in the Southwest as 
a pilot project, and in that we would be able to analyze whether 
or not it’s going to be effective as a disaster program and 
provide the support that’s needed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are 19 RMs in 
the Southwest who have declared themselves an emergency due 
to the drought. These farmers and ranchers have come here 
today hoping to have their questions answered. These farmers 
want to know if the minister will treat them fairly and treat the 
drought with as much concern as he did with the floods. 
 
Will the minister do the right thing and treat these farmers and 
ranchers with respect? Will he give these farmers and ranchers 
some answers on how to handle a disaster in the Southwest? 
Who best, who best to talk to the review committee, than the 
people that are being affected? Will the minister reconsider and 
have this drought committee meet with the farm review support 
committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’ve already answered that question, 
Mr. Speaker. And so I want to also point out that as we move 
forward on this it has been very clear in our discussions with 
the federal government that they are no longer interested in any 
kind of ad hoc programs. They are working to build program 
with us, working to build program that will help through all 
kinds of circumstances, whether it be disaster, whether it be a 
drop in income, whether it be an item that is needful of very 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2006 

good crop insurance. We’re trying to develop program that will 
work across the board. 
 
At this point clearly they have said there is no ad hoc program. 
And I would like also to be very clear in noting that the 
members opposite have also said on numerous occasions, they 
recognize clearly farms are private businesses. And including 
the leader opposite, Mr. Speaker, they have made very clear that 
they don’t think direct investment in private businesses is the 
way to go. 
 
They have also made clear, Mr. Speaker, they have also made 
clear, as the member from Melville-Saltcoats said when asked 
should the government step in and help every time there are 
weather-related production problems, he said, I quote, “No, I 
don’t think . . .” 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Poverty and Food Bank Usage 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in 1991 this NDP government 
promised to eliminate the need for food banks in Saskatchewan. 
Also in 1991, the NDP government promised to work to end 
child poverty in Saskatchewan. Yesterday the Canadian 
Association of Food Banks released its 2006 hunger count. 
 
Nationally the number of people using food banks is dropping, 
yet here in Saskatchewan, where this government is 
experiencing unprecedented prosperity, the increase in food 
bank usage is the second highest in Canada. Per capita food 
bank usage in Saskatchewan was the fourth highest in the 
nation. Mr. Speaker, why has this NDP government failed to 
deliver on its 1991 election promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what is really important is 
that this province and this government knows that we have to 
work very careful and very clearly to meet some of the 
objectives of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, any increase in use of food banks is 
something that many provinces do not accept. And it’s not 
acceptable as well, Mr. Speaker. What is important is that we 
have put a plan forward, Mr. Speaker, to reduce poverty. This 
government is leading that particular file, Mr. Speaker. It is not 
uncommon for many jurisdictions to come to Saskatchewan to 
see how we are doing, Mr. Speaker. We are a model. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, that being said, what is important, 
does that mean we have more work that needs to be done, Mr. 
Speaker? We fully acknowledge that. So again I’d point out that 
there’s been good progress made. More progress will be made. 
And every time, Mr. Speaker, we have an increase in minimum 

wage, every time we have support for certain groups, they vote 
against that, Mr. Speaker. Every time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what’s really important to 
members on this side of the House is the children in 
Saskatchewan are hungry. Mr. Speaker, in 2006 the hunger 
count contains another alarming statistic. Despite the NDP’s 
promise to work to end child poverty, the number of children 
who are food bank clients continues to increase. Saskatchewan 
has the second highest rate of children as clients at food banks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this NDP government again failed 
children in Saskatchewan? Why have they failed to live up to 
the 1991 commitment to work toward ending child poverty in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister of 
community services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that is why the people of 
Saskatchewan do not trust the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. The reason why they don’t trust them, Mr. Speaker, is 
they say one thing outside the Assembly and they vote against 
the budget that really increases some of the support mechanisms 
that this government has put in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let us go down that list, Mr. Speaker. Minimum wage that 
helps families. They voted against that, Mr. Speaker. Their 
taxation policy that they have for lower income actually hurts 
the lower-income people, Mr. Speaker. Housing, they vote 
against every budget that we have to increase housing, Mr. 
Speaker. Health benefits, the child care program that their 
federal cousins cut, not a peep from them, Mr. Speaker. Talk 
about literacy, Mr. Speaker. Not a peep from them when their 
federal government cuts literacy programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out every time, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan and 
we want to increase benefits, they vote against that budget. So I 
would say, park your crocodile tears. People know what you’re 
up to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter how much the 
minister stands up and screams about what they think we should 
be doing or what they have done, there is a fact here. And that 
is the number of people using the food bank is increasing in this 
province under this NDP government regardless of what he 
says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2006 hunger count shows Saskatchewan has 
the highest percentage of food bank clients with social 
assistance as their primary source of income. That’s their 



November 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Wayne Hellquist is the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Regina and District Food Bank. He says, despite an increase in 
support, demand for services at the food bank remains very 
high. Mr. Hellquist says some of this demand is driven by 
problems in the rural economy, which we have all talked about 
in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government continuing to force 
the poorest of the poor people in Saskatchewan to use food 
banks more and more often? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister of 
community services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government will 
stand with the poor of the poorest, Mr. Speaker. We will stand 
to make sure that we stand up and we vote to make sure that the 
people that have low income and the least advantaged in this 
province, that this government will support them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will point out that from 1994 to 1995, if you take, Mr. 
Speaker, after-tax income into account, our province of 
Saskatchewan has seen a decrease in poverty from 14.1 to 10.1, 
Mr. Speaker, under this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And 10.1 is still too high. We’re going to continue moving, and 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we have done everything from 
increased social assistance rate, the highest in many years last 
year. Not only are we helping with lower bus passes, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve announced PST [provincial sales tax] cuts and 
we’ve had a rental supplement and employment supplement and 
the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. We are going to help the poor 
people. That’s the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — None of the children that are waiting for food 
at the food bank feel any better because of the stats that that 
minister just quoted. 
 
This is a quote that we found that was stated in this Assembly 
on June 7, 1988. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . I think of the hundreds of families that have turned to 
food banks in this province. Are they a priority of [this] 
government? No, they are forgotten by this government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, do you know who made this quote? The person 
who made this quote is the Premier, and that quote was made 18 
years ago in this very Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Why has this 
NDP government forgotten about children and families that are 
poor, for 18 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the minister of 

community services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is really odd coming 
from that party, Mr. Speaker, that last election they proposed a 
$50 million cut to social services, Mr. Speaker — $50 million 
cut — and they can’t deny it, Mr. Speaker. They can’t deny it. 
And that member stood up right next to her leader at that time 
and saying, we support it. So my question to her is, where are 
you going to rip out $50 million from social services? Which 
groups are going to suffer, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And most recently now they said, we’re going to make sure that 
the people that get the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. The minister of 
community services. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d point 
out, Mr. Speaker, their most recent position is now, well we’re 
going to make sure that the people that deserve the money get 
it. So who are they going to cut out, Mr. Speaker? Who are they 
going to decide who gets help and who doesn’t get help, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
On this side of the Assembly it’s very important to note that we 
are building independence. And there’s always improvements 
made. We continue to work very hard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Teacher Staffing and School Closures 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in 
question period I asked the Minister of Learning about the 
approximate number of schools she expects will close in the 
coming year after the government-imposed moratorium is lifted 
at the end of this year. In addition to failing to answer the 
question, the minister accused me of providing factually 
incorrect information. She quoted an MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] report that I wrote earlier this year. In it I 
said that, quote, teachers have been left behind as the NDP’s 
underfunding of education will result in at least 150 teacher 
cuts. Can the minister explain how this statement was 
inaccurate? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there was not 150 teacher 
cuts. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well once again the minister shows her 
ability to make inaccurate assessments of information that she 
should have. I agree that the statement was indeed inaccurate 
but not for the reason that the minister noted. In fact, in fact 
there weren’t 150 teacher cuts. According to the media reports 
today there were 204 teacher cuts. And according to . . . The 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2006 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Bulletin says that there 
were 260 teacher cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers are accurate. Which number will 
the minister accept responsibility for and accept that she’s 
blatantly wrong in her statement? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last spring in this House the members from the 
opposition got up day after day and talked about at least 150 
teachers being cut and why were we doing this to the education 
system in Saskatchewan. I said then to the members opposite, 
please wait. Don’t be using scare tactics. Wait until the school 
divisions have had a look at what changes would be made. The 
school divisions took great care to manage vacancies, there was 
retirements in the system, and there was nowhere near a loss of 
150 teachers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition indeed 
waited and instead of things getting better from the estimates I 
had of 150 positions being lost, they went up to 260, Mr. 
Speaker. And that begs the original question and an answer that 
the minister never provided yesterday and hasn’t provided 
today. The question was, how many further positions are going 
to be lost? How many schools are going to be lost? How many 
classrooms are going to be closed as a result of the decreased 
enrolment and the government-imposed moratorium that 
expires on January 1 of next year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is typical of the 
opposition: scare tactics; we’re losing teachers, losing teachers, 
losing teachers. Now the member gets up and talks about losing 
positions. There’s a big difference, Mr. Speaker, and the 
members opposite know that and people within the system 
know that. 
 
The members on the school boards across this province have 
managed vacancies. They have looked at retirements. And there 
was 227 positions that were managed through retirements and 
vacancies — not positions, not teaching positions or teachers. It 
was vacant positions and through retirement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
Order please. Order. Order. The member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well once again, 
the minister fails to understand the impact of these decisions on 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also asked the minister yesterday if she would 
make the commitment, at the request of the teachers of this 

province, that they be intimately involved in any discussions 
involved with the closure of schools and the decreasing of 
teaching positions. She failed to make that commitment. 
 
We’ve asked that communities be involved in any of these 
decisions involving the future of the schools and the education 
of their children in their communities. And she failed to give 
that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this minister will not indicate how many schools 
she expects to be closed in the new year as a result of the lifting 
of the moratorium, will she at least commit to the fact that 
parents and teachers and communities are going to be intimately 
involved in the discussions about the future of their schools? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, now the member said 
it’s nothing to smile about. Now we all know that that member 
sat on a school board for many years and was a member. And, 
Mr. Speaker, now he has the nerve to stand up and say, you 
should put in this, this, and this rules and the Government of 
Saskatchewan should be responsible for the decisions that are 
made at the school board level. He would’ve flipped through 
the roof if I’d tried to do that when he was on the school board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this government has always 
believed in shared responsibility with the school divisions. The 
school divisions are elected locally. They understand the 
communities that they represent, and they are quite capable of 
making the decisions that affect their school division. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Coyote Depredation in Saskatoon Southeast 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to raise an issue in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. Ruth Baker manages a 
large herd of cattle which is being preyed upon by coyotes. The 
problem is so severe that she has lost more than 100 animals to 
date. Last week alone, five calves fell prey to coyotes. Mr. 
Speaker, what does the minister plan to do to resolve this 
problem? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a 
couple of ways that I can respond to this. One is that the 
member opposite does have an expert on coyotes, cougars, and 
wolves in his caucus, and if he would talk to the member for 
Rosthern Spiritwood, he would give him lots of advice on how 
the procedures work. 
 
But practically, what we have in a number of different aspects, 
the initial response for coyotes and predator control is through 
the Sheep Development Board. They have specialists who work 



November 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

on this particular area, and I encourage the member opposite to 
have his constituent contact them. I know that the member 
opposite from Rosthern Spiritwood would be of great 
assistance, and I will assist him as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mrs. Baker did exactly that. In a letter sent by 
the Minister of Agriculture to Mrs. Baker, he says, “To learn 
more about these management practices [concerning, regarding 
coyotes] see enclosed publications.” And what she got, Mr. 
Speaker, was a booklet from the province of Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, aside from the obvious fact that this booklet is 
from a different province, many suggestions in this book do not 
even meet with Saskatchewan rules. For example, the Alberta 
booklet has an entire chapter telling farmers and ranchers how 
to poison coyotes. In the Agriculture minister’s letter he said, 
“As mentioned in my previous letter of June 22, 2006, only 
Conservation Officers have the authority to poison coyotes and 
this option is used only as a final resort.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister please explain what Mrs. Baker 
should do. Should she follow the recommendations in the 
Alberta booklet, or should she listen to the Minister of 
Agriculture? Can the minister please explain this? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a typical 
question period exchange. I answered the question that he asks 
the second time already in the first question. So I guess I’ll just 
have to repeat it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have methods of dealing with predators in 
Saskatchewan. The member from Rosthern Spiritwood and I 
met with a number of his constituents around this very 
particular issue. We responded in that area with a very I think 
innovative way to deal with predators. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
the member opposite should have his constituent do is work 
with the Sheep Development Board and their specialists on 
predators there, and we can respond. But, Mr. Speaker, there are 
different issues in different parts of the province. And we have 
methods of responding, and we will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mrs. Baker has already had two visits from 
conservation officers to try and solve the problem. She still 
continues to lose cattle to coyotes. She has lost over 100 cattle 
to date. Mr. Speaker, this is an indication of how out of touch 
this NDP government is with the ag sector of this province. 
They sit over . . . They make light of it. This is a humorous 
thing. It’s not a humorous thing to Mrs. Baker. This is the type 
of thing that bankrupts farmers in our province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: what is Mrs. Baker to 
do with her business? Is she to follow the Alberta 
recommendations or is she to try and work with the minister 
who is doing absolutely nothing to deal with what to her is a 
very serious problem? Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think when the member 
who’s asked this question had his seatmate as his research 
person, they had some better questions. And so I think that in 
this particular situation the member has asked the same question 
three times. I responded the first time by saying that we do have 
predator control methods that are very clear in the province. 
They work through the Sheep Development Board. They also 
work with the Sask Environment people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is allow these professionals to 
do their job. I know that some of the members opposite don’t 
like working with civil servants but, Mr. Speaker, we rely on 
them because they do a very good job for all of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister for CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] and First 
Nations and Métis Relations. 
 

Lowest Cost Bundle of Utility Rates in Canada 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am so pleased to be able to rise today to announce that our 
government has once again provided Saskatchewan families 
with the lowest cost bundle of basic utility rates in all of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the third year in a row, we have beaten out our neighbours 
in all other provinces by providing the lowest cost for a bundle 
that includes home electricity and natural gas, basic phone 
services, and auto insurance. Mr. Speaker, this is just one of the 
many reasons why Saskatchewan is a great place to live, to 
work, and to raise a family. 
 
Our total bundle costs for 2006 is projected to be $3,418. That’s 
about $35 lower than Manitoba’s cost, Mr. Speaker, and — get 
this — a whopping $1,080 lower than Alberta’s costs. I am also 
pleased to say that we have kept the commitment this year 
without needing to provide a year-end utility rebate as we did in 
2004 or to subsidize rates as we did last year with the 
SaskEnergy rates. 
 
We kept the commitment, Mr. Speaker, this year because the 
Crowns managed their rates very well. I commend officials in 
SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance], and SaskTel for those efforts. 
 
While having the lowest cost bundle of rates in the country, our 
Crowns also continued to provide safe, reliable, high-quality 
products and services to all Saskatchewan people in 2006. And 
that will make . . . And they will, I should say, make profits 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2006 

again this year which the province will in part reinvest in health 
care, education, and other important public services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Premier made the bundle commitment in 
2003, he said achieving it would be a key performance 
measurement for our Crown corporations. Our Crowns have 
achieved that goal for the third year in a row, and Saskatchewan 
families have once again enjoyed those benefits. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like 
to join today with the minister in commending the employees of 
our Crown corporations — SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI, and 
SaskTel — for the great and very critical job that they do 
particularly on a day such as today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we should all have an extra acute 
appreciation of the reliable service that we get from SaskPower 
and SaskEnergy because we’re going to need that service for a 
few months when we live in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that the minister can stand in his place 
today and announce that a rebate is not necessary this year says 
far more about the managers and the management of our Crown 
corporations than it does about the Premier and his government. 
At least with the Crown corporations in control, fulfilling one of 
the Premier’s election promises, at least this will be one of the 
few promises that have to date been kept. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I 
table responses to written questions no. 156 through 197. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 156 to 197 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the Government House Leader state 
his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a long-standing 
principle in the conduct of the members of the House that 
members are not allowed to do from their seats what they’re not 
permitted to do on the record while on their feet. And during the 

question period, Mr. Speaker, in the exchange directed to the 
Minister of the Environment in response to one of the questions, 
the minister referred to members on the opposite side having 
expertise regarding . . . was it cougars and wolves, and 
something, anyhow. Okay. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is this, is that the hon. member 
for Kindersley from his chair uttered a remark that several in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, found personally offensive. The 
phrase that he used was this: you have all the cougars over 
there, pointing, in the opinion of members, female members of 
our caucus, Mr. Speaker, in ways that were . . . It was received 
and considered to be disrespectful. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
simply ask that the hon. member for Kindersley be asked to 
withdraw the remark and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during the exchange, I didn’t 
hear the comment made by the member from Kindersley, if in 
fact a comment was made. But what I did hear was the Minister 
of the Environment making comments talking about wild 
animals and making reference that they were attributed to 
members on this side of the House. And I think that’s what — if 
you will examine Hansard — was the comment made by the 
minister referring to members on this side of the House as either 
coyotes or something else. And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that 
you examine Hansard . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member ought to deal with the 
point of order that’s at hand. He’s raising actually a second 
point of order. But before it goes any further, I think I would 
just like to deal with this matter raised by the Government 
House Leader. 
 
It has been a long-standing practice that any name-calling of 
any type is not allowed in the Assembly in this . . . But this did 
not go on record. I was not able to hear the remark, so I was not 
able to call it. But I will provide the opportunity, if the member 
from Kindersley feels he wishes to stand up and apologize for 
this remark, I would ask him to take this opportunity to do it, 
and let’s leave it at that. The member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to take this opportunity to apologize, and if I have 
offended anyone, to apologize, and to this House. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his voluntary 
response. The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
now, in order to accommodate the good work of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies as well as the 
Standing Committee on the Economy, move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



November 29, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10:00 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:33.] 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................606 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................606 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................606 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................606 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................606 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................606 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................606 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................607 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................607 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................607 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................607 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................607 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................607 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................607 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................608 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................608 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................608 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................608 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................608 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Definition of Community Support 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................608 
 Judge Appointed as British Columbia’s Representative of Children and Youth 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................609 
 LeRoy Resident Recognized for Great Volunteerism 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................609 
 Improved Road Access for Big River First Nation 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................609 
 Record of a Meeting 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................609 
 Policy Development 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................610 
 New Democratic Party Leadership 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................610 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Support for Farmers in Southwest Saskatchewan 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................610 
  Wartman....................................................................................................................................................................................611 
 Poverty and Food Bank Usage 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................612 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................612 
 Teacher Staffing and School Closures 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................613 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................613 
 Coyote Depredation in Saskatoon Southeast 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................614 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................614 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Lowest Cost Bundle of Utility Rates in Canada 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................615 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................616 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................616 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................616 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
  Hagel (point of order) ...............................................................................................................................................................616 
  Morgan (point of order) ...........................................................................................................................................................616 
  The Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................616 
  Dearborn (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................616 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


