


















































Hansard: May 18, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 63A  THURSDAY, MAY 18, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1719 
 May 18, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present to the Assembly today regarding autism. And 
I read the prayer, or part of the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendation made February 25 by the Government of 
Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to the 
Saskatchewan Minister of Health, the Hon. John Nilson. 
The presentation from Saskatchewan families for effective 
autism treatment concerned issues surrounding the support 
of autistic children and adults that need review, one in 
particular being the availability of behavioural therapists. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer continues, goes on to list a 
number of other areas that need to be addressed. And so on 
behalf of these petitioners, I present. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The petition is signed by people from the communities of 
Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition. There seems to be a growing concern among the 
residents of Saskatchewan regarding the lack of autism 
spectrum disorder capacity. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendations made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services to 
the Saskatchewan Minister of Health. 
 

The prayer goes on to read: 
 
Of some of the things desired, a coordination among the 
departments of Health, Learning, and Community 
Resources and Employment with input from stakeholders 
to formulate a provincial comprehensive autism spectrum 
disorder treatment program. 
 

An additional point: 
 
To increase the early diagnosis of children with ASD and 
to have respite and family support accessible based on 
need. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this three-page petition is signed by individuals 
from communities around the entire province but most 
specifically by two individuals from the community of 
Shaunavon who have first-hand knowledge of autism related to 
their families. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of citizens of the province regarding the 
drug Avastin and the fact that this NDP [New Democratic 
Party] government is not funding Avastin, which puts us 
squarely into a two-tier medical system. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads as follows, the prayer says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to fully fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that believe that we’re in two tiered 
health care right now in Saskatchewan on this petition are 
signed from the people from Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise on behalf of people in the Tisdale area who are 
concerned about the cutback in services in their area. They no 
longer have surgeries being done in Tisdale and that’s added 
another 100 surgeries to the waiting list. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that surgical services are 
reinstated in the Tisdale Hospital. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Tisdale, from 
Ridgedale, from Sylvania, from Porcupine Plain, Crooked 
River, Zenon Park, Bjorkdale, Archerwill, Martensville, Swift 
Current, and Yorkton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition. This one is signed by people who are trying to survive 
the harrowing drive down Highway 5. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
of the petition reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these people are from a number of 
communities. They include Prud’homme, Saskatoon, 
Humboldt, Wadena, Clavet, Preeceville, Bruno, and Meacham. 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

And I’m pleased to present every one of these signatures to you 
in this petition. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it appears that this petition is signed by 
individuals all from the community of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise this afternoon to 
present a petition requesting the government to fund the cancer 
drug Avastin. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signators are from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition calling on this 
government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the great 
city of Saskatoon and I’m proud to be able to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
petitions today of citizens that are concerned about the 
deplorable and unsafe condition of Highway No. 27. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade Highway No. 27. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Bruno, Dana, 
Aberdeen, Warman, St. Denis, Biggar, Vonda, Hague, 
Prud’homme, Cudworth, Humboldt, Watson, and Saskatoon. 

And I’m pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who have concerns regarding two-tier health. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Halbrite, 
Weyburn, Fillmore, and Yellow Grass. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again to present a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the lack of funding for the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Weyburn and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of the 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today live on Wright Crescent, McFarland 
Avenue, and Forsyth Crescent in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today with a petition from citizens that are extremely 
concerned about the NDP’s two tiered health system. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Weyburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens that are concerned with the highway conditions of 
Highway No. 3. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures to this petition are from Lloydminster 
and Livelong. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise to 
bring a petition forward from my neighbouring constituency, 
Arm River-Watrous. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Department of Highways 
section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remains open so as 
to ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
highway employees who would be affected by such 
possible closures. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners would ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good people of Watrous, 
Humboldt, Simpson, and Nokomis. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
calling on the government to maintain the Department of 
Highways section shop: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop at Watrous remains open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
highway employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by citizens from the good town 
of Imperial. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Northwest. 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on autism spectrum disorders. And I’m glad 
you’re listening, Mr. Speaker. Whereas the people who have 
autism spectrum disorder are some of the most vulnerable in 
our province; and whereas in Saskatchewan the number of 
children being diagnosed with ASD [autism spectrum disorder] 
is high and the rate of increase is alarming. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the following 
recommendations made in February 2005 by the 
government of the Saskatchewan caucus committee on 
human services to the Minister of Health. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good people of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
Thank you for listening. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House again today 
to present another petition regarding autism spectrum disorder. 
This petition calls for a number of things pursuant to the caucus 
committee on human services in February 2005 and among 
those things are included: 
 

A continuation to provide intensive behavioural 
intervention and other therapies for as long as an 
individual’s lead medical profession deems them to be 
required; to increase the early diagnosis or children with 
autism spectrum disorder; and to have respite and family 
support accessible based on need; and to make access to 
specialized equipment and supplies based on need; and to 
encourage and support autism-related research in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of citizens of the province who are concerned about the 
deplorable condition of the south access road from Highway 22 
leading into the village of Zenon Park, Mr. Speaker, and that it 
has become in such poor condition. And they’re also asking the 
government to repair that while a repair crew is in the 
immediate area. And I read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain the south access to Zenon Park so it can 
return to being a safe and economical route for 
Saskatchewan families and businesses. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signed by citizens of Zenon Park, Arborfield, 
Saskatoon, Ridgedale, and Beechy. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby 
received as follows: 
 

Petition concerning acute care beds in Melfort Hospital, 
sessional paper 756; 
 
Petition concerning upgrade to Highway 27, that’s 
sessional paper 757; 
 

And additions to previously tabled petitions being addendums 
to sessional paper nos. 4, 5, 42, 67, 638, 639, 669, 742, and 753. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Economy Committee to report Bill No. 28, 
The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall Bill 28 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. When shall the 
amendments be read for the first time? I recognize the minister. 
 
[13:45] 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I move that the amendments be read 
now a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First and second reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? The 
Chair recognizes the minister. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — By leave I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is required. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. It has been moved by 
the Minister of Agriculture and Food that Bill No. 28, The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee in the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report that it has considered 
certain estimates and to present its fifth report. I move, 
seconded by the member from Biggar: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy now be concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, seconded by the member for Biggar: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy now be concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to introduce today in your gallery, Ms. Noreen Neu, 
executive director of SaskMusic. And with her is Mr. Terry 
Mayer, vice-president of SaskMusic, and Ms. Vesti Hanson, 
secretary-treasurer of the Saskatoon Musicians’ Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these will be some of the folks I’ll be relying on to 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1723 

assist in the task that the Premier has given me today to 
examine the music industry in Saskatchewan. I think we all 
believe that there’s huge opportunities during 2007 with the 
Junos and the Country Music Awards to help take our music 
industry to the next level. And I’ll be listening very carefully to 
the advice that these people and others have to give me as we 
go down that road. So would you please join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce today a group of students from the 
community of Hague — Hague High School — on behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 48 grade 11 and 12 students 
from Hague High School. They’re accompanied by Margi 
Corbett, Russell Dyck, Andrea Woods Fehr, and Keith Wagner. 
I had the privilege of meeting with the students earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know that it’s quite an interesting group of 
students that have come here. And I want to invite you and the 
members of this Assembly to welcome this group of students to 
the Assembly here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, je veux vous présenter et aussi mes collègues 47 
étudiants de l’École St. Mary à Regina. Les étudiants sont dans 
les 3ème et 4ème années. Ils ont étudié les structures du 
gouvernement en Saskatchewan. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to present to you and 
also to my colleagues 47 students from St. Mary School in 
Regina. The students are in grades 3 and 4. They have studied 
the structure of government in Saskatchewan.] 
 
These St. Mary School students are accompanied here today by 
their teachers, Madame Kari-Anne Ellery and Madame Jamie 
Marchand. Maybe the two of you could stand and wave so that 
everybody knows who you are. Merci beaucoup. 
 
The official photographer with them is my constituency 
assistant, Sharon Lindgren; perhaps you could stand and wave 
as well. And the official government cheerleader in the front 
row is none other than my daughter, Morgan Morin. Perhaps 
you can stand as well. 
 
These students have done extensive studies about this great 
province of Saskatchewan by engaging in various interesting 
projects. One of these projects, Mr. Speaker, is a quilt of 
Saskatchewan which was made by each of the students, by 
receiving a quilt square and creating something of significance 
about Saskatchewan on that square. Now I have to tell you, this 
quilt gave me great anxiety when it was initially sent home, in 
terms of a project, because sewing is not one of my strong 
skills. Matter of fact my husband would say, it’s not one of my 

skills at all. But I was quite pleased when I found out that we 
could simply iron on the decorations and didn’t have to actually 
sew them. So merci beaucoup for that as well. The squares were 
then sewn together to form a beautiful quilt and will be on 
display hopefully sometime in the future in the legislature. 
 
These teachers are a fine example of creativity and dedication 
of the educators of this province of Saskatchewan. The students 
of École St. Mary are currently involved in a community 
fundraising program and are a great asset to the constituency of 
Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
And I would like the colleagues and the Assembly to welcome 
them to their legislature today and wish them a very fine time in 
learning about the legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Just for 
my French guests as well, I want to join . . . quote a little 
French. 
 
I want to point out there’s a very special guest in our gallery 
today. It is often, Mr. Speaker, that we sometimes hear of our 
idols. Some of them are rock stars. Others are hockey players, 
and others are engineers and so on and so forth. But, Mr. 
Speaker, once in a while a politician becomes a rock star of 
sorts, and he does have a fan base. 
 
And I mentioned to the Minister of Industry and Resources 
several weeks ago that you have one really strong fan in my 
home community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. The member from Massey 
Place is of course who I’m making reference to. 
 
This guy, almost every week comes in and says, boy did the 
minister ever tell those guys off. And so I told the minister 
about it. And the minister should be pleased today that his fan 
travelled all the way from Ile-a-la-Crosse to see the minister in 
action hopefully today. But none other . . . I’d like to ask all 
members of the Assembly to please welcome my neighbour, a 
very close supporter and a very, very good friend, Mr. Dale 
Desjarlais. So please welcome Dale. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my great privilege to introduce two members in the west gallery 
to you and to all members in the Assembly. Way at the back is 
Jennifer Soloway who works in my office here. And beside her 
is Jillian Gebauer who’s one of the summer students here. 
 
And Jillian is just finished her first year of university and hopes 
to become a pharmacist one day. And she’s done an excellent 
job so far in the office and look forward to having her work 
throughout the rest of the summer. And if I could ask all 
members to welcome to the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all of my colleagues in the 
House, I’d like to introduce two young people who are sitting in 
the west gallery. 
 
Amanda Fink has worked in my office here for two to three 
months. And she’s settled right in, got us all under control. And 
things are running along wonderfully. And sitting with Amanda 
is Kevin Meacher. Kevin, this is his second term as a summer 
student in my office here in Regina. Kevin resides in Moose 
Jaw, and I’ve known him for many, many years, and we’ll leave 
it at that. Kevin’s an outstanding young man and a credit to all 
young people here in the province of Saskatchewan. He was 
one of the coaches that took the little league team to the world 
little league series last year — the team from Moose Jaw. He’s 
just a fantastic young man, and it’s a privilege to have him in 
our office and look forward to working with him for the rest of 
the summer. 
 
So I hope all members will join with me in welcoming them to 
the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Supporting Troops in Afghanistan 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The day after the tragic 
loss of 26-year-old Captain Nichola Goddard, the first female 
soldier to die in Afghanistan, and the day after the very close 
vote in the House of Commons to extend Canada’s mission 
there, this is the day to send a strong message to our troops in 
Afghanistan that they have our support. And for the record, I 
offer that support for both our troops and their mission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us never forget for what they are fighting. They 
are fighting the Taliban who, as a theocratic dictatorship, 
brutalized women and minorities. Prior to the Taliban in 
Afghanistan, 70 per cent of the teachers, 40 per cent of the 
doctors, 10 per cent of elected officials were women. Under the 
Taliban, women were not allowed to go to work, go to school, 
or even to go outside without being accompanied by a male 
relative. Women who violated these laws were sentenced to 
public lashing or even death by stoning. 
 
Nichola was in part fighting for these women, and I note that 
today her grieving husband is asking Canada to support the 
Afghanistan mission. Our troops are also fighting those who 
conspired in the terrorist attack that took the lives of 25 
Canadians on 9/11. I am proud that my country has committed 
to rebuild Afghanistan and to permanently defeat the terrorists 
in that country and the danger that they pose to the entire world. 
 
While there are not adequate words to express our gratitude to 
our troops there who are today grieving the loss of a hero, 
Captain Goddard, still we say, thank you. Our hearts are with 
you, and Godspeed. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Code of Ethics 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
tradition that government’s performance are judged by its first 
100 days in power. The members opposite will never achieve 
power, so let’s judge their performance since they adopted their 
code of ethics. 
 
By our count in the 63 days that the House has been sitting, the 
Saskatchewan Party has breached its code of ethics 16 times. 
That’s an average of one every 3.9 days. But who’s counting, 
Mr. Speaker? Here’s the first three in the top 10 list of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s most blatant breaches of its code of 
ethics. 
 
Ten, the Saskatchewan Party claims that highways were closed 
when they weren’t and that four highways maintenance shops 
were being closed when they were not. 
 
Nine, the Saskatchewan Party leader refers to an article about 
oil sands development in Saskatchewan and characterizes it as 
— here’s a surprise — completely negative, when the article is 
actually very positive and recommends investment in the 
province. 
 
Eight, Saskatchewan Party members wrongfully but repeatedly 
claim that the Premier and another cabinet minister wrote a 
particular letter when all the time they knew the real author was 
not a member of the government at all. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Tap Communications Wins Award 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the 
talent we have in this province. Tap Communications, based in 
Saskatoon, has been recognized globally in a recent awards 
ceremony. The Summit International Awards recognize the best 
in the advertising industry. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
announce Tap Communications won the bronze award in the 
self-promotion category. 
 
Here’s what Summit International Awards had to say about Tap 
Communications, and I quote: 
 

“Congratulations! Tap Communications Inc. is a winner of 
the 2006 Summit Creative Awards Competition. Among 
the thousands of submissions from twenty-six countries, 
your creative scored amongst the very best.” 
 

Mr. Speaker, this award is the latest in a string that Tap 
Communications has received. Earlier this year Tap 
Communications won the prestigious Silver Leaf Award of 
Excellence. Only six of the 178 entries from across Canada won 
this award, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

The results of these awards are also causing benefits to the 
economy of Saskatchewan. Ray Penner, president of Tap 
Communications, said his company needs to expand to address 
the current demand. That’s good news for Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, as Mr. Penner plans to add more staff and more 
people. 
 
Congratulations to Tap Communications and Ray Penner for an 
outstanding job and proving that Saskatchewan can compete 
globally and proving that the entrepreneurs in this province are 
amongst the best and brightest. Congratulations again to Tap 
Communications. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Code of Ethics 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, number seven on the top 10 
list of the Saskatchewan Party breaching their code of ethics: 
the Saskatchewan Party continue claims that an individual of 
the Labour Relations Board has been terminated when actually 
his term has simply come to an end and he isn’t reappointed. 
 
Six, the member from Saskatoon Northwest tells reporters a 
young Saskatchewan man must go to Alberta for addictions 
treatment because Saskatchewan has no beds available. Later in 
the same interview he is forced to admit that this was actually 
the parents’ choice and that there may have been beds available 
in Saskatoon and that young man actually goes to a joint 
Saskatchewan-Alberta treatment facility. The Saskatchewan 
Party leader defends him, saying he’s only guilty of a confusing 
scrum. 
 
Five, the member from Saskatoon Southeast claims that a 
former member of the Assembly is a victim of a political 
vendetta. The claim is made in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
When asked about it by reporters outside the Assembly, the 
member can not only not substantiate the remark, he can’t even 
remember saying it. 
 
Four, Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville-Saltcoats claims 
that the Minister of Agriculture made up a quote from federal 
Ag minister, Chuck Strahl, telling Saskatchewan farmers to 
buck up. The member knew full well that Mr. Strahl had said 
exactly that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Wood River. 
 

Vultures in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, 
well. Mr. Speaker, today we could actually credit the NDP for 
instituting policies that are bringing new residents to rural 
Saskatchewan. These new residents have been moving into 
abandoned farmhouses across our great province and have been 
doing a great job at removing dead weight from rural areas. 
 

The only problem, Mr. Speaker, is that these new residents are 
not taxpayers, but they are turkey vultures. Now normally these 
vultures nest in caves. But since we don’t have all that many 
caves in Saskatchewan, these birds have adopted nicely to 
moving in to some of the many abandoned farmhouses that dot 
our prairie landscape. 
 
Dr. Stuart Houston, a well-known ornithologist, has been 
studying these birds as of late and has noted the birds’ sharp 
population increase in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we can all 
thank the NDP’s policies for allowing rural Saskatchewan to go 
to the vultures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

Code of Ethics 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, number three on the Saskatchewan 
Party list of ethical breaches, the member for Carrot River 
Valley claims that he and his wife are very upset that because 
she is a teacher, they are forced to donate money to the NDP 
through the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. Except — 
except — the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] does 
not donate money to the NDP. Even the Saskatchewan Party 
House Leader admitted that they were wrong on that one, 
although no one bothered to apologize for the statement. 
 
Number two, the member for Humboldt takes a comment from 
the government member completely out of context and uses it 
to accuse the member of trivializing a patient’s case in the 
House. She then refers to a tape that does nothing but prove that 
she has quoted him out of context, which isn’t so much 
unethical as it is unsensical. 
 
And number one, Mr. Speaker, number one, Saskatchewan 
Party political advertising, paid for by taxpayers’ dollars, that 
claim tuition fees are going up when they are not, and that 
Saskatchewan is losing jobs when we are not. When asked 
about the job numbers, the Saskatchewan Party defends the 
claim but admits it’s technically, mathematically incorrect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of Saskatchewan Party breaches of their 
ethical code is long and undistinguished. It’s as if they think 
that having a code of ethics is the same as actually having 
ethics, when clearly, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the same at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning the federal Minister of Agriculture announced details 
of how the federal government is listening to and addressing the 
needs of Canadian producers. This morning the minister 
announced there will be $900 million flowing through the 
federal government to Canadian producers to address changes 
to the federal government’s CAIS [Canadian agricultural 
income stabilization] program regarding inventory valuations. 
There will also be another 50 million to address negative 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

margins from past years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has shown that they 
understand the problems facing Canadian agriculture and are 
prepared to work with our producers to return profitability to 
Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a sharp contrast to what we have seen from 
this NDP government who has cut millions of dollars from the 
Ag budget this year. In fact, the NDP has been ignoring 
agriculture so long, they forgot how to spell agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. This morning the NDP government put out a news 
release from the minister of agricilture and food. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I guess that’s not too surprising from a government 
that has ignored farms for 14 years. 
 
There’s a old adage, Mr. Speaker. Those who live in glass 
houses should not cast stones. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I guess we all make the odd 
spelling mistake, but every farmer in this province knows how 
you spell disaster. It’s NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Nursing Shortage 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, a recent letter copied to 
me by SUN, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, asserts, and I 
quote: 
 

This government appears to have made a deliberate 
decision to use the growing nursing shortage to control 
heath care costs and restrain services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last year the government eliminated more than 
125 vacant RN [registered nurse] positions instead of filling 
them with nurses. 
 
According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, according to the Canadian Institute 
for Health Information, Saskatchewan has the worst RN 
retention rate in the country. Still that minister refuses to set a 
goal. That minister refuses to sit down with the stakeholders 
and develop a plan and execute a plan for retention and 
recruitment. 
 
To the Premier: how long is he going to put up with that kind of 
incompetence from the Minister of Health? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that members of the public as the opposition knows . . . is 
that this government has acknowledged for some time the 
nursing shortage in the province of Saskatchewan. And in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we have referenced on several occasions that just 
a few months ago we released a report, the workforce action 
plan. Mr. Speaker, that action plan, produced in consultation 
with nurses in this province and other professionals, will ensure 
that this government will address not only the shortage of 
nurses, but physicians and other professionals in the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that workforce action plan which is now in the 
implementation phase, when it’s fully implemented will 
improve Saskatchewan’s self-sufficiency and training, will 
create employment opportunities, will improve our ability to 
recruit needed professionals, and will continue to build a more 
representative workforce in this province. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
committed to dealing with this and we’ve got the money to do 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister lacks credibility 
when the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses in their letter go on to 
say, and I quote: 
 

The province is facing bed closures in intensive care units, 
surgical units, pediatric intensive care, and emergency 
departments, as well as temporary or permanent closure of 
rural facilities — a direct result [this is a quote from SUN, 
a direct result] of government inaction regarding the 
nursing shortage. 

 
That’s what SUN is saying — government’s inaction. 
According to the union, Saskatchewan already has the shortest 
acute length of stay of any province in Canada and readmission 
rates that are higher than the Canadian average. 
 
Again to the Premier: how long will he endure, will he force 
Saskatchewan to endure his minister’s incompetence on the 
important issue of nurse retention and recruitment? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I acknowledge that the province of Saskatchewan has a 
shortage of nurses of all classes, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve got a 
plan in place that we will work in consultation with the sector to 
improve the circumstances in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just a few short weeks ago, we introduced a 
budget in this session, this sitting of the legislature, that called 
for a 10.2 per cent increase in health spending — $300 million, 
Mr. Speaker. And it is becoming harder and harder to recognize 
why the members opposite continue to call for additional 
spending in health care, Mr. Speaker. But they refuse to support 
the budget which put that money in place to support not only 
retaining and recruiting of nurses, but improving bed care, 
patient care throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the members opposite to reconsider their 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

budget vote and support the new money for health care that will 
allow us to do some of these things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the nursing shortage does not just 
affect patients in the province. It also, of course, affects the 
nurses themselves. 
 
Rosalee Longmoore, the president of SUN, in a letter this week 
said this, and I quote: 
 

Every day, nurses in Saskatchewan are facing the 
consequences of government inaction regarding the 
nursing shortage — the shortest length of stay, the highest 
re-admission rates, chronic understaffing which is 
jeopardizing patient safety, excessive overtime, cancelled 
vacations, high injury and illness rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say that this Health minister has, 
and I quote, “ . . . demonstrated a profound lack of respect for 
nurses.” 
 
Again to the Premier: how long will he put up with that kind of 
management of the health care system, with that sort of 
treatment of our nurses by that Health minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Over 
the last few months, I’ve had the opportunity to work very 
closely with nurses and other professionals in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have general support from many sectors 
on the implementation process for the workforce action plan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that workforce action plan has been 
reviewed by a national audience, Mr. Speaker. And that 
national audience has said this is the premier working plan for 
workforce action in the entire country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — But let’s have a look at how it is we can’t 
jibe the fact that they will not vote for a budget that puts $300 
million worth of new health care with their plan, Mr. Speaker, 
to reduce health care spending in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1995, then member from Kindersley — the guy who thinks 
he’s going to be the next member from Kindersley — called for 
a 5 per cent reduction in health care spending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget what the Canadian 
Institute for Health Information has said about this province 
under that NDP government and that minister — that under his 
management we have the worst nurse retention rate in the 

country, Mr. Speaker. That’s his record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some specific examples of how the 
situation is hurting right here in the capital city of Regina. 
According to Beverley Miller, the president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses Local 105, the Pasqua Hospital 
ER [emergency room] has an over reliance on overtime to 
support the department. She states that units are often just 
robbing Peter to pay Paul and she goes on to say, and I quote: 
“There is a correlation to adverse outcomes and patient safety is 
compromised.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister then tell this Assembly, can he 
tell Beverley Miller, what he is going to do specifically about 
the fact that nurses are telling him from the city of Regina that 
patient care is being compromised by his inaction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
as I’ve indicated not only today but in previous days as well, the 
word inaction is entirely inappropriate. Mr. Speaker, this 
government is taking action and we’re taking action very 
quickly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I take a look at what the members opposite 
have been saying about health care over the last few years and it 
makes sense now why they’re not supporting a budget that calls 
for a 10 per cent increase. In 1995, they called for a 5 per cent 
decrease. In 1999, Mr. Speaker, they called for a freeze. And 
subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, they called for any increase to 
be tied to the rate of inflation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 7, 8, 9, and 10 per cent increases 
in health care from this side, this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re proud to be able to put additional dollars and to 
work with health care professionals to ensure that we are 
building the best possible system within the resources available 
to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about the system 
and the processes and the resources. He apparently is 
completely deaf to what the people of the province are saying, 
to what the Hansens from Humboldt have said, Mr. Speaker, to 
what Emily Morley’s family has said to that minister, and now 
to what nurses are saying, and specifically the union leadership 
of nurses are saying. 
 
Beverley Miller, again with respect to what’s happening in 
Regina, notes that the union’s nursing advisory committee has 
recently filed 26 work situation reports, the majority of which 
that have not been dealt with. She states that if no solutions are 
forthcoming from this government, there will be continued 
leakage of emergency RNs as well as a continued shortage of 
nurses in O.R. [operating room], critical care, and emergency. 
 
Perhaps the most damning indictment that the Saskatchewan 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

Union of Nurses brings forward is that the viability for the 
Pasqua Hospital is in question because of this government’s 
inaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t this minister do what Manitoba did to 
resolve the problem? They sat down with the union, the nursing 
college, the employers, and they hammered out a solution long 
ago. Mr. Speaker, why the inaction from this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
inaction that the member talks about opposite again, Mr. 
Speaker, completely inappropriate to this debate. This 
department has met with the province of Manitoba on their 
nursing strategy. The province of Manitoba is indicating they 
can learn something from us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have sat down with the nurses in this province 
and other professionals and developed a working plan that we 
are now in the process of implementing. Mr. Speaker, that 
inaction that the member opposite is talking about is completely 
inappropriate. 
 
Let’s take a look at some of the things that members opposite 
have said recently — 1999, Mr. Speaker, not that long ago, the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats said it would be a mistake to 
throw new money at the health care system. Mr. Speaker, again 
in 1999 the member from Rosetown-Elrose talked about 
freezing the funding and indicating any new money would 
come in at the rate of inflation. 
 
We can’t finance new recruitment and retention efforts freezing 
the health care budgets. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 

Waiting for Angiograms 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Valerie Paterson 
was here on Monday to tell that Health minister about her 
experience in the health care system, Mr. Speaker. And yes, he 
says, I am pointing at that Health minister. It’s appalling, her 
treatment in the health care system. 
 
Valerie’s 47 years old and a grade school teacher from 
Saskatoon and was told she’d have to wait six months for an 
angiogram. While she was on that waiting list, waiting six 
months for an angiogram, she started to have heart-attack-like 
symptoms and was rushed in to the emergency. This is what 
Valerie had to say about the emergency waiting in the hospital, 
and I quote: 
 

You’re lucky to be in the hospital because there’s only 30 
[people are] ahead of you . . . If you’re outside, there are 

500 [people] ahead of you waiting for an angiogram. 
 
Well Valerie was pretty close to the mark. We talked to the 
Saskatoon region yesterday and there are 472 people waiting in 
Saskatoon alone for an angiogram. That’s absolutely appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is this minister going to do to address the 
problem of a lack of angiogram space in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly what we are doing is a lot more than what has been 
advocated by members opposite who would freeze or decrease 
the amount of money available in health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this program while the members opposite are 
talking about what should be done, maybe they should take a 
look at and send their researchers out to find out what’s been 
done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In March of this year the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority 
recognized that there were challenges within the cardiac cath 
unit. Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with this government and this 
budget, $650,000 of brand new money, one-time money, was 
put into the Saskatoon Health Region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what will happen under this plan in the next few 
months? We will increase the number of recovery beds for 
cardiac services. We will provide 600 additional procedures to 
be done, 1,100 procedures overall each and every year. We 
have hired two new cardiologists, Mr. Speaker. They will be 
arriving in September and October and they will be working to 
reduce these lists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, even when Valerie Paterson 
was admitted to the emergency room in Saskatoon with 
symptoms of heart attack and stroke, it still took four days to 
get an angiogram. On Monday, this Health minister said that 
having to wait four days in the hospital for a diagnostic test 
after coming in with heart-attack-like symptoms was, and I 
quote, “does sound [a little] ridiculous.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now know that there are 472 people like 
Valerie Paterson in the Saskatoon Health Region. Mr. Speaker, 
waiting six months sounds more than a little ridiculous for an 
angiogram in this province, Mr. Speaker. What is the target 
from this NDP government that a person should have to wait for 
a diagnostic test after they’ve had heart-attack-like symptoms? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
indeed, as members opposite continue to call for more spending 
by this government while not voting for the spending that we’re 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

committed to, Mr. Speaker, let’s keep in mind that each of their 
members goes home and talks about how the health care system 
cannot have more spending. The latest, Mr. Speaker, in 2004 
from the member from Martensville who said, “Saskatchewan 
cannot afford to spend a higher percentage of . . . tax dollars on 
[our] health [care system].” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does that mean in terms of the commitment 
of the members opposite to the health care system? This year, 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize some difficulties within the cardiac 
cath unit. Mr. Speaker, we put 650,000 new dollars into that 
unit. It will have an impact on the numbers coming down, Mr. 
Speaker. We have hired two new cardiologists, Mr. Speaker. 
We have added the capacity. We are doing more cardiac 
angiograms in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. The referrals are going 
up and we are addressing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps talking 
about why we don’t support a budget. We don’t support a 
budget because it has people lined up on the front steps 
protesting about Avastin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — We don’t support the budget because we 
have people coming into this legislature every day pleading 
their case because they’re not getting proper health care in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. You can throw $3.3 billion at a problem 
but it’s not fixing it and that’s the problem with this NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when they have more interest 
in self-promotion of a Finance minister to be leader than putting 
funding towards a neonatal unit in Saskatoon, we’ll vote against 
that budget every single time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when will the minister start 
doing the right thing, managing the funds that they’re putting 
into the system, and making sure patients get care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
as the member knows, he’ll have another chance to support the 
budget and the extra dollars for health care tomorrow, Mr. 
Speaker, tomorrow when we deal with appropriation. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the members of the public are going to be more satisfied 
with comments about the health care system in Saskatchewan 
from those from outside who look at it and not from the 

members opposite who have an agenda of deliberately 
decreasing and undermining confidence in the public health 
care system. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when the Conference Board of Canada takes 
a look at Saskatchewan’s health care system and rates us 
number three in the country, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of 
the fact that we’ve got 35, 37,000 people working within the 
system — people who care, who are compassionate, who want 
to provide good care. Mr. Speaker, we will manage the system 
to support those people and for those who need care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Humboldt. 
 

Construction of New Humboldt Hospital 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the residents in my 
constituency are being forced to pay an NDP rural health 
premium. They have to pay this premium because the NDP 
government dragged its feet for so many years that the cost to 
build a hospital in Humboldt has almost doubled. Now each 
homeowner in Humboldt will have to pay an additional $100 a 
year for the next decade. Businesses, Mr. Speaker, will have to 
pay up to $600 per month for the next decade. This is because 
the NDP has reannounced this hospital for a decade now but 
done absolutely nothing about building it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order. Order. One 
at a time, members. One at a time. Member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How can the 
Minister of Health justify this unfair rural health care premium? 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the member opposite may have read the news release that 
was out a day or two ago, Mr. Speaker, a news release that 
included comments from her own mayor in the town of 
Humboldt. 
 
Agreements have been reached, Mr. Speaker, between the 
municipalities and Saskatchewan Health and the Saskatchewan 
health region to ensure that the dollars go forward for the 
development, further development in the Humboldt hospital. 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working closely with the municipality. 
We are going forward with that project. We are committed to it. 
We have reached agreements to carry it forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do we continue to justify the call for more 
spending and the members opposite refusing to add dollars to 
the provincial budget as we have brought forward, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is right in one 
thing: the people of Humboldt have stepped forward yet again. 
And yet again they will pay this unfair premium because they 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

know how important the Humboldt hospital is for their 
community. But they’re tired of waiting for this NDP 
government. And it’s time that the minister steps forward. 
 
Last month after a public meeting that drew only 12 people, the 
Minister of Industry and Resources told the Humboldt Journal, 
and I quote: 
 

When asked about a construction start date, he would only 
say that it’s moving along in terms of planning, and he 
certainly hopes construction will be started this year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Humboldt answered with putting 
forward their cash. They want more than hope from this Health 
minister. Will the Minister of Health today have the courage to 
stand up and guarantee construction will begin this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatoon Regional Health Authority will be the ones who 
ultimately determine the process and the timeline. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we are very pleased with the progress that has been 
made on the Humboldt hospital to date, and this government is 
completely committed to that project. And it would be our 
desire and hope that indeed that project is able to get under way 
before the course of this year is over. 
 
And I would urge the members opposite that tomorrow when 
the appropriations motions come before the House, that they 
will support it so that we have the dollars on this side of the 
House to support that project as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Condition of Highways 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the state of highways in this 
province is downright dangerous. I’d like to quote from a letter 
I received from a constituent of mine. And I quote: 
 

I drove over a pothole and a large piece of asphalt kicked 
up and damaged the undercarriage . . . [of] my car. It was a 
large enough piece [of asphalt that it hit] with enough 
force to set off the airbags in the car, which in turn bruised 
my wife’s arm and knocked her unconscious for a 
moment. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what does the Minister of Highways have to say 
about this, that his highways are in such a disrepair that people 
are getting seriously injured? 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite and to the people of Saskatchewan that 
obviously safety is a major concern with respect to the 
Department of Highways employees and to myself as the 
minister responsible. The members opposite will know that 

every spring in this province we have frost heaves; we have 
potholes on some of our roads. This year has been particularly 
difficult based on the high moisture levels over the course of the 
winter and the fact that we didn’t have a sustained period of 
30-below weather which generally helps to stabilize those 
roads. 
 
Our officials have their crews out working on a daily basis. The 
weather has been supportive in that it’s been warm, it’s been 
drying out the roads so that we can get out and so that we can 
repair them. Mr. Speaker, no one will argue that there are 
potholes in TMS [thin membrane surface] roads here in 
Saskatchewan. We know that. We’ve got 6,000 kilometres of 
them. We can’t get to them all at once. Thanks very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Robert Istace was simply 
driving with his wife on Highway No. 45 and the next thing he 
knows a piece of asphalt heaves up large enough to set off the 
airbags and render his wife unconscious. Mr. Speaker, when 
Mr. Istace went to investigate what had happened, he found the 
piece of asphalt and I’d like to quote from his letter again. 
 

I stopped in the middle of the highway to look at the 
damage and [it was] . . . caused . . . [by] a piece of asphalt 
about 8 inches by 12 inches. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what explanation does this minister have for Mr. 
Istace? Can he explain why he allows Saskatchewan highways 
to be this unsafe? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s obvious, 
and certainly it’s obvious to members on this side of the House, 
that we have some roads in this province that are at this point in 
a state of disrepair. And the crews are out; they’re filling the 
potholes; they’re working within our different communities 
across this province to attempt to make our roads as safe as we 
can. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say it’s been an 
extraordinarily difficult year. Our maintenance budget is going 
to be up. I believe it will be up over what we forecasted, 
frankly. But I think it’s also important to say to members on the 
opposition side who keep telling us that the economy of this 
province has gone to hell in a handbasket, frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’ve got record activity in oil and gas which means more 
semis on the roads. We’ve got more grain being hauled on our 
roads based on the fact that the Crow rate and rail line 
abandonment has taken place — supported by those guys, by 
the way, Mr. Speaker. Those are some of our challenges, but 
we’re dealing with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, not only did this piece of asphalt 
cause Mr. Istace’s wife to become unconscious, it also caused 
serious damage to his car. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Istace is on the 
hook for a repair bill well in excess of $2,000, all because this 
minister’s highways are falling apart and left in a state of 
terrible disrepair. Now SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] claims it was his fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can this minister set the record straight? Can this 
minister tell the Assembly why Mr. Istace and his wife were 
forced to live through the stressful and damaging incident and 
will he commit today to compensating the Istace family for any 
damage done to the vehicle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I will say to the 
member opposite that I’m unaware of the circumstance but I 
will give my commitment to look into this today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that there are times when road 
conditions create circumstances that we would rather not have. 
We’ve got, it needs to be remembered, more highways on a per 
capita basis than any jurisdiction in Canada. What we also have, 
Mr. Speaker, in this province and in every other province in 
Canada, is the lack of a national highways infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that members opposite could certainly 
help their constituents, they could help the people of 
Saskatchewan if they would join with us in lobbying the 12 
Conservative members of parliament — who they helped to 
elect — to work towards a national highways infrastructure in 
this country, Mr. Speaker. That would be the biggest help that 
they could do to their constituents and to mine as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 

New Seniors’ Gold Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have just 
come from the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Mechanism where I was very pleased to make an announcement 
of interest to seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is fortunate to have such an active 
and involved seniors’ population. Indeed Saskatchewan has the 
highest proportion of seniors in Canada. One of every seven 
persons in Saskatchewan is over the age of 65. 
 
As a way of recognizing seniors’ valuable contribution to the 
province, I’m pleased to advise you of the seniors’ gold plan. 
As a gesture of our appreciation, this gold plan is available to 
all Saskatchewan residents 65 years of age and older. The first 
gold plan benefit is free entry to provincial parks. This benefit 
allows seniors free access into provincial parks beginning May 

18 for the 2006-2007 year. 
 
Another benefit, free fishing licences. These licences will be 
available by early June from any of the more than 1,000 angling 
licence vendors across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — We’re also pleased to offer seniors a 
significant discount when they travel by bus on routes served by 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. As of June 1, people 
age 65 and older can go to any STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company] depot or agency and receive a total 
discount of 30 per cent on fares from Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. STC will continue to offer a 10 per 
cent discount for customers between the ages of 60 and 65. 
 
Another benefit, free photo identification from Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. This allows seniors who do not have a 
driver’s licence the option of obtaining a photo for ID 
[identification] purposes free of charge. This benefit will be 
available June 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we may consider adding small benefits of this 
nature to the gold plan in the future. As we head into the May 
long weekend, it’s my hope that these benefits, as a gesture of 
our appreciation, will help seniors enjoy our gorgeous 
Saskatchewan summers and travel our province year-round. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly owe a great deal to the people who 
built this province, and I thank all seniors for their part in 
making our province the place we’re proud to call home. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as maybe the only 
senior that’s in the legislature, I would like to respond to the 
Minister of Healthy Living Services. Well ever since we first 
learned about the seniors’ gold plan during the Throne Speech 
this spring, I’m sure the seniors have been waiting in silent 
anticipation for whatever that could be. 
 
So what is this seniors’ gold plan? Could it be, they thought, an 
initiative or an opportunity to address such things as reducing 
the waiting lists for medical assistance? Could it be addressing 
the seniors housing and long-term care accommodation? Or 
maybe they thought it could at least reduce the taxation on 
property tax for those on fixed incomes. 
 
Now don’t me wrong. There’s I’m sure much appreciation for 
such things as free entry into the provincial parks, for free 
fishing licences, for a 30 per cent discount on STC. And even a 
free SGI photo, I’m sure is much appreciated. 
 
Actually I’m anticipating about the same enthusiasm as when 
we received letters from seniors, when they received the last 
handout, the free handout from the NDP government, the free 
centennial pin with the word seniors written on them. These 
were the letters we received along with the question, wasn’t 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2006 

there a more effective way to spend the $400,000 that’ll 
actually help us? 
 
With population out-migration, seniors are proportionately one 
of the fastest growing demographics in this province. Anything 
further we can do to assist the seniors . . . those are the people 
that helped develop this province, and the more we can do, the 
better. We owe it to them. The seniors’ gold plan seems to be 
the very least this government could do. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment. 
 

New Entrepreneur Category in Immigrant 
Nominee Program 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I’m pleased to rise in the 
House today to speak about a new program to increase the 
number of immigrant investors to our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Today I attended a luncheon with 
members of the Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce to 
announce the introduction of a new entrepreneur category 
within the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Effective immediately, the 
entrepreneur category replaces the business category and one 
criteria of the farm owner/operator category of the SINP 
[Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program]. Potential 
immigrant investors now have greater access to business 
opportunities throughout Saskatchewan and additional 
incentives to stay in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our bold strategy to attract 5,000 annual 
immigrants to Saskatchewan by 2008, we expect that 100 to 
200 new entrepreneurs will come to our province. Mr. Speaker, 
immigrants are crucial to the continued prosperity of 
Saskatchewan. Our province’s economy is booming. This near 
unprecedented pace of growth fuels the demand for skilled 
workers that continues to accelerate as birth rates decline and 
baby boomers retire. 
 
The introduction today of the new entrepreneur category will 
help us attract the immigrants that we need while providing 
incentives for them to stay in our province. In this new 
category, immigrants can establish businesses in all sectors of 
our economy, unlike the previous category which was limited to 
certain sectors. 
 
Investors are now required to post a $75,000 good-faith deposit 
to strengthen their commitment to live and work in our 
province. The deposit will be held by a private sector trustee. It 
will be refunded with interest once the applicant has established 
a viable Saskatchewan business within two years of arrival in 
our province. Should the investor default, the deposit is entered 
into Saskatchewan’s General Revenue Fund. 
 
The good-faith deposit is a feature of other similar immigrant 

investor programs throughout Canada and has proved to be an 
effective incentive in staying in the province. The deposit is 
also available to immigrants wishing to own and operate a farm 
in Saskatchewan in lieu of a signed offer to purchase land prior 
to entry. Investors will now be able to research the market 
before they buy that farm. 
 
Nominees in the entrepreneurial category must have a minimum 
personal net worth of $250,000 Canadian and be willing to 
invest at least $150,000 into a new or existing Saskatchewan 
business. Entrepreneur immigrants must maintain an active role 
in the operations of the business and retain at least one-third 
ownership. Exceptions may be made in cases where the 
investment exceeds $500,000. Pooled investments are not 
permitted in this category as every investor is assessed on 
individual merits nor are passive investments considered, such 
as property rentals and leasing or loan companies. 
 
The province will maintain its right to refuse entry if we believe 
the applicant does not truly intend to live in Saskatchewan or 
plans to flip a business and relocate elsewhere. Nor does the 
category allow so-called investors of last resort, where 
unknowing immigrants are led to business opportunities that 
non-immigrants would never consider. 
 
Prior to acceptance, immigrant applicants must make a 
minimum five-day exploratory visit to Saskatchewan so that 
they can meet with immigration officials and research their 
planned business. It also gives them the chance to get a glimpse 
of the new place that they may call home. 
 
We believe the contribution of entrepreneur immigrants to 
Saskatchewan is crucial to the continued health of our 
communities. And without a talented and expanded population 
our province will not be able to achieve our strategies for 
innovation and growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we welcome this announcement today. We think 
it’s good for our province given the business taxes that were 
included in the last provincial budget, where there will be 
significant reductions. We think that this is another way to 
attract investment capital to our province. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
continuation of our government’s commitment to stand up for 
something positive in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
minister for a copy of the statement just before the House sat. 
The Saskatchewan Party has been urging the NDP government 
and certainly, and pushing, and certainly agrees with their 
initiatives in the immigration file. We on this side of the House 
recognize for a long, long time that immigration needed to be a 
very important part of the growth agenda for Saskatchewan, and 
we have been listening to the stakeholders in the province. 
 
We’ve been listening to businesses and industry and farmers 
and other people in Saskatchewan. And they’ve been saying 
that immigration certainly was needed to take place in this 
province considering the demographics of the population of 
Saskatchewan and because of the loss of our young people to 



May 18, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

other economies around Canada and around the world. So 
immigration was certainly needed in Saskatchewan to make up 
the difference for the loss of workers, and especially skilled 
workers and trained workers in the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have been listening to the private sector for quite some time 
and urging this government to bring in an entrepreneur 
category. This was obviously something that was needed for a 
number of years to bring investment dollars into this province. 
Investment dollars naturally will create jobs and create 
opportunity and attract more people and keep our young people 
in the province instead of having to go out of the province to 
make their way in life and find opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly interesting to see the government, 
how they operate as we get closer and closer to an election. 
They start making baby steps in the right direction. And this is 
another example of this, of them finally, finally moving in the 
right direction to get the economy of Saskatchewan growing. 
And it’s too bad that this government didn’t take the advice 
from entrepreneurs and citizens of Saskatchewan and the 
official opposition a number of years ago and get moving on 
this file a long time ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly this is a very good announcement. But 
we always temper our enthusiasm of the NDP government’s 
announcements by what they’re actually going to do, what the 
results of their programs and their initiatives. And we certainly 
have concerns about the massive growth of the Immigration 
department, the number of people that they have hired. They 
claim to need these people to work on files and cases. But as we 
know, this minister and this government would certainly like to 
push the private sector out of the way and do a lot of the 
consulting work on their own. So we’re very suspicious of some 
of their intentions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will be watching the government in the 
future in seeing how this plan works, and certainly we’ll be 
interested to watch the results. Hopefully they will come in as 
predicted. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:45] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
government, I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 1,102 
to 1,151 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 1,102 to 1,151 have 
been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to move a motion related to procedure regarding government 
business. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been requested. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader: 
 

That pursuant to rule 4 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and 
notwithstanding rule 3(1), that this Assembly shall recess 
until 7 p.m. later this day in order to facilitate the meeting 
of the standing committees on Human Services, 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, and the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, member from Moose Jaw North, seconded by the 
member from Melfort, the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That pursuant to rule 4 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and 
notwithstanding rule 3(1) this Assembly shall recess until 
10 p.m. later this day in order to facilitate the meetings of 
the Standing Committee on Human Services, 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Infrastructure, and the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in recess, I would . . . do I 
need a motion to deal with these in recess? Then we’ll just 
simply direct, Mr. Speaker, that the Human Services 
Committee, Intergovernmental Affairs, and Crown and Central 
Agencies shall proceed to their business. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, members. The House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1719 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1719 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1720 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1721 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1722 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1722 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1723 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1723 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1723 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1723 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Supporting Troops in Afghanistan 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1724 
 Code of Ethics 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1724 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1725 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1725 
 Tap Communications Wins Award 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1724 
 Vultures in Rural Saskatchewan 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1725 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1725 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Nursing Shortage 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1726 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1726 
 Waiting for Angiograms 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1728 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1728 
 Construction of New Humboldt Hospital 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1729 
  Taylor.......................................................................................................................................................................................1729 
  



 

 Condition of Highways 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1730 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1730 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Seniors’ Gold Plan 
  Addley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1731 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1731 
 New Entrepreneur Category in Immigrant Nominee Program 
  Atkinson...................................................................................................................................................................................1732 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1732 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1733 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1733 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
MOTIONS 
 Hours of Sitting 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1733 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


