






















































Hansard: November 21, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 16A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 489 
 November 21, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege again this afternoon to present more petitions from the 
communities of Broadview, Cowessess, and I see there are 
some signed here from Saskatoon, Yorkton, and Whitewood 
regarding dialysis services in the Broadview Hospital. And I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement the strategy that will see 
a dialysis unit placed in Broadview Union Hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition once again with regard to the condition of Highway 
18. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatories to the petition today come from the 
communities of Claydon, Eastend, and Frontier. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present today on behalf of a constituent from 
Carnduff. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the communities of Carievale, 
Storthoaks, Oxbow, Gainsborough, Alida, Wawota, Redvers, 
Antler. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the community of Wolseley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the drug Avastin: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Wolseley and Sintaluta. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It will be no 
surprise that today I rise again with a number of petitions with 
citizens that are concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And to demonstrate how well-travelled this highway is, the 
signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Watrous, Bruno, Humboldt, 
LeRoy, Saskatoon, Jansen, Guernsey, Wynyard, Lanigan, 
Viscount, Colonsay, Muenster, Englefeld, Hendon, Warman, 
Kelvington, Bradwell, Archerwill, Kamsack, and Winnipeg. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues on behalf of citizens concerned with the lack of 
funding for the cancer-fighting drug Avastin. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, from the great 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

Southeast are from Carnduff, Oxbow, Glen Ewen, and Oxbow. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — And the Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
today I rise to present a petition on behalf of constituents of 
mine who have concerns regarding the Estevan Daycare 
Co-operative, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
review the decision to deny the requested spaces for the 
Estevan Daycare Co-operative. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan and 
Bienfait. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present another petition from citizens of Wilkie who are 
concerned about reduction of health care services. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wilkie Health Centre 
and special care home maintain at the very least their 
current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Wilkie and district. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of 600 children under six 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build an elementary school 
in Arbor Creek. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signatures today are from the areas of Collins Terrace, 
Peters Cove, and Beckett Crescent in northeast Saskatoon. I so 
present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring a 
petition from citizens who are very concerned about the NDP’s 
[New Democratic Party] two tiered health system. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed in total by the good citizens of 
Wolseley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned about the NDP’s 
two tiered health system, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures of this petition are from Grenfell, 
Broadview, and Wolseley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to bring forward a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan 
concerned about the government’s lack to fund the cancer drug 
Avastin. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by the good citizens of Regina, 
Wolseley, and also from Edmonton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition on 
citizens calling on the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade 
Highway 20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Nokomis, Jansen, Lanigan, Drake, Muenster, and Hudson Bay. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the provincial 
government’s failure to fund the cancer drug Avastin. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is all signed by the good 
citizens of Grenfell. And they have also printed their names, 
and we appreciate that. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present yet another petition regarding this 
government’s failure to fund the cancer drug Avastin. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens 
throughout Saskatchewan. I so present on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with my colleagues in presenting a petition calling on the 
government to fund the cancer drug Avastin. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people of Wolseley, 
Indian Head, and Sintaluta. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order petitions tabled at the last 
sitting have been received and under rule 15(7) have been read 
and received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL 
COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 4, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — And when shall Bill No. 4 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that 
consideration in Committee of the Whole be waived. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave that consideration of Committee of the Whole be waived. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Then when shall this 
Bill No. 4 be considered, read the third time? The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Learning. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006 
(No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur l’éducation (no 2) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 4 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to give notice that I shall on day 18 move first reading of a Bill 
that would be An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act (Set Election Dates), 2006. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 18 move first reading of An 
Act to provide for the Election of Saskatchewan Nominees for 
Appointment to the Senate of Canada. I’m pleased to present 
this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation: has Saskatchewan Housing ever entered into 
a contract with L.W. Construction? And if so, when and 
for what purpose? 
 

In addition I give notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: is SaskTel 
outsourcing any of its engineering work or any other work 
to India or any other foreign country? If so, what type of 
work is being outsourced and to which countries? 

 
Also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Finance: what is the 
provincial capital tax rate on railroads? 
 
To the Minister Responsible for Finance: what is the 
locomotive fuel tax rate? 
 

[13:45] 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskTel: what is the book 
value of Ag Dealer when the initial investment was made 
in the year 2000? 
 

And there are a number of other questions for SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management: when is the projected completion date for 
the work currently being done in the foyer of the 
legislature? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
stand again and give notice of written questions. First of all, I 

give notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: for the fiscal year 2003-2004, how many 
days was the Riverhurst ferry not in operation? 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the fiscal year 
2004-2005, 2005-2006, and for the year to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: what was the cost of maintenance on the 
Riverhurst ferry in the fiscal year 2003-2004? 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the fiscal 
year 2004-2005, 2005-2006. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 21 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Highways and 
Transportation: for the fiscal year 2003-2004, what was 
the cost of operating Riverhurst ferry? 
 

Mr. Speaker, now I have similar questions for the fiscal year 
2004-2005, 2005-2006, and for the current year to date. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I wish today to introduce to you and through you a 
group of young people seated in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young folks are involved in Canada World 
Youth. Canada World Youth will be celebrating their 35th 
anniversary and will be taking part in over 50 projects around 
Canada this year alone, Mr. Speaker. Participants volunteer for 
three days a week in the community that they will be staying in, 
and then they have one day of education. Mr. Speaker, this 
group will be split in two. Part of the group will be staying in 
Gravelbourg, and the other half will be staying in my 
constituency of Moose Jaw. 
 
Today they had a tour of the Legislative Building and a 
question and answer period, Mr. Speaker, with you over lunch. 
And then I had a quick visit with them. And I also understand 
the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Wood 
River also had a quick visit with them before they entered the 
House today. 
 
Each group, Mr. Speaker, has nine students from Ukraine, nine 
youths from across Canada, and two chaperones, one chaperone 
from the Ukraine and one from Canada. Mr. Speaker, they 
arrived . . . They’re looking wonderful after arriving very late 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

last evening. I don’t imagine they’ve had too much sleep. They 
will spend three days here in Regina and then they will carry on 
to the communities where they will be for the next three, three 
and a half months, Moose Jaw and Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in welcoming 
these young people to our legislature and also to Saskatchewan, 
and we hope you have a great three months. And I look forward 
to seeing some of you in Moose Jaw. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow and welcome our 
guests from Ukraine. I know you got in late last night, around 
midnight I guess, and probably feeling a little bit tired, but 
maybe we can get things livened up here in a few minutes and 
we’ll keep you awake. 
 
There is a group that’s coming to Gravelbourg, which is in my 
constituency. And the supervisors for Gravelbourg are Lee 
Reaney and Luda Lushpie. And I’m sure you’re going to enjoy 
the area around Gravelbourg. It’s a pretty flat area but you go 
further south and there’s lots of hills and rolling land and 
there’s a fair bit to do as far as the outdoor activities. 
 
And so I would like to welcome all of the guests from Ukraine 
to Canada and especially Saskatchewan, and welcome to our 
Legislative Assembly. And I’d ask members to please join me 
in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier, the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure today to welcome to the Legislative Assembly, 
seated in your gallery, some very special guests who each are 
involved in early learning and child care in their communities. 
 
First of all I would like to introduce two who are also visiting 
our province, two from the province of Manitoba. And I would 
ask as I introduce if you would just give us a wave. From the 
province of Manitoba, Lorraine Myerion and Violet Merrick of 
the Long Plain First Nation in Manitoba. Lorraine and Violet 
are both employed by the Little Hands Head Start Program at 
Long Plain First Nation, and they’re visiting our province as 
part of a community exchange program with the Yorkton Tribal 
Council. 
 
Joining our Manitoba guests in the gallery today are Chief 
Norman Whitehawk of the Cote First Nation; Arlene Pinay, 
executive assistant, Yorkton Tribal Council; Bev Peel, 
children’s program team leader, First Nations Inuit health 
branch, Health Canada; Yvonne Rusnak, early childhood 
program coordinator, Yorkton Tribal Council; Heather Bear, 
health portfolio councillor, Sakimay First Nation; Freda 
Musqua, Head Start coordinator, Keeseekoose First Nation; 
and, Mr. Speaker, Monica Whitehawk, Head Start daycare 

director at Cote First Nation, who by the way, Mr. Speaker, 
happens to be celebrating her birthday today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting 
with this dedicated group of individuals later this afternoon, and 
again I would ask all members to welcome them to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier in welcoming the 
guests just introduced to our gallery, our out-of-province 
visitors. Welcome to Saskatchewan. And I hope it’s a 
productive time that you will have here in Saskatchewan. And 
especially a welcome to Chief Whitehawk, who is a resident of 
my constituency and the other members that the Premier has 
introduced also from my constituency. Welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, to you 
and through you to all members, I would like to introduce two 
very special constituents of mine. Seated in the east gallery are 
two of my four sisters, Edna Irwin and Audrey Thompson, and 
they come up and spend a couple days with me each session. So 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly an 
exceptionally good-looking group of students in the east 
gallery. I know that when most introductions are done, the 
members say that they are a good-looking group of students. 
But I’ve seen these folks when they came in, and they are truly 
exceptionally good-looking and wonderfully gifted students. 
 
They are from Lakeridge School which is just down the block 
from where I live so I’m very familiar with the school, and I’m 
extremely pleased to see these folks here today. They are 
accompanied by Colette Delainey, Heather Hutchison, and 
Sarah Keshane and I think some other people whose names I 
don’t have, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to having a visit with 
these students later on and I want to welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well I’d 
like to acknowledge some other work that Heather Bear has 
been doing in our area, certainly working with the committee 
around dialysis and bringing that issue to the forefront, 
especially in how it affects her community. And I want to thank 
her for having had the privilege of meeting with her. And we 
certainly look forward to this ongoing discussion. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Multiculturalism Week 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 
November 19 through the 25 it is multiculturalism week here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our provincial motto, “from many peoples, strength” reminds 
us not only that Saskatchewan has always been a place of 
cultural diversity, but also that respecting cultural diversity and 
learning from and celebrating one another’s cultural traditions 
will be a source of strength to us and to help all of 
Saskatchewan’s people live together and move forward in 
harmony. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan can be very proud of 
the many firsts to which this province may lay claim. Among 
those firsts, in 1974 Saskatchewan became the first province to 
enact multicultural legislation. Recognizing the right of every 
community to retain its identity, language, and traditional arts 
and sciences for the mutual benefit of all was contained in that 
legislation and is contained in it. 
 
1997 the Act was revised and a section of the Act states that the 
policy should preserve, strengthen, and promote Aboriginal 
cultures and acknowledge their historic and current contribution 
to the development of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be a wide variety of events taking place 
throughout the province to highlight Saskatchewan’s diverse 
cultures. 
 
I encourage everyone to take the opportunity to participate and 
help to celebrate Saskatchewan multiculturalism week. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 

Louis Riel’s Poem for Robert Gordon 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend I spent a day at the Batoche historic site and out of the 
friendships I made there and respect for these people today I 
read this poem. 

Robert Gordon! 
I beg your pardon 
For so having 
Kept you waiting 
After some poor verses of mine. 
You know, my English is not fine. 
I speak it; but only 
Very imperfectly. 
 
The snow, 
Which renders the ground all white, 
From heaven, comes here below: 
Its pine frozen drops invite 
Us all 
To white — keep our thoughts and our acts, 
So that when our bodies do fall, 
Our merits, before God, be facts. 
 
How many who, with good desires, 
Have died and lost their souls to fires? 
Good desires kept unpractic’d 
Stand, before God, unnotic’d 
O Robert, let us be fond 
Of Virtue! Virtues abound 
In every sort of good, 
Let virtue be our soul’s food. 
 
Louis “David” Riel 
Oct. 27, 1885 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 

Recognition of Innovation Place Employee 
 

Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, Innovation Place, which 
I’m proud to say is located in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Sutherland, is one of the most successful and rapidly growing 
university-related research parks in North America. 
 
Building on the strengths of the university as well as the federal 
and provincial agencies that are either in or immediately 
adjacent to the facility, the more than 100 companies and 
organizations that make their home in Innovation Place are 
from a wide variety of sectors including agriculture, 
information technology, engineering, resources, and the life 
sciences. Mr. Speaker, Innovation Place employs over 2,000 
people and contributes over $240 million a year to the economy 
of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. Innovation Place is a 
significant part of Saskatchewan’s diverse and growing 
economy. 
 
I’m pleased to say that Austin Beggs, director of corporate 
relations for Innovation Place, has been elected president of the 
Association of University Research Parks. This association 
includes some of North America’s top-ranked research parks, 
including Research Triangle Park in North Carolina that serves 
Duke and two other nearby universities. Mr. Speaker, this is 
only the second time the North American organization has 
elected a Canadian as its president. Mr. Speaker, Austin Beggs 
is yet another example of someone pursuing a rewarding, 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

successful career right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Beggs and Innovation Place put Saskatoon, Saskatchewan 
on the global map of innovative research. I’d like to invite all 
members to join me in wishing him well in his new position. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 

Saskatoon Arn Falcons Win Prairie Challenge 
 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatoon Arn Falcons Peewee Football Club are the 
Saskatoon Kinsmen minor football league and provincial 
champions. The team consists of many dedicated 11- and 
12-year-old football players and parents from northeast 
Saskatoon, led by coach Jim Rusnak. 
 
Not just satisfied with winning the provincial championship, 
this highly motivated team did what any team with true 
Saskatchewan spirit would do. They challenged their Alberta 
counterparts to a winner-take-all, Prairie bragging rights 
championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past Sunday in a warm-up for the Vanier Cup, 
Potash Corp. Park in Griffiths Stadium played host to the first 
ever Prairie Challenge. I had an opportunity to participate in the 
opening ceremonies and welcomed the Alberta champion St. 
Albert Raiders to our province. 
 
The teams were evenly matched. The Saskatoon Arn Falcons 
were a perfect 10 and 0 in league and playoff action this year. 
The St. Albert Raiders, who did wear green and white, were 11 
and 1 in league in playoff playing. An enthusiastic crowd of 
parents, relatives, and fans cheered throughout the well-fought 
match on a crisp Saskatoon morning. 
 
[14:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know you want to know the score. The 
Saskatoon Arn Falcons, in true Saskatchewan fashion, beat the 
St. Albert Raiders 30 to 28. Both teams had supper together, 
and organizers say this weekend’s activities built bridges 
between the two provinces. Admission to the game was only a 
toonie, and the proceeds — some $1,000 — were donated to the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix Sporting Christmas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members to congratulate the 
initiative of Jim Rusnak and the Saskatoon Arn Falcons in 
staging this innovative sporting event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Leo King Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Borgerson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great 
pleasure to wish one of my constituents a happy birthday, and 

that person is Leo King of Paddockwood. 
 
Leo was born on November 21, 1906, in the town of Watson. 
He had an impressive and varied work history starting here in 
Regina in 1927 at the Wheat Pool office and later at Wheat Pool 
offices in Dundurn, Delisle, and Lac Vert. He ran the Co-op in 
Moose Jaw, the John Deere dealership in Prince Albert, served 
as secretary-manager of the Saskatchewan Implement Dealers 
Association, and as secretary-treasurer of the Auctioneer 
Association. 
 
Leo has always been active in his community. He is a charter 
member of the Prince Albert Lions Club, a 25-year member of 
the P.A. [Prince Albert] Elks Club, a nine-year member of the 
Paddockwood Elks Club, a nine-year member of the 
Paddockwood Hospital Board, and a volunteer for the Cancer 
Society for 29 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Leo has five daughters, six grandchildren, and 
nine great-grandchildren. He and his wife, Eva, have been 
married for 50 years, sharing work, community service, and 
family time, and enjoying weekends at their Candle Lake 
cottage. Leo is an avid fisherman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as MLAs our greatest joy comes from the people 
we are honoured to meet and those who become friends. For me 
this is certainly the case with Leo and Eva King, who I know 
will be watching this televised proceeding. 
 
I thank Leo King for the part he has played in the good life of 
this province. I wish him all the best today and in the days to 
come, and I ask this Assembly to wish Leo King a happy 100th 
birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Legacy of Nursing Mismanagement 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
former Premier Roy Romanow admitted that his government 
went too far with health care cuts. He admitted that the deep 
cuts of the 1990s were a mistake. He admitted that his 
government was wrong to slash nursing enrolments. In 1991 
more than 500 nurses graduated in this province. But the NDP 
made the decision to cut back those seats, and by 1999 only 115 
nurses graduated. And look at the mess we’re in today. 
 
Who was the associate health minister when this decision was 
made? None other than the member from Saskatoon’s 
Riversdale, the very Premier himself. And what has he done 
since then? Well over a decade later under his NDP 
government, there were only 230 RN [registered nurse] 
graduates, and hospitals are closing as a result. Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses has indicated that there are now over 445 
full-time equivalent vacancies in this province. 
 
Here’s what Roy Romanow said, quote; “We pushed the costs 
out of the government’s pockets and right into the pockets of 
farmers . . . business people and nurses.” This government has 
almost $1 billion election slush fund, and it still won’t admit to 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

its destructive legacy of nursing mismanagement. The NDP 
government solution is a sprinkling of pixie dust while nurses 
and patients are left twisting, twisting, twisting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Karnevalsgesellschaft Harmonie Opens 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had the 
opportunity to attend the opening of Karneval Season 2006-07 
at the German Canadian Society Harmonie in Regina. Mr. 
Speaker, Karnevalsgesellschaft Harmonie has become a popular 
tradition in the city since 1970 when it was founded and is 
always a sold-out event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new prince and princess are crowned annually to 
reign during the Karneval season. Outgoing Prince Kenton I 
and Princess Erika II handed over the reins to Prince Eckhard I 
and Princess Darlene I. And it’s a Karneval tradition to poke 
fun at government, all levels of government, and there were 
plenty of political swipes taken. I’d repeat one or two of the 
more barbed comments, but of course that’s not my nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Karneval is for old and young alike. Four different 
dance groups as well as the Royal Guard performed for the 
capacity crowd. The large numbers of dancers in each group is a 
good and welcome indication that German culture and 
traditions are thriving in Saskatchewan. The annual national 
Karneval Gathering is being celebrated in Edmonton this year 
and . . . I mean at the end of January 2007 and promises to be a 
huge party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a wonderful time at the opening of Karneval, 
as I always do. And I want to thank and congratulate President 
Veronika Lekien and the Karnevelsgesellschaft Harmonie for 
all their hard work in hosting yet another fun filled and 
successful Karneval season. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Backup Emergency Plans for Rural Health Facilities 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Health. Can he tell this 
Assembly why the Vanguard Health Centre was closed on 
Friday, who was informed of the situation, and what alternate 
arrangements were made for the people in that area? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I can 
tell the member opposite that regional health authorities are 
responsible for the day-to-day operations of the hospitals within 
our province, Mr. Speaker. The regional health authority acts in 
the interests of the safety and security of the patients within 

their care. Mr. Speaker, the regional health authority would 
have answered all of the questions that the member opposite 
has. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Myron Finley is a 
resident of Vanguard. On Friday he received a call from the 
school. Mr. Finley’s 10-year-old son, Tyler, had broken his 
arm. The boy was rushed to the health centre, but there was a 
big sign on the door. It said closed; sorry for the inconvenience. 
Mr. Finley grabbed the emergency phone by the door, and it 
wasn’t working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are we continuing to see these rural hospital 
closures? Why aren’t people informed? And why doesn’t the 
emergency backup system work? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated, the regional health authorities are responsible for the 
day-to-day operation of health care throughout the province. 
Mr. Speaker, the regional health authority would have taken 
some action in this case. Mr. Speaker, under normal 
circumstances individuals, when a hospital is closed, are asked 
to call 911 and have the ambulance operators respond to the 
calls to ensure that they are taken immediately to the nearest 
health facility that has been primed to expect the care for those 
areas in the province where closures have had to take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I indicate the regional health 
authorities are acting in the interests of the safety and security 
of the patients in their care. And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
Health supports the regional health authorities in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to 
be passing the buck to the health authorities. He is the Minister 
of Health. He should be looking after these situations. 
 
Mr. Finley started driving his son towards Swift Current after 
he found out the health centre was closed. When he finally, 
finally got into cell phone range . . . The minister talks about 
calling 911. Well if you’re in your car and you have no cell 
phone coverage, how can you do that? So when he finally got 
into cell phone range, Mr. Finley called the Cypress Hills 
Health District. He described the nature of his emergency and 
asked where he should be taking his son. Lo and behold, the 
person on the other end of the line said take him back to 
Vanguard. When Mr. Finley said it was closed, that person said 
no, in fact it’s open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is there no procedure in place for 
communicating these hospital closures? Why is it that no one 
seems to know what’s going on in the health care system? 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite is not being very specific about who exactly 
was communicated with within the health regions. There are 
always people designated to respond to emergency 
circumstances. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite understands 
— he’s been in this position long enough — he understands that 
the regional health authorities have responsibility for the 
day-to-day operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan and Sask Health 
does have ultimate responsibilities but, Mr. Speaker, we ensure 
that policy and funding is in place to ensure that the regional 
health authorities can respond to issues like this. Mr. Speaker, 
the policy and funding issues are in place to assist the regional 
health authority in cases like this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the minister 
forgets that he is the Minister of Health, and he is responsible 
for health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the trip to Swift Current took 50 minutes. It’s a 
trip Mr. Finley says he’ll never forget. Tyler was screaming in 
pain. Mr. Finley says his son will survive, but what if it had 
been his father with a heart attack? What if it had been some 
other child bleeding from a large gash in the neck? Mr. Speaker, 
Myron Finley says he is “really disturbed” there is no backup 
emergency plan for Vanguard. 
 
So I’ll ask the same question to the minister: why is this 
happening? What happened to the NDP’s action plan for 
Saskatchewan Health and the promise that no one would be 
anymore than a 30-minute drive from primary health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member earlier referred to Vanguard as a hospital. I think the 
member opposite is aware that it is a health centre, Mr. Speaker, 
and does have certain conditions and limitations in any case, 
Mr. Speaker, because of the ability of professionals to be able to 
service the area. 
 
That having been said, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
aware that the health regions do have the day-to-day 
responsibility for delivering care to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the policy and funding is in place to ensure 
that the regional health authorities have the ability to do the 
work that we’ve asked them to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, whether it’s a health centre 
or a hospital, it really didn’t matter because the facility was 
closed. Mr. Speaker, here’s a list of hospital closures in the last 
several weeks: Preeceville, Kamsack, Spiritwood, Arcola, Big 
River, Central Butte, Coronach, Bengough. Now we can add 
Vanguard. 
 
Is this a deliberate program of planned rotating closures? Is this 
government once again trying to save money by offering 
second-rate services to rural Saskatchewan? When will the 
minister do his job and look after health care in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member asks if this is a deliberate action, and of course the 
simple, easy, and correct answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. But he 
also asks, when will I step up and do the job that I’ve been 
asked to do, Mr. Speaker. With my colleagues on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, we have committed over $300 million 
— now closer to $400 million — this year, Mr. Speaker, in 
additional funding to assist the regional health authorities to do 
the work they’ve been asked to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve concluded negotiations with both the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association on recruitment and retention issues. Mr. Speaker, 
the members opposite have only committed to cut the budgets 
of the health care system. Contrast those two commitments, Mr. 
Speaker, and you will see on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, we are standing up for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Recovering Wage Overpayments 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
recent Labour Relations Board judgment has told SAHO 
[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] to 
renegotiate with unions to recover wage overpayments to 
individual employees. Let’s review how this has happened. 
 
The joint job evaluation process had been dragging on for years, 
so on the eve of the 2003 election the NDP circumvented the 
normal collective bargaining process and drew up an agreement 
for pay increases with unions. But the work was not complete, 
and pay bands weren’t finalized, yet the government went ahead 
and paid money out. Now the NDP is saying it made a huge 
mistake and wants the money back. This could amount to $5 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could this government ever be so 
irresponsible to now punish employees because of its own 
flawed process and disrespect for the collective bargaining 
process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
 [14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I can 
tell the member opposite that all the hyperbole, the words that 
he’s using to describe the circumstances, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
no evidence to support almost everything that he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this government is completely 
committed to the joint job evaluation process. Mr. Speaker, the 
joint job evaluation process is exactly what it says it is. It’s a 
joint process that involves government and unions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, through that joint job evaluation 
process, there were agreements to pay some dollars out in 
advance of the process being completed because of the length of 
time it was going to take. And, Mr. Speaker, some 
overpayments were made. And, Mr. Speaker, this government 
and the unions agree, Mr. Speaker, that those overpayments are 
money that is due to the people of Saskatchewan and will be 
collected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank the minister 
for confusing this issue. On the one hand, the government is 
trying to get $5 million back from employees because it 
bungled an agreement on the eve of an election. 
 
On the other hand, here is what section 76 of The Labour 
Standards Act says, and I quote: 
 

No employer shall require an employee to return to him, or 
accept from an employee, the whole or any part of any 
wages, minimum wage or annual holiday pay that he paid 
to the employee . . . ” 
 

Let me repeat. The Labour Standards Act specifically states that 
an employer, in this case the Government of Saskatchewan, 
can’t seek repayment of wages already paid. 
 
Employees are not at fault. They were told they were worth so 
much before the election. And now they’re told, sorry, you’re 
not worth it after all, and we want the money back. Why is this 
government breaking its own law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
assume from the questioning and the way it was delivered that 
the member opposite believes that we should simply mediate 
this matter and not collect the overpayments, Mr. Speaker. I 
wonder if that is indeed what the member opposite is saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a joint agreement. There’s an 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, that these payments were subject 

to reconciliation at the end of the process. Mr. Speaker, if there 
was overpayments, those overpayments would be repaid to the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes the content of that. It 
takes it seriously, Mr. Speaker. Those overpayments are due the 
people of Saskatchewan, and we will ensure that those 
overpayments — negotiated, Mr. Speaker — are collected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What actually 
happened, Mr. Speaker, is that on the eve of this election, 
October 4 with the writ being dropped on October 9, 2003, a 
hastily drawn together agreement, flawed agreement came into 
place. Health employees were promised pay raises and bonuses. 
And now the NDP government wants that money back — $5 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our office has heard from employees who have 
been told they must pay back thousands of dollars. Some of 
these people have already retired. And now the NDP 
government wants them to dig into their savings to pay for this 
government’s mistake. Mr. Speaker, other employees have 
since died. What happens then? 
 
If this NDP government had followed the collective bargaining 
process in the first place, we wouldn’t be in this situation. Mr. 
Speaker, why is this government trying to break the law and to 
cover up its own bungled mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
obvious; the member opposite is saying that this money owed to 
the province of Saskatchewan should not be collected. It is the 
opposition’s contention today, Mr. Speaker, that we should 
write off $5 million in a negotiated, agreed upon process 
between this government and the unions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bottom line in all of this, Mr. Speaker, is that the number of 
people for whom overpayments exist is less than 3 per cent of 
those who were affected by the joint job evaluation process, Mr. 
Speaker. We will discuss this matter with each of those 
individuals in that 3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We will ensure that 
there is a fair process involved in ensuring that these 
repayments are made. And, Mr. Speaker, in circumstances 
where they can’t, we’ll take that into account. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the Minister 
of Health has now used the number $9 million if I heard him 
correctly. Mr. Speaker, the account of November 9 where 
SAHO has been told to talk to unions to get the money back 
says clearly it is estimated to be up to $5 million. 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

Mr. Speaker, let’s remember why we are in this big mess in the 
first place. This NDP government circumvented the normal 
collective bargaining process and rammed through an 
agreement on the eve of an election call. I’m sure you’ll 
remember the pay hikes and $1,000 bonus that was promised to 
employees. And that NDP government had the gall to say that if 
a Saskatchewan Party formed the government that they would 
take it away. Now isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker? It’s the 
NDP government that wants to take the money back because of 
the bungled process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP government’s plan? To recycle 
this money? To try and buy more votes on the eve of another 
election call? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again the member opposite either can’t hear or is trying to 
mislead the members of the House, Mr. Speaker. There was no 
$9 million mentioned in any of my comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated very clearly that we support the joint 
job evaluation process. Mr. Speaker, we are committed to the 
joint job evaluation process. There have been some 
overpayments made under agreements with the unions, Mr. 
Speaker. And we are in the process of finding the best way in 
which we can ensure that the overpayments that were made to 
employees are returned to the treasury, Mr. Speaker, so that 
within the health care system we can ensure we have additional 
dollars for recruitment and retention, for equipment, for 
improving circumstances in the workplace, Mr. Speaker, and 
ensuring that we provide better health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Grant Process for Community Initiatives Funds 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the community initiatives 
grant was supposed to allow communities to fulfill their dreams 
— dreams like building playgrounds for their children. In my 
constituency of Humboldt, two communities tried to fulfill that 
very dream and they succeeded. Both communities received 
approval for their grant applications. The village of Bradwell 
built a playground with their grant money, and so did Sunset 
Estates. Sunset Estates even called their project, Kids First. 
Both were extremely pleased that their children could now play 
in a safe place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, these communities’ dreams were dashed 
when they received correspondence stating that the NDP 
government wanted some of the grant money back. Mr. 
Speaker, can the minister explain why he is clawing back 
money from the communities who simply wanted to provide 
playground equipment for their children? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 

Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve had a number 
of times that we’ve had issues brought to this House where the 
facts haven’t been accurate. I don’t have specific information 
about the case that the member purports to have here today. 
But, Mr. Speaker, when grants are put in place, then there are 
criteria that are put in place for those grants, and the grants are 
made on the basis of responding to the criteria that are put in 
place. And, Mr. Speaker, if those conditions are not met, then in 
the interests of accountability and proper expenditure of public 
funds, then in some cases repayments may be necessary to be 
made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, both Bradwell and Sunset 
Estates applications were sent in and accepted, and the money 
was sent from that minister’s government. In that time 
Bradwell’s citizens banded together, and they built a 
playground, and so did Sunset Estates. More than a year later, 
this NDP government came back and say that they’ve had a 
change of heart, and they shouldn’t have gotten that money. 
The government’s own policy states that once the proposal is 
deemed eligible, the proposal will be evaluated against 
established criteria, and the minister said that again today. 
 
How incompetent is this government that a year later it comes 
back to the communities and wants the money back after 
they’ve poured all of their efforts into building safe places for 
their children? 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why he accepted the 
applications from Bradwell and Sunset Estates if he simply 
planned to claw the money back in the near future? Why fill 
them with hope and have them put all that effort in to take it 
away a year later? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, grants are put in place 
in order to facilitate community activities. That’s the intention. 
That’s appreciated when it’s done. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Community Initiatives Fund grants are put in place; they’re 
administered by an arm’s length from the government . . . Now 
the hon. member, the hon. member begins to whine when I refer 
to this being administered by an arm’s-length of the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is, this is done in the interest of fairness and 
accountability. And I’ll tell you, it’s a whole different 
circumstance from when this party and some of their members 
were in government before, when accountability, Mr. Speaker, 
meant sometimes we had, we had overexpenditures in the 
budget in excess of $1 billion a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those days are gone when it’s managed when all 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

decisions are made directly by government. I stand firm by the 
fact that we will, in the interest of fairness to all communities, 
administer by arm’s-length, conditions are put in place. If 
they’re not met, then they are required to. And appeals are 
possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s getting very tiresome when 
that government keeps on passing the buck. They claw back the 
money and then pass the buck and say we’re not responsible for 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that Saskatchewan is the volunteer 
capital of Canada. People in this province sacrifice their time 
and their resources to do what’s right, and it’s the Saskatchewan 
way. And the member from Regina Wascana agrees. And here’s 
a quote from Hansard on October 30, 2006, and I quote, “. . . 
community-based and volunteer organizations are the backbone 
of the high quality of life Saskatchewan families enjoy.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the village of Bradwell used volunteer labour to 
build its playground equipment. They listed it on their 
application, their application that went through the process that 
the minister had talked about and was approved. Now the NDP 
wants money back. Donations in kind, contributions of 
volunteer time may not be claimed as an expense as no money 
was paid out. Mr. Speaker, how can this NDP government say 
that it believes in volunteer projects and values volunteers when 
it’s trying to claw the money back from Bradwell? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many 
times I have to repeat this to make it clear. Grants are in place. 
There is a arm’s-length committee that adjudicates the 
applications, whether they meet the criteria. The money is sent. 
The project is done. The final report is submitted. If the 
conditions for the grant are not in order, then resolution is 
expected. And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, in addition to 
that, communities have the ability to appeal if they feel there 
has been an incorrect decision made, and I would encourage 
that these communities would do that. 
 
But I know this, Mr. Speaker. I know this. When I think about 
the history of this group in government before, when their 
leader worked in the Grant Devine government and 
overexpended in the range of billions and billions of dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, there was no appeal. There was no appeal. There 
was only one appeal. That was to kick them out, to change the 
government, and that’s where it will stay because this is a 
government that believes in accountability, unlike the 
predecessors in that party opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a government that is all 
talk and no action. They pass the buck, and they are making it 
very difficult for these small communities in rural 
Saskatchewan to even provide playground equipment for their 
children. This government has put these communities in a 
terrible bind. Here’s what Sunset Estate said in a letter to the 
minister on November 15: 
 

Now, the Community Initiative Grant people are 
demanding [that] we return the money spent on the 
playground equipment ($11435.11). We do not have that 
kind of money. In fact we are just breaking even now. If 
we had to pay this [money] back, we would have to fold 
and have the government or someone else take over. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these people are just trying to provide playground 
equipment for kids. They made their applications, and it was 
approved. 
 
Why is this government making it as difficult as they possibly 
can? They accept their applications and ask for the grant money 
back. What kind of heartless government is this? Will the 
minister reconsider and allow the communities of Bradwell and 
Sunset Estates to keep their funds for their playground 
equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought 
at some point in the session up till now, we would have got 
around to the jobs question. But we are here, the last question 
again today and yet not another question on jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are good things being done in communities 
by volunteers. It’s appreciated. However, Mr. Speaker, the 
auditor, the Provincial Auditor . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order, members. Order. The 
Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand why this 
group does not pay great heed to the requirements of 
accountability and the requirements that an auditor would have. 
An auditor would say, Mr. Speaker, that when you have grants 
and they have rules, they have to be followed. Surely that is not 
too much to expect, Mr. Speaker. When the things have to be 
resolved, they will be. And as I said before, communities can 
appeal. The good work is appreciated. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I find it kind of interesting. I find it kind of 
interesting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order please, members. 
We’ve had the question asked. Let’s get the response. The 
member . . . Order. The Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

Speaker, just a little short snapper question. How many over 
there either served or ran for election under the Grant Devine 
government? How many? Nobody is prepared to admit. Well 
that’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 
2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la 

Cour d’appel 
 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 37, The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 37, The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 38, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Environment that Bill No. 38, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now introduced and read for 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

The Chair recognizes the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Tobacco Damages and Health Care 
Costs Recovery Act 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, 
The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services that Bill No. 39, The Tobacco Damages and 
Health Care Costs Recovery Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member from Melfort 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a motion 
of substitution on committees before orders of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort has requested leave 
to move motions regarding substitutions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member from Melfort. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution on Committee 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Southeast, that the name of Don 
Toth be substituted for the name of Don Morgan on the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Opposition House 
Leader, the member for Melfort, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That the name of Don Toth be substituted for the name of 
Don Morgan on the Standing Committee on Human 
Services. 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — On behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to table responses to written questions 55 to 58 
inclusive. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Infrastructure Fund Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s indeed a pleasure to rise today to move second reading of 
Bill No. 35, The Infrastructure Fund Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Infrastructure Fund Act introduces a new 
funding arrangement for building and improving on the 
infrastructure of Saskatchewan. The purpose of this Bill is to 
establish a Saskatchewan Infrastructure Fund. This fund will 
receive monies in the ’06-07 year from the General Revenue 
Fund surplus and in turn will provide monies for the provision 
and maintenance of infrastructure, initially recreation and 
cultural facilities under the building communities program. 
 
Through this legislation the Saskatchewan Infrastructure Fund 
will provide resources for public infrastructure to achieve the 
government’s long-term objectives of building and improving 
Saskatchewan communities, of building and improving capacity 
for social and economic development of the province, and for 
meeting the growing needs of Saskatchewan families. 
 
The establishment of the Infrastructure Fund will allow 
government to set aside funds now for infrastructure purposes 
using the opportunities presented from the 
higher-than-anticipated resource revenues. These funds can then 
be expended over a multi-year period without lapsing in the 
annual budgetary cycle. Initially, Mr. Speaker, the fund will be 
established with an injection of $100 million that will be used to 
fund infrastructures, programs, and projects under the building 
communities program. 
 
The building communities program will provide capital funding 
to various cultural and recreation facilities across the province 
including museums, art galleries, and sports complexes. The 
Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation will be 
announcing eligibility criteria and funding arrangements for the 
program in the near future. 
 
Enacting legislation now to establish the fund clearly identifies 
government’s commitment to this program. It also allows 

communities time to plan and budget for the projects and 
subsequently approach the government for additional financial 
support when details are finalized. 
 
In addition to demonstrating government’s commitment to the 
renewal of public infrastructure, the legislation proposed in this 
draft Bill also provides for accountability and transparency with 
respect to the use of the Infrastructure Fund. Transfers to the 
fund will be allocated for specific infrastructure programs and 
purposes. Transfers from the fund must occur through the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund]. This means that specific use of the 
funds will be tracked and reported in departmental estimates 
and forecasts. Initially in this particular case, it’ll be the 
Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation that’ll be 
accounting for the building communities program. 
 
Additionally, all transfers to and from the fund and the fund’s 
balance must be recorded in the public accounts. Mr. Speaker, 
the initial amount allocated to the fund will be for the building 
communities program commitment. However, flexibility has 
been provided in the legislation for the fund to receive future 
financial injections as other resources become available to 
address other infrastructure needs of Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
In closing I would say — as members of this Assembly are well 
aware — one of the cornerstones our government’s focus for 
the year ahead is to ensure that Saskatchewan families benefit 
from our strong and growing economy. I’m pleased to say that 
this Bill helps to achieve this goal by introducing a new 
financial tool to support 21st-century public infrastructure — 
infrastructure that will contribute to the economic growth; 
infrastructure that will support job creation; infrastructure that’ll 
build our communities and futures for young people right here 
in this province, right here at home. 
 
As such, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second 
reading of Bill No. 35, The Infrastructure Fund Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 35, The Infrastructure Fund Act be now read a 
second time. The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill 35, The Infrastructure Fund Act. This Act 
certainly raises a lot of questions. I mean, the premise behind 
the fund seems to be a very good one. Obviously communities 
need those types of infrastructure or projects to be built. 
 
But as we have seen in question period today, the Minister of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation, who has clawed back money 
from other types of projects . . . We have to ask the question: 
what is the criteria for acceptance of this fund? Is this fund 
going to be given to communities, the communities are going to 
build their projects, then six months or a year later are going to 
be asked to pay all or part of the money back to the government 
because the government has mismanaged the criteria and the 
application process and then claim to say that the money was 
given out in error? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of these things need to be clarified. And 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

the communities of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Saskatchewan are certainly going to need to know exactly what 
they’re getting into when they apply for and hopefully receive 
infrastructure money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation certainly has a large project that he is working on in 
his area, and one wonders if this fund is just set up — this $100 
million is going to his particular ministry — we wonder if this 
fund is just set up just to fund his one project only. Certainly 
there’s many very laudable projects around the province that 
need funding and certainly this money should be given out to all 
parts of Saskatchewan. Everyone should have a chance at 
receiving this fund to build their projects in their communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, certainly the criteria is a big question. We will 
study this Bill, we will talk to stakeholders in communities that 
have projects in planning and see if this infrastructure fund is 
what they need, Mr. Speaker. So at this time I’d like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 35, The Infrastructure 
Fund Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill 36, An Act 
to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 2006 budget that I announced on April 6 in 
this Assembly, I was pleased to announce this government’s 
plans to carry forward major reforms of the business tax system 
in the province. Our business tax reforms are indeed eliminating 
the general corporate capital tax. They’re reducing the corporate 
income tax rate to 12 per cent. They’re increasing the 
small-business threshold to $500,000 and improving the tax 
incentives for manufacturing and processing. 
 
More recently, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure to announce in 
this Assembly a major two-point reduction in the sales tax rate. 
I’ve also been pleased to, on behalf of our NDP government, 
announced reductions to the small-business tax rate, changes to 
the dividend tax credit, and the full indexation of 
Saskatchewan’s personal income tax system for 2007. We’ve 
announced all of these tax reductions in this past year. 
 
These changes build on the most significant personal tax 
reforms announced in the province’s history. And these changes 
result in lower taxes for Saskatchewan families. Our 
government is working hard to make sure that Saskatchewan is 
the best place to live, to work, and to raise a family. 
 
Our record of tax relief in reducing sales taxes, corporate taxes, 

income taxes, property taxes, small-business taxes, our record 
of tax reduction shows that we are indeed making life better for 
today’s families and businesses. And we’re building a better 
future for young people right here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments that will 
implement the income tax changes I’ve announced over the past 
few weeks. It will reduce the small-business tax rate to 4.5 per 
cent. It will alter the provincial dividend tax credit to establish a 
new 11 per cent rate for dividends from larger businesses and 
set the dividend rate for small businesses at 6 per cent. It will 
also reduce the rate of the investment tax credit for eligible 
manufacturing processing assets to 5 per cent to match the new, 
much lower provincial sales tax rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to these amendments, this Bill also 
provides for some technical housekeeping amendments and for 
clarification of references to the federal Income Tax Act. I am 
very pleased to move the second reading of An Act to amend 
The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 36, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 
2) be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member 
for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak to Bill No. 36, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key word that the minister just said is their 
government’s record of tax reductions. And as we know the 
history of the NDP, just before an election they reduce taxes 
and immediately after the election they raise taxes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to break this cycle. After the 
next election, there’ll be a Saskatchewan Party government, and 
we will continue to reduce taxes in the future for the good of the 
province and the economic health of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Party is on record speaking to 
reducing taxes in this province. We have for many years now. 
And finally now, when the NDP government are in desperate 
political straits, they are finally starting to implement some of 
our ideas on the tax reduction front. We certainly agree with 
reducing taxes, but I mean the motives behind the NDP 
government are certainly suspect. 
 
But as I said, Mr. Speaker, after the next election, the 
Saskatchewan Party government will continue to lower taxes 
and grow the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 36 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen that Bill No. 17 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other 
Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I count it 
an honour to be able to stand in the Assembly today and to 
address the issues surrounding Bill No. 17, the miscellaneous 
statutes Act that’s before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years, we’ve heard this 
government talk a lot about how it’s going to fund education. 
And we have continually seen this government erode that 
funding for education. 
 
And as we observed last night in committee on a Bill brought 
forward on recommendations from the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association, the school boards themselves recognize 
that the government continues to underfund the cost of 
educating our young people which, Mr. Speaker, I find 
interesting given the fact that in this province over the past 
number of years — and as we look into the future — unless we 
have more young people move to the province or remain in the 
province and begin to have families, we have some real 
challenges facing school boards and schools across the province 
of Saskatchewan. Namely the fact that the number of young 
people in our schools continues to decline which means at the 
end of the day that the costs for education continue to go up, 
and in particular the continued dependence that we have on the 
property owner to fund education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about property taxes and we talk 
about the funding of education, it would seem to me that as the 
Department of Education sets the standard and level of 
education that we expect our schools to provide to the youth of 
this province enabling them to look forward to their futures and 
their contribution to society when they complete their education 
— whether it’s a post-secondary educational term at a 
university or at a regional college or even the SIAST 
[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 
colleges in the province of Saskatchewan — we would assume 
that the province would indeed meet its and honour its 
commitments to fund education in the province of 
Saskatchewan. However, Mr. Speaker, we continue to see an 
erosion of that commitment and as a result, the continued 
dependence on the property owners. And thus the piece of 
legislation that we have before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the reason this legislation is before us 
today derives its . . . or is directly attributed to the move by over 
100 RMs [rural municipality] last year to withhold taxes which 
was owing to the regional school boards. And the reason they 
did that, Mr. Speaker, is because the government continued to 
rely on the property owner. 

Now the government would tell us that they put money into the 
hands of regional educational boards or RMs to offset the cost 
of that education and the dependence on the property owner. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, even as I have seen personally in 
my own agricultural experience and in our constituency, we 
have . . . Yes, we’ve got some individuals who actually saw a 
reduction on their property tax. But in many of the RMs, many 
property owners actually saw an increase in the cost of that 
education that was imposed upon them. 
 
And one would have to ask, well if it’s costing you more as a 
property owner, wouldn’t you expect that you’re going to 
actually see services available to you or to your children — if 
you have children in school — or even to your neighbours’ 
children, the young people that are in your community? 
Wouldn’t you expect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if there’s an 
additional cost coming out of your pocket as a property owner, 
that you will see additional services? And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what we’re finding, and what most parents are finding, what 
schools are finding, not only in the Moosomin constituency but 
across the province of Saskatchewan, is that we’re not seeing 
increased services. In fact in the last budget and in the budget of 
this past spring, many schools found that they were facing 
reductions. 
 
And I can tell you in my constituency there were schools that 
faced reductions of two and three individuals in the area of 
teachers and the area of teacher assistants. Some schools had 
minor increases, but many schools had reductions. And so it’s 
no wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have RMs responding 
to the ratepayers when they come to pay their taxes, and saying, 
why should we be paying this level of care or a level of taxation 
when we see reductions in our own community schools? 
 
Last night at committee meeting the chairman of the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association gave me the 
argument that the school division he was chairperson of actually 
was a zero grant board. And therefore it was . . . they could 
actually fund their education. 
 
I’ve raised the question about the fact that many communities 
are beginning to say that the money that we are taking in, that 
we are paying out as ratepayers and that is being taken in in our 
area from property tax and the funding that goes to education, 
could actually fund an education program in our communities 
effectively. And in some cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they could 
actually put . . . not only increase the number of teachers in the 
classroom but could actually put money back in the ratepayers’ 
pockets. 
 
And what Mr. Bean said, Mr. Bean says, yes, but we’ve got to 
share the like. Well that just, that sounds to me, that’s socialist 
philosophy we have around here. Take from the rich to give to 
the poor. That’s what I find interesting. 
 
And the member from, the Minister of Finance now is entering 
the debate, and I certainly welcome his comments. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what Mr. Bean was talking about, opposite to 
what the Minister of Finance is saying, is Mr. Bean was just 
reflecting the realities of what they’re facing as school board 
association because this Minister of Finance, this minister of 
Education, and this government, this Premier is not honouring 
its commitment to adequately fund education in the province of 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

Saskatchewan. And that’s the need for this Bill. That’s the need 
for this Bill. Thus the need for this Bill because the Minister of 
Finance is not prepared to put the money. . . What’s he got right 
now? I think he was bragging the other day of almost $900 
million that he’s got in his pocket. And oh, and the minister 
says it’s one-time money. Interesting, one-time money. 
 
For some reason every six months we find there’s an additional 
allotment to the pot that says it’s one-time money rather than 
making a firm commitment. And where’s, and where’s . . . 
While this may be his one-time money today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you know and I know over the past number of years 
the province of Saskatchewan has been blessed with a pretty 
decent return from oil revenues. And that’s not just one-time 
money. Maybe the million . . . the $1 billion that the minister 
has available right now, some of that is one-time money as 
additional revenues have come in. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unfortunate part, this government 
has had 15 years to honour its commitment to adequately fund 
education in the province of Saskatchewan, to adequately put 
money into the province of Saskatchewan. And then the 
Minister of Finance says, well how much more? Well maybe 
the Minister of Finance should take a look at where the money’s 
going. 
 
The Minister of Finance talks about ensuring that our young 
people . . . or the minister of Education actually. There’s 
adequate funding to cover their education. And yet they keep 
. . . And you know I don’t, some ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
don’t disagree with the Minister of Finance. I think maybe the 
Minister of Finance should take a careful, more careful look at 
where the money goes because he is putting more money in, 
except not enough. While they put more money in over the 
years, the costs of education . . . and then where’s the money 
gone to? 
 
One of the concerns I have raised, has the minister taken a look 
at the costs of running these large regional boards and the 
individuals that we have travelling back and forth from one 
community, in some cases an hour and a half, two hours to 
provide services that we in the past never really had before, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
So is that money actually being used to educate the youth of our 
province? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest no it isn’t. It’s 
not being used appropriately. And as a result, the dependence, 
the high cost, the dependence we have on the property owner 
and the revolt that the RMs last year entered into because of the 
fact that they were faced with higher costs from their property 
owner. And the property owner’s asking, what are we getting 
for these dollars? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would think that there isn’t a member in 
this Assembly who wouldn’t have some major concerns with 
this present Act before the Assembly. The fact that, the fact that 
this government is now saying, no we’re going to penalize you 
because we can’t adequately fund education and therefore it has 
to come out of the property owner. If you withhold that money, 
we’re going to penalize you. And that’s exactly what this piece 
of legislation is doing. This legislation is saying to taxpayers in 
the province of Saskatchewan, it’s saying to RMs that no, if you 
withhold your taxes, we will not allow you to do that. Well in 

fairness, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . break the law. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And the minister’s talking about breaking the 
law. Mr. Speaker, all the people of Saskatchewan are asking for 
is for this government to finally address that question and 
address that promise to adequately fund education in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if they were adequately funding education, I think they’d 
talked about getting back to that 40/60 split — 40 property 
owner, 60 per cent the province. I believe that’s what they’ve 
been talking about. But for many areas, and certainly in my area 
of the province, we certainly aren’t there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as a result, it’s a burden to the property owner of 
Saskatchewan — whether that property owner lives on a farm 
in rural Saskatchewan, whether that property owner lives in a 
small urban community or a small town, or whether that 
property owner lives in one of our large urban centres in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that as MLAs, each and every one of us run into that question 
on an ongoing basis. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there are a number of 
issues that I could continue to raise in regards to this piece of 
legislation and the reason it sits before us and the reason the 
government sat down and decided they had to do something. 
However I would suggest if the government really lived up to 
its commitment to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
it wouldn’t need such a piece of legislation before us at this 
time. Therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Moosomin has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 17. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 15 — The 
Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I was indicating before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there’s a number of concerns regarding taxation, regarding 
finances in the province of Saskatchewan. And we have before 
us at this time Bill No. 15, the municipal financial corporation 
Act. 
 
And as I understand it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act updates 
terminology allowing corporations to lend monies as a part of 
an agreement or in exchange for securities other than 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

debentures. What this Bill is attempting to do is make a few 
major changes. While it’s a Bill with only five clauses in it, but 
there’s some major changes. And the changes are to update the 
Bill and its terminology in the Act. And one of the major 
changes is to allow corporations to lend monies as a part of an 
agreement or an exchange for securities other than debentures 
as well as to dispose of these items. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have across the province is 
we have municipal governments that find themselves on many 
occasions having to go to other agencies to glean the financial 
resources they need to operate until their tax notices come in. 
 
And so I believe what this Act is doing is allowing financial 
resources and municipalities to lend money . . . What this Bill is 
doing in section (f), it talks about lending money to 
municipalities within the province in exchange for municipal 
debentures and purchasing municipal debentures. 
 
And what I’ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the years, 
municipalities have had to look at other avenues and resources 
in order to meet the financial needs of their municipalities until 
they indeed have the financial resources available to them 
through taxation and the property owner actually paying that 
tax. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there are a number of 
questions. While the Act itself seems to be fairly simple and 
straightforward, there are a number of questions that need to be 
raised and continue to be raised at this time, and therefore I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Moosomin has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 15. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 

 
Bill No. 13 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 13 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
privilege and pleasure to stand and make some comments 
regarding Bill No. 13, the Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in reviewing this Bill, I think that 
what this Bill is doing is making amendments to allow 
SaskEnergy to enter into the field of transporting other forms of 
energy such as ethanol, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen which, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, may or may not be a good thing. 
 
I believe in regards to the ethanol, I think this is something that 

the province of Saskatchewan, citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan has been looking for, for some time. And it begs 
the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, regarding ethanol — have 
we missed the boat? 
 
There’s lots of opportunity in regarding ethanol, but it seems 
like this government lagging behind all the time. And to be 
honest, Mr. Speaker, the ethanol industry could be and should 
be a growing part of Saskatchewan, but unfortunately it is not. 
And we need to take measures to make it more profitable in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And by allowing the transporting of 
other forms of energies like ethanol, it is a good move. 
 
The problem I have, or one of the problems I have, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in regarding this, is the expansion of the role of the 
Crown corporations. Does it infringe on the private sector 
operators? And furthermore has the private sector operators 
been consulted in this regard? And I would have my doubts if 
they were. And if they haven’t, why haven’t they? The private 
sectors in this province are part of what makes this province 
grow. And it’s up to the government to make the rules and 
regulations that will fit the infrastructure of this province. And 
in order to do that so that all parties benefit, these private 
sectors have to be consulted. And I would doubt, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if they were. 
 
In regards to SaskEnergy, I lived in the town of . . . [inaudible] 
. . . for sometime, and I looked at my SaskEnergy billing every 
month, and it got to a point where — boy — I’m paying a lot of 
money. And it seems like every year SaskEnergy went up. It 
was just a given. It was going up. So I decided that it was time 
to sell the house and move to an acreage where out there I can 
look at other forms of energy. And right now I’m looking at 
possibly going to wood, simply because again this year the 
government is raising SaskEnergy again. Every year it goes up. 
 
So to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what about the seniors that are 
on fixed incomes? How are they going to be able to pay for the 
increases to SaskEnergy? They’re on fixed incomes. And 
there’s many seniors in this province. In fact if you look around, 
with the amount of young people moving out of the province, 
there’s more and more seniors. How are they going to pay for 
this? And yet the government continually raises SaskEnergy 
rates. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what about the young people in the 
province of Saskatchewan? There’s not very many of them, but 
there are a few. How do they cope with the cost of SaskEnergy 
going up every year? Instead of staying home and being with 
their families, the spouse then has to go out and work, so 
they’re both out working which causes problems with families. 
All this adds to the frustration of growing a young family in the 
province of Saskatchewan. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they move to where they have a better standard of living which 
normally is into Alberta, so that’s why our young people are 
moving out of the province and moving to places like Alberta. 
It’s because of the added cost that the young families in our 
province are faced with. That is one of the stumbling blocks of 
not keeping our young people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mentioned, has the NDP consulted with 
the private companies on this Bill, and we know very well that 
the NDP have a long record of not consulting with stakeholders. 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

That seems to be their plan. Conquer and control. Push through 
things without contacting the people of this province who built 
this province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is the rationale for this 
expansion? Why are they doing this? 
 
SaskEnergy is a Crown and one of a valued Crown in this 
province, but why now for this expansion? Will this expansion 
of the corporation role keep rates low for people in this 
province of Saskatchewan? Is this why they’re doing it? It 
doesn’t mention it in here, but I would have my doubts if it 
does. If it goes that far to keeping the rates controllable in the 
province for seniors and young people as I have mentioned, 
then it is good. But I don’t see it in this Bill, and I have my 
doubts that it will, and I believe that it’s going to keep going up 
every year like it has been for the past number of years. 
 
Also in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s an amendment to 
expand the number of board members from 10 to 12 and I’m 
saying why. Why do we need two extra members more on a 
board to govern the control of a Crown? I would also want to 
make mention that I believe that two extra members coming to 
this board are probably some ex-NDP MLAs or officials that 
have worked with the NDP Party that will get these jobs. So it’s 
kind of patronage to their party as to who will fill in this role, 
and is that a clear way of doing things? No it’s not, so I wonder 
why we go to 12 members rather than staying at the 10. 
 
Every time you add more board members you add cost to the 
Crown. I mean it’s bad enough that we have some — what? — 
90 Crowns in the province of Saskatchewan, and now we’re 
going to add more members so that cost is more bureaucracy to 
the province of Saskatchewan which the taxpayers in this 
province have to pay for. 
 
So when the citizens of Saskatchewan say we have too much 
government, well here’s a perfect example, a perfect example of 
why the people of Saskatchewan are tired of the government, 
the NDP government, because every time there’s a job creation, 
it’s always within the government in administration. And that’s 
why the time for an election is soon, and I’ll tell you the 
citizens of Saskatchewan welcome that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 13. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook has moved adjournment of debate for Bill 
No. 13. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 25 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006/Loi 
de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member from Moosomin. 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Bill No. 25 is basically modernizing the legislation 
regarding the Legislative Assembly Act, and in most particular 
it’s addressing the issue of bilingual translation, with some 
housekeeping changes. 
 
Part of the modernization, Mr. Deputy Speaker, deals with the 
members of the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
and the responsibilities we as MLAs have and certainly the 
duties of MLAs and the different positions within the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I notice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have something like 71 
pages to this Act — much different than the previous Act that I 
dealt with which was basically one page of the Act. And so I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this might require just a little longer 
discussion and debate as we address the issues that are coming 
forward in this piece of legislation. 
 
What the minister indicated was that the Act is just being 
modernized and being made more consistent with other 
jurisdictions and federal language laws. And however we all 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well that there’s some changes 
within this Act also address issues of how members of the 
Legislative Assembly, elected officials, work within their 
constituencies and work within the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Having been a member of this Assembly for a good number of 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen changes take place 
through the years, some I would suggest have certainly been for 
the betterment of how the Assembly functions, how we as 
legislators meet the needs of our constituents, how we address 
and not only represent the needs of our constituents, but also 
representing our constituents in the broad picture, and how we 
represent Saskatchewan as a whole and stand up for issues 
surrounding this province. 
 
And we all believe it certainly is a terrific province. It’s, I 
would suggest, one of the best provinces in which to live. There 
were so many things going for us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and yet 
we continue to lag behind other jurisdictions in the country. 
And as I had indicated earlier, while . . . the changes are to 
bring us more consistent to other jurisdictions and federal laws. 
It’s unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re trying to be 
consistent, but we still lag behind in many areas. 
 
This legislation deals with rule changes concerning committees 
operating simultaneously. And as I indicated earlier, as we 
looked at the evolution of the legislative process from the time I 
first entered this Assembly to today and the fact that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I believe as a member of this Legislative 
Assembly you’ve had the privilege of seeing many changes . . . 
you’ve been involved in some of the changes as well as I have. 
 
We have moved from a process where the Assembly was called, 
and it could drag on for any period of days. In fact when I was 
first elected, we sat actually through the summer, and that 
certainly wasn’t a good time for our families. It was a difficult 
time for our families to sit through a time when you would look 
to enjoying some time . . . the beautiful nature around us, the 
scenery the province has, the great outdoors that we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And yet many members in this 
Assembly sat through that period of time, sitting in this 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

Assembly within the confines of these four walls, and didn’t 
have the privilege of actually enjoying the great outdoors that 
this province is known for. 
 
And so we have seen that evolution from that time to a period 
where we’re discussing more specific time periods in which 
MLAs are going to meet in the Assembly, and yet allows 
members the ability to address issues within their constituency. 
And I certainly agree. 
 
I’ve been a strong proponent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the fact 
that we should have a fall sitting, a legislative fall session — 
not at the whim of a government, but something that’s been 
agreed to as we see in Ottawa. Ottawa has a fall session. They 
have a break over Thanksgiving, and they have a break at the 
Remembrance Day celebrations. But they have a fall session 
that is defined. And then they have a spring sessions that’s 
defined. Then they have a summer session . . . or a winter 
session, pardon me, and a spring session. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this piece of legislation is 
. . . certainly has moved to address some of those issues. And 
now we have, as I note in the legislation, we have a specific 
time that’s been set out for us to sit in the fall. And we know 
that we’re going to sit roughly a period of five weeks. We know 
when it’s going to begin. We know that in the spring by a 
certain date we will be sitting at that time period rather than 
whenever the government felt it had its business in order and 
then they could afford to call the Assembly in because they 
were ready for the members to come and start addressing the 
issues. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So this piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think is 
certainly beneficial. And I want to acknowledge at this time that 
it came about as a result of some hard work on behalf of 
members on all parts of the floor, on both sides of the 
Assembly. And I want to compliment the members who 
through the years have been involved in the evolution of the 
changes which at the end of the day will not only benefit the 
people, the taxpayers, and the electors of Saskatchewan but 
certainly make life somewhat more . . . a lot easier for the 
sitting members. 
 
And one of the other issues that I certainly want to 
acknowledge, that I think is long overdue, is the fact that while 
you and I, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are quite familiar with the fact 
that when the Speaker sends out notice to let the members know 
that the House is going to sit on a specific day seven days 
hence, the line that hits the media is, MLAs going back to work. 
We know that that’s far from being true, that MLAs have been 
constantly on duty. However I’m not exactly sure why that 
headline specifically reads in that regard but what . . . As 
MLAs, as we came back to the sitting this fall, we knew that 
when we came back here we’d be sitting Monday and Tuesday 
and Wednesday and Thursday. And then Friday we’d actually 
have the opportunity to get back to our constituencies. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an MLA that doesn’t live 
all that far from Regina, to sit the five days and go back to the 
constituency mid-afternoon Friday wasn’t necessarily a 
problem for me. But, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 

members in this House who have four-, five-, and six-hour 
drives just to get back to their constituency. And when you’re 
sitting, to leave on a Friday afternoon basically you’re on your 
way back on a Sunday. It doesn’t give you that much time for 
family or for constituency matters. So the move to a Monday to 
Thursday, allowing for that Friday sitting . . . opportunity 
through Friday and part of Saturday to meet with your 
constituents, I think was the right thing to do. And I want to 
compliment the committee members for having put forward that 
proposal. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that isn’t much different 
than from what other jurisdictions are doing as well. And the 
public needs to be aware of the fact that, while the days may 
have changed a little bit, the hours of actual sitting time and the 
committee work in this Assembly really hasn’t changed that 
significantly, hasn’t changed whatsoever. The hours will be 
continued . . . The members will continue to put the required 
hours in this Assembly through committee work and through 
the legislative process. And I think that’s another issue that it’s 
important for us as legislators to let the people of Saskatchewan 
know — that their voice will be heard in this Assembly, that 
there will be adequate time to address those issues. 
 
So while this piece of legislation has so many other issues 
dealing with the requirements of members, the commitments of 
members to committee work, and the structure of the Assembly, 
and how the process is going to move forward, and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the fact that it’s in French as well, this piece of 
legislation specifically addresses that and ensures that there’s 
the proper appropriate bilingual translation. 
 
It’s appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the process that 
allowed for this evolution came about through the work of a 
number of dedicated members. Through consultation with other 
jurisdictions, provinces across this country, great country of 
ours. Through discussions with federal members. And even a 
couple members had the opportunity of travelling to other 
commonwealth jurisdictions to look at their process of 
legislative sitting and time in the Assembly, time out of the 
Assembly, committee work, and what have you. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly appropriate that we’ve 
actually moved forward to address some of the concerns in this 
Assembly and how this Assembly functions to allow members 
to more adequately and appropriately address concerns of their 
constituents. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know a number of 
other members would like to address this Bill before it’s moved 
forward in committee. Therefore at this time I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Moosomin has moved a motion to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
25. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 
 
 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

Bill No. 26 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 26 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, just a few comments in regarding Bill No. 26, The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. In fact I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could almost give the same speech 
over again in regards to this Act but I will save the members 
having to listen to me give the same speech. But I think what it 
does is basically addresses . . . It’s just a Bill that follows in 
conjunction with the legislative Act that was just, we just 
adjourned a moment ago. 
 
And this one here, Mr. Deputy . . . Madam Deputy Speaker, is a 
much simpler Act in regards to the members’ conflict of 
interest, government organization. It just sets up some new 
schedules in the Legislative Assembly and executive councils 
amendments Act. And therefore at this time, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moosomin has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 10 — The 
Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand today and enter into the adjourned debates on 
Bill No. 10, Limitations Amendment Act. I’m . . . been made 
aware that . . . Excuse me. 
 
This Act was before the legislature approximately a year ago 
and, because it wasn’t . . . didn’t cover all the bases that it was 
supposed to cover, we see it back here again in the legislature to 
be debated on. 
 
I find it’s always very interesting because we hear from 
members opposite, from the government side when Bills come 
forward and they want them to move through quickly, they say, 
don’t worry; all the work has been done. There’s no need to do 
any more scrutiny than what, you know, one or two adjourned 
debates on the Bill. And then we find out a year later that all the 
work hadn’t been done. 
 

And what comes to mind more often than not is The Cities Act. 
And I remember members from the government saying that this 
Cities Act had to be put through right away because it was the 
most important Bill that needed to be put through; all the 
homework had been done. And we found that not all the 
homework had been done. And eventually it passed but it’s 
been . . . There’s been a Cities Act that has been back before the 
legislature almost on a yearly basis as more amendments have 
to be made. 
 
Well Bill No. 10, Limitations Amendment Act is similar to that. 
It’s not nearly to the scope, of course, that The Cities Act was. 
Bill No. 10 is really quite a short piece of legislation dealing 
with limitations. The Bill makes changes to the period of 
limitations for decisions regarding property. In section 7 it 
enacts an ultimate limitation period of 15 years from the day of 
which the Act or omission on which the claim is based took 
place, Mr. Speaker. So it’s setting into stone some guidelines, 
some limitations as to, you know, certain examples that I just 
mentioned. 
 
I think if there is one thing that I heard actually today in 
question period, that there should be a limitations Act on how 
far this government can go back and blame other people on the 
state of the province. Now that would be a limitations Act that 
should be put in place. 
 
I heard the member from Moose Jaw North . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I heard the member from Moose Jaw North and 
now the member from North Battleford talking about the 1980s. 
And just in case they don’t realize, they’ve been in government 
for the last 15 years and the consequences that we’re facing in 
the province right now are of their making, not of any other 
party’s making. 
 
And so it’s interesting that, you know, as I’m talking about 
limitations and how far back in this situation, when we’re 
talking about legal jargon, how far back they can go, the 
government certainly doesn’t have any problem going back as 
far as it wants to to blame other people and other parties for the 
failings that quite frankly we see that this government is doing. 
 
In this Bill, section 15 is being amended to refer to section 7.1 
rather than subsection 7(3) which is being repealed. Section 21 
is being amended simply to refer to section 7, making the last 
couple amendments in the Bill appear to be housekeeping 
amendments. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I said, for the most part this Bill 
is just dealing with subject matters that weren’t dealt with in the 
Bill last year. It doesn’t seem to be meeting with too much 
concern that we’ve heard of yet. But as with all the Bills, we 
want to make sure that the proper time has been spent before 
the Bill moves on so that any of the interested parties can have a 
look at the Bill and raise concerns that they may have. At this 
point we haven’t heard a lot of concerns. But that doesn’t mean 
there won’t be any coming forward. 
 
So at this time, Madam Deputy Speaker, so the interest groups 
and the parties that this Bill affects can do their work on this 
piece of legislation, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

Head-Milestone has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 18 — The 
Court Security Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
great pleasure to speak to this Bill, The Court Security Act, Bill 
No. 18. This Bill seems to allow for airport style security, 
including metal detectors, for courthouses. It allows sheriffs the 
power to frisk people and to evict individuals who have entered 
a courthouse and so on. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I worked for several years in justice in 
this city, in court services actually, and I know that security is 
and can be an issue in courthouses. Some of the people — a 
very small percentage of the people — but some of the people 
who are in courthouses are of the unsavoury variety and this can 
cause security issues coupled with the emotional nature of court 
proceedings and so on. 
 
And I know that during my time as deputy local registrar of the 
Regina judicial district that I had to double as a security person 
a couple of times. And no real danger ensued but, just the same, 
I do understand the potential for issues surrounding security in 
our courthouses. At the same time, Madam Deputy Speaker, we 
have to balance security of those involved in the justice system 
and others in courthouses with the public’s right to access to 
public buildings. And I think that’s the balancing act that is the 
issue here, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a very sad state of 
affairs when a public building and public officials require such 
levels of heightened security. Maybe that’s where we’re at in 
this society. I’m not so sure. 
 
In any event, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’ll have to speak with 
the parties that are involved in the judicial proceedings these 
days as my experience goes back many years. And accordingly, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn this matter for now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Thunder Creek has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 19 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up and discuss on this particular Bill, number . . . 
Bill 19, the security Act. It’s quite a lengthy Bill at that end of 
it. 
 
It’s probably one of them Bills that when we change our 
committee structure, that it would fall into that quite handily. 
And the reasons are because it is lengthy. We’re doing second 
readings in the fall, and this Bill probably won’t pass till this 
spring. And you’ll have time to get out the special interest 
groups. This particular Bill, it’ll probably take a month to read 
it. That’s why it’s probably good that it’s going to not go 
through till spring at that end of it. It’s quite lengthy. It’s quite a 
. . . many amendments on it. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And it deals with a very important subject. It deals with 
investment, people that are investing here in Saskatchewan and 
also throughout Canada, Madam Deputy Speaker. And we 
come to if you’re going to be growing this province, that’s one 
of the things we’re going to be looking at is investment. 
 
People should always feel that their investment should be safe. 
And I know sometimes a lot of people, they’re not, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They don’t feel that their investments are safe. 
And they worry about that, especially older senior people. They 
feel that when it comes to their savings, they are very worried 
about it. They’re very worried about their investments at that 
end of it. So any laws that we can change to make that a little 
safer and make more investment coming to this particular 
province, Madam Deputy Speaker, at that end of it, because 
that’s . . . if we want investment to come to this province . . . 
and we need investment coming to it. 
 
We haven’t had much investment coming to this province under 
this present NDP government. And with that, we need to do 
whatever we can to make investors feel safe because right now 
under this NDP government, Madam Deputy Speaker, they 
don’t feel welcome is the biggest thing. That’s what part of this 
government should be looking at is actually trying to make 
investors feel welcome. They’re very good at not making 
business people feel welcome. I can remember when the 
Premier sent out that letter. What did he call them? Greedy 
corporate huskers. I think that’s what he called them. Greedy 
corporate huskers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hucksters. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Huskers. He called them greedy corporate 
huskers in his letter that he sent out to raise money. Now how 
can you raise money that way and get people to come and 
invest in your province when you send out that kind of letter to 
business people? 
 
Now I know I’ve talked to some of the people, the members 
opposite there, Madam Deputy Speaker, and you’ll talk to a few 
of them. They think they’re business people or they’ll talk, 
they’ll say we’re friends of business. I know a couple members 
say, oh I get along really good with the business community, 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

with the restaurant community here in Regina. 
 
But I think if they really went out there and talked to them and 
showed them that letter, I don’t think that people feel, business 
people in this province feel that friendly towards the NDP 
government. They don’t in Saskatoon. They certainly don’t in 
Arm River-Watrous. They certainly don’t in rural 
Saskatchewan. And it’s coming that way in Regina. 
 
That’s why their polling is sitting at about 24 per cent right now 
and plummeting with that at the end of it. And that’s why our 
economy isn’t growing. That’s why there’s no jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. And there should be a lot more jobs with the 
investment coming in. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, dealing with this particular Bill, it also 
. . . there’s a question or two you want to ask is, this 
government says it’s working with other provinces with that. I 
wonder if it’s leading or if it’s following the other provinces 
when they’re putting these regulations together. Because this 
government has a history of just following — of following, 
never being a leader. 
 
And one of them is we talk about another Bill that’s on the 
order paper, my biodiesel Bill, Madam Deputy Speaker. That is 
a Bill that probably should be pushed forward to show that this 
province is a leader in the biofuels industry. But no, this 
province always wants to follow, follow, follow, at that end of 
it. 
 
And I think with this particular Bill, it’s probably one of the last 
provinces to come in line, at that end of it, with the other 
provinces. Because I’m pretty sure, I think Alberta was a pusher 
of this, and it probably is a very good piece legislation. Because 
that’s something that these provinces should be doing is 
working together. They haven’t been doing that in the past, and 
this government is very bad for not working with its 
neighbours, Alberta and BC [British Columbia]. 
 
Right now there’s a new West emerging. There’s a new West 
out there emerging — a powerhouse of Alberta and BC. And 
Saskatchewan could be a piece of that if they really wanted to. 
But do this NDP government really want to be a piece of the 
new emerging West? We could be a power. This is where the 
power base could be. We have all the natural resources. We 
have the oil. We have the gas. We have uranium. We have the 
mining. And we have the people that want to work in Western 
Canada. We could be an emerging power. 
 
But does this province want to work with Alberta and BC? No, 
no. I think in Alberta and BC I think they have joint cabinet 
meetings once a year. They also have what they call . . . They’re 
trying to work on trade, lifting trade restrictions interprovincial. 
Is this government sitting on that committee? I think we’d 
raised questions on it. And they said . . . What did the Premier 
say, Madam Deputy Speaker? I think he said it would blur 
political lines if we tried to work with Alberta. 
 
Well why not just trying to better the life of people in 
Saskatchewan except worrying about your own political future. 
And this is what this government has a history of — always 
worrying about its own political hide. And its hide right now is 
getting tanned out there, Madam Deputy Speaker, and it’s going 

to be kicked out next election at that end of it. 
 
But that’s one of the things that this government should be 
looking at. If they started with this working interprovincial, they 
should be working at that to lift trade restrictions or to work 
better with your neighbours. 
 
There’s different rules. I know that on the highways I had one 
guy call me. He said, you know, there’s a weigh station on 
Saskatchewan side and there’s a weigh station on the Alberta 
side. We had to build both of them. They were probably only 
less than 50 miles apart. He says, why isn’t there just one on the 
border? Why don’t we have the same weight restriction? Why 
don’t we have the same rules and regulations across that to 
make the trucking move across? Because most of the stuff 
that’s moving across interprovincial is moved by trucks. And it 
should be as easy, when it comes to trade, as easy as it can be to 
move at that particular end of it, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Because you have to remember that this particular government 
though doesn’t like to work with its neighbours. It doesn’t even 
like to work with the Manitoba government who is an NDP 
government, doesn’t even like to work to them because that’s 
even more left than the Manitoba government. Manitoba 
government is kind of in the centre. 
 
These guys would love to drag you back to the Tommy Douglas 
days and maybe even further back to before that which was the 
CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] and before that 
which is the Regina Manifesto which basically deals with 
eradicating capitalism. And that’s what the roots of that party is. 
And you wonder why, Madam Deputy Speaker, that they can’t 
work with any provinces at that particular end of it. 
 
You know this government, when it comes right down to it, is 
basically an isolated bunch and the people of Saskatchewan are 
realizing it. Federally the NDP government, federally, is just a 
fringe party. It’s not much more better than the Green Party 
right now. And these guys are going to be joining them before 
long. In a number of years, the NDP Government of 
Saskatchewan is just going to be a fringe party just about the 
same level as the Green Party. And I’ll be looking forward to 
that, Madam Deputy Speaker, when that happens. 
 
You know we’re talking . . . But I should get back to Bill 19 
because when I start talking about political history, I just can’t 
help but bring up the NDP’s past at that end of it. We are 
talking about Bill 19, at that end of it, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
and with that . . . But one of the reasons on that is because of 
the history of this NDP government of not working with the 
people and also not consulting. There’s a number of people. I 
wonder if they really consulted with them at that end of it. I 
know that we’re going to be checking with that. 
 
This particular Bill needs a lot of scrutiny because I understand 
that they’d passed legislation that came in effect in June 1, 
2006, and they are already making changes to the amendments 
already. It’s been less than six months and they’re already 
making amendments to this particular piece of legislation. If 
they’d have did their homework back then, I wonder if they 
would have to make the amendments. Are the amendments 
dealing because they made mistakes? Or is there further 
changes that have been made since then? And those are 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

questions I guess we’ll be asking in committee and also passing 
out to interested parties. 
 
Because getting back to the topic of investment, this is a very 
important Bill because you are dealing with people’s money out 
there and they should feel, when they want to invest in 
Saskatchewan, they should feel safe. 
 
And I know that my constituency office, I’ve had a number of 
calls and it’s mostly from seniors talking about certain 
investments. We’ve heard about the scams in Moose Jaw where 
they were phoning from Nigeria. There were some people there. 
But I’ve had some . . . they’ve come and they’ve showed me 
some letters of . . . and they looked like pretty shady 
investments. I say, you know, I say take them to the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] or take them to an investor’s 
house and let them look at it, you know. Because we do get that 
here. There is unfortunately people that will prey on seniors 
when it comes to investing money at that end of it. So any rules 
that we can to make it safer and better, we should be looking at 
that. And I think this piece of legislation is moving in the right 
direction at that end of it. 
 
Now I’ve made some points about this government and the 
direction it likes to move, which is slow. But on that particular 
end I think, I think they’re moving in the right direction with 
this particular piece of legislation. But I also . . . like I think we 
should check with Alberta, BC, the neighbours because I don’t 
think these guys check that much with them to see if they’re 
totally in line with amendments that are being made to this 
particular piece of legislation at that end of it. 
 
I think another thing that this Bill deals with, it’s supposed to 
. . . They talk about a passport. And this also talks about dealing 
with territories, kind of a passport on the security, that the 
regulations will be basically broad-based. Now I know looking 
at it quickly there were some stuff here with it. That Ontario at 
first didn’t join but now they’ve come to some kind of an 
understanding, and I think they are going to join. 
 
It would be nice if all the provinces and territories could be on 
the same rules and regulations when it comes to investing and 
also when it comes to investor fraud because as we move into 
the Internet age, there’s a lot of ways you can invest now. 
There’s . . . you can . . . things you can do on the Internet that 
probably people may invest and may think that they are actually 
investing in a legitimate business and find out later on that they 
were . . . it wasn’t and they ended up losing their money. 
 
So that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate on this particular Bill so that we can send it out to the 
appropriate parties and also that it can be looked at. Like I say, 
it is a very extensive Bill with many amendments on it. Thank 
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Arm River-Watrous 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 22 — The Legal 
Profession Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Bill is about the third most 
favoured group in society. We have lawyers, used car salesmen, 
and politicians that rank one, two, three on this issue. And this 
one deals with the legal society, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
It deals with a number of areas. The first one is confidentiality 
or privilege of the information that they have access to. I think 
everyone has assumed that when you deal with a lawyer, you 
have client-solicitor privilege, that you have confidentiality of 
the information that is provided, and that that confidentiality 
also covers the staff in the legal offices, covers the staff as well 
within the court systems and the prosecutors’ office that are 
dealing with any legal matters or any legal information that may 
pertain to the individual. 
 
So while there are changes being made to this Act, I just 
wonder what is precipitating the necessity for that change. Has 
there been a breach at some point that has caused this to 
happen? Or what is the reason for the change in this particular 
piece of legislation dealing with the disclosure of information 
that is privileged or confidential? 
 
So I think the minister, I’d like to propose to him that when he 
comes before the committee at some point, that he be ready to 
explain what is generating this need for this particular change in 
privilege and confidentiality rules. Has there been a . . . I read 
his comments in Hansard, and I didn’t seem to pick up that 
there was an answer there on that particular issue. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’ll be one of the questions 
which I’ll be proposing, or my colleagues will be, to the 
Minister of Justice when he comes before the committee to 
explain why there is a need for change. Has there been a breach 
in the past that this is trying to correct? Or is it foreseeing a 
potential breach in the future and that they’re trying to head it 
off before it actually happens, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
One of the other areas that this Act deals with is legal trust 
funds, lawyers’ accounts, where they would put monies that 
have been entrusted to their, to their hands — let’s say in a real 
estate transfer which is probably one of the most common, or 
perhaps estates, those kind of issues, Madam Deputy Speaker 
— where a lawyer’s office would have a trust fund set up where 
funds would be deposited into that account to be held for a 
period of time until a certain transaction has taken place. 
 
So when that money is put into the lawyer’s account, the 
question then becomes, what happens with it? What are they 
doing with that money? If it’s in a straight chequing account, 
one in which there is no interest paid, well then there would be 
no money accruing to either the legal fund, to the lawyer, to the 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

person whose money is on deposit. No one would be gaining.  
 
But if the lawyer’s legal trust is say a chequing account that has 
a savings component or an interest component to it, well then it 
could be generating some revenues. And to whom does that 
interest accrued belong? Does it belong to the person who has 
their money on deposit with the legal fund, with the legal trust? 
Does it belong to a lawyer? Does it belong to the government? 
Does it belong to some other entity, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
And that is what this particular Bill is dealing with. Up until 
now any accrued interest — it’s my understanding — was paid 
if they couldn’t identify clearly to whom that money belonged, 
e.i., the person who has money being held by the lawyer in a 
legal trust, then that money was then turned over to the 
government. 
 
[15:45] 
 
What this Act proposes to do is to turn that accumulated interest 
over to the law society and the law foundation account for their 
purposes. And I guess one of the things that is of interest to 
people is, what are those purposes? And the minister outlined 
some of them in his presentation on this Bill, and I’m not sure if 
that constitutes the entire total that the law foundation funds 
would be utilized for. But some of the things that he listed were 
legal education, legal research, legal aid, law libraries, and law 
reform. 
 
And I guess the question will need to be asked to the minister. 
And I’m sure most members of the legal profession would have 
some answer for this, but I’m not familiar with a number of 
these areas in relationship to the legal foundation. 
 
When you take a look at legal aid, legal aid is provided by the 
province through the Department of Justice to provide 
assistance to those individuals in society who cannot afford the 
services of a solicitor mainly in dealing with criminal cases. It 
used to be broader than that, but now it seems to have been 
narrowed down in the main to use during criminal proceedings. 
 
In fact is this summer, the situation out at Whitewood with the 
kidnapping, the individual who has been charged with that was 
looking to Saskatchewan to provide the funding for his solicitor 
which he wanted from Ontario. Well this is Saskatchewan. We 
have legal aid lawyers who are employed by the province. We 
also have a good many other law firms across the province that 
could provide services for that gentleman in his case. So there 
was no need for legal aid to provide that assistance for someone 
out of province. 
 
But I’m not sure when the minister talked about legal aid in his 
speech dealing with this Act, if he meant the Saskatchewan 
Legal Aid that provides that service or some other form of legal 
aid through the law foundation. My suspicion is that what he 
was talking about in terms of the law foundation is not what 
people in Saskatchewan normally think of as legal aid, but some 
other form of service to lawyers perhaps or to . . . I’m not even 
sure if it would be to the general public, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So I guess that’s one of the areas that the minister will need to 
clarify, as well as the costs for legal education. The legal 
education of whom? Does the law foundation provide some 

assistance for legal information to the general public, or is this 
information being provided to the legal services in 
Saskatchewan — to the lawyers and the law firms? Again that’s 
an area that I think needs to be explained and needs to be 
researched. 
 
Now when you . . . He mentioned law libraries. Well certainly 
law libraries, if they have access to the general public, are a 
worthy, worthy enterprise, a worthy action to be sustaining 
because quite a number of times people need an explanation as 
to first off what the statute is, secondly what it means, and third 
how it has been interpreted in legal cases. And that would be 
available in law libraries. And precedents are there going back 
many, many years if the law library is fully provided for. And 
so those would be of valuable assistance to anyone who has 
given some consideration to their own legal statuses and the 
actions they may or may not be involved in. 
 
I guess in one area though, sometimes a little bit of knowledge 
can be dangerous, and we see people who come forward to try 
to represent themselves before the courts and struggle a great 
deal. And in those areas a very good law library might certainly 
assist them in providing that. And I know the old advice is that 
when someone represents themselves before a court of law, 
they generally have a very poor lawyer. So I think that’s 
something that we should all keep in mind when we’re 
contemplating any actions before the court that we might want 
to represent ourselves in. 
 
One of the areas in this though, Madam Deputy Chair, when 
you look at the amount of funds generated, I would wonder 
what’s the volume of dollars that we are discussing here. Are 
we talking hundreds of dollars? Are we talking thousands of 
dollars? What are we talking about when we’re looking at this 
kind of change in the Act? How much money would be going 
from the lawyers’ legal trust funds into the law foundation? 
 
And I think that would . . . Well that money at some point in 
time could belong to someone who’s a client to a law firm. It 
may not be a significant amount, enough money to warrant 
tracking, but I guess the question comes in, when should it be 
tracked and paid out to the individual who has money on 
deposit with a trust and when would it not be tracked and turned 
over then to the law foundation? I think those are some of the 
areas that there are questions in this particular area. 
 
Also this Act deals with solicitor-client privilege. And from 
looking at the Act, it would seem to be a situation where a law 
firm or a lawyer is no longer practising and what happens to 
those records that would belong to the lawyer and to the client 
but may have a need to be accessed once that law firm or that 
lawyer is no longer practising. And so who controls those 
records? How are they accessed? Who makes the determination 
under solicitor-client privilege that that information should 
become public and available to someone else? And when is that 
information not available? 
 
And the Act talks about making changes to that, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. So that’s another area that I think needs to be 
scrutinized very carefully to determine when the courts should 
make the decision, and based on what criteria are they going to 
make the decision to restrict access to the information or to 
provide what has previously been confidential information or 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

privileged information under solicitor-client privileges. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, these are some of the issues that 
we are still awaiting further information on from stakeholders 
throughout the province; therefore I would move at this time 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington has 
moved to adjourn the debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 23 — The 
Securities Transfer Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand today and talk on Bill 23, transfer of 
securities. We’ve looked through this Bill and really do feel that 
there’s much more scrutiny that needs to be taken with the 
stakeholders and allowing the stakeholders to have input in this 
piece of legislation. 
 
The government at times says that they have consulted with 
different groups and that they’re all onside with pieces of 
legislation. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, from my experience 
in this House that quite often once you take the Bill out to 
different stakeholders they say, well we hadn’t heard anything 
about it. A classic example of that would have been a Bill that 
came through last year regarding gaming, video gaming, and a 
major stakeholder — whose business relied on, you know, 
whether this legislation passed or didn’t pass and some of the 
issues around that — had never been consulted, not even once 
by the government. 
 
The only way they found out about this piece of legislation was 
happening to watch the CTV [Canadian Television Network 
Ltd.] news and found out that this piece of legislation was 
directly going to impact them. And that’s when they became 
involved and certainly worked through our caucus and had the 
Bill held up long enough so that they got to do their due 
diligence and work with the government to make necessary 
amendments to that piece of legislation. 
 
So once again, when we look at Bill No. 23, we feel that is . . . 
It may not be to the same extent as what that gaming legislation 
was last year, but it certainly is our job to hold up these Bills to 
make sure that the stakeholders have input into them. 
 
This is the second securities Bill that has entered the legislature 
in this fall sitting, Madam Deputy Speaker. This Bill will bring 
us in line, the province of Saskatchewan in line with other 
international conventions, as well as other provincial 
regulations in Canada. 
 

Currently law is inadequate. The law’s inadequate to deal with 
the sophisticated, multi-jurisdictional transactions, and needs to 
be reformed. So whenever you hear that it deals with 
sophisticated, multi-jurisdictional transactions, you know it’s a 
fairly in-depth piece of legislation and needs the proper 
scrutiny. 
 
I think many provinces are looking into legislation like that or 
have implemented this type of legislation. This will add a 
formal legal transaction process. It will control final risk and 
achieve finality of settlements which, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
when you hear the importance — what I think is fairly 
important of this piece of legislation — it begs the question as 
to why this legislation is coming to this legislature now and 
why it hadn’t been looked at over the past number of years to 
try and formalize across Canada and internationally the process 
of transferring securities. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when you look at the way things are 
now in this province and around the world, it really has become 
a global place, and dealing multi-jurisdictionally is not an 
uncommon issue. I can just speak from experience with 
commodities, farm commodities where, you know, it’s 
interesting. We had the debate earlier in this legislature about 
the Canadian Wheat Board, but how, you know, the 
government feels that the only people that can market the grain 
properly would be the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And I can just speak from my perspective that, through our 
farm, we haven’t grown wheat board grain for about 8 or 9 
years, and yet every kernel of grain that we have grown — 
whether it’s lentils, flax, canola, peas, canary seed — every 
kernel of grain that we have grown has been marketed without 
the wheat board. 
 
Well the member from Cannington is saying successfully. For 
the most part it’s been successful. I haven’t always hit the top 
prices that I’ve wanted to hit, but the point being I’ve had the 
opportunity to market the grain as I wanted. 
 
And the point of that is, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the world 
has become accessible through punching keys on your 
computer — or as the Premier would say, dialing in the 
different websites around the world — and you can find out 
what is going on around the world. And when you look at this 
piece of legislation that’s talking about transfer of securities and 
multi-jurisdictional, that’s what it’s all about. And that’s 
certainly becoming more commonplace every year that we’re 
dealing in a global market, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So there is some concern as to why this piece of legislation 
hadn’t come to this House earlier. We do know that, now that 
it’s here, we need to do the proper due diligence and 
consultation with many of the stakeholders to make sure that 
this does bring us in line with other jurisdictions. I would hate 
to go through the work of passing this Bill and only to find that 
we aren’t in line with a number of jurisdictions and have to 
revisit this piece of legislation again next year — such as the 
Bill that I had talked about earlier, the limitation statutes. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we want to make sure that, if 
we’re going to put this Bill forward, that it deals with the issues 
that it talks about and that it brings us into a standard that is 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

relevant across jurisdictions, be it provincial or internationally. 
So until that work is done, Madam Deputy Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Indian Head has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 5 — The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
The Oil and Gas Conservation Act I think is a very important 
Act, particularly in my constituency as we have . . . a good 
number of the oil wells in Saskatchewan are in the Cannington 
constituency in southeast Saskatchewan. There’s a number of 
other areas as well. Estevan has a good many of those wells, as 
does the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency and some place up 
in the far, far northern part of the province, somewhere around 
Lloydminster. They also have a number of wells, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. That’s a long ways away from Cannington. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the newer areas of the province 
where drilling is taking place, orphan wells may not be a big 
problem yet. But in the mature oil patch, orphan wells are 
indeed a problem. What happens is that a well is drilled, 
produced for a period of time, it gets sold a number of times, 
and finally someone abandons the well. And hopefully they do 
the proper work to clean that up, but it doesn’t always happen. 
Sometimes an individual owning that particular well that’s no 
longer productive simply walks away from it and someone else 
is therefore left to pay the fees, to pay the costs of the 
environmental cleanup that is involved. 
 
And the Minister of Justice is talking about those greedy 
corporate hucksters. Well the minister . . . What happens in 
these cases is generally an individual, not a corporation, that is 
performing those. But there are those kind of individuals and 
those kind of corporations throughout society, in every walk of 
life, of every political stripe. No one has a corner on those kind 
of individuals, Madam Deputy Speaker. If they did not exist, if 
those kind of people did not exist, there would be very little 
need for lawyers and there would be very little need for laws 
because we would treat each other equitably and fairly. 
Unfortunately, lawyers proliferate and so do laws because of 
the individuals that we face in society. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in dealing with orphan wells, there is 
an environmental cost to cleaning these up when they are 
abandoned. In most cases they’re looked after by the owner of 

the property — the oil company, the individual who owns that 
production, that previous production, looks after. But 
sometimes it doesn’t happen. 
 
So that means if it’s on private property, in a good many cases, 
the individual — generally an agriculture producer, a farmer or 
a rancher — is left to hold the bag when it comes to paying for 
those environmental costs. Even though they as an individual 
have got very, very little economic return from that, they’re left 
with what could be a very substantial cost for the cleanup. 
 
So a number of jurisdictions — Alberta and Saskatchewan, both 
— have implemented orphan well legislation, which is what 
this is mainly dealing with, to protect the landowners and the 
government from those onerous costs. Because when an 
individual can’t afford to pay for that, then it falls back onto 
government to recover the property and to clean it up. 
 
And we see this happen not just in the oil patch, but we see it 
happen as well within communities. We see it happen with 
service stations. We’ve seen it happen up in Prince Albert with 
the treatment plant that was there for railroad ties. I believe it 
was a tar site of some kind. So there are a number of those sites 
across the province, and this particular Bill deals with those 
involved in the oil and gas production area. 
 
Now the government is changing this Act to move the charge, 
the cost away from wells that have been abandoned or ceased. 
The word abandoned isn’t used. It’s inactive. So they have 
moved, they’re moving it from inactive wells to active wells. 
There are a lot more active wells across the province than there 
are inactive wells and so they’re changing the charge. 
 
So I guess the real questions need to be asked. What was the 
charge previously on an inactive well? And what’s the charge 
going to be on an active well? If they’re equal, there are a lot 
more active wells than there were inactive wells, so the 
government is then charging a significant increase fee to the oil 
and gas production sector of the province. And you might say 
that this particular charge, it’s not a charge based on the amount 
of production you’ve generated. It’s not a charge based on the 
value of your assets. It’s simply a capital charge on the fact that 
you own the property or lease the property and own the 
equipment sitting on it. So it’s really a form of capital tax. 
 
So the question comes down to, what is a fair amount of capital 
tax to charge for this kind of service? If each well, each facility 
is charged a percentage, if it’s charged a flat fee, well then what 
is the total cost? What is the government going to generate for 
this charge? And what are their expenses incurred in both 
developing that structure and how much money are they 
accumulating? And what are they doing with it in the meantime 
before it’s actually used, when it ever may be used, to correct 
the situation of an orphan well? 
 
One of the things I think that the government should do — and I 
don’t see this in the Act or in the legislation anyplace — that 
since they’re changing it over to active wells, it should be 
scaled based on the number of wells and facilities that any 
particular owner has. It should also be capped at a certain 
amount so that whether you own 100 wells or whether you own 
1,000 wells, there is a relative cap in there someplace — 
whatever the appropriate number would be — rather than 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

simply having it open-ended as another tax. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of things that need to be discussed with 
this. There’s a lot of input still needed from the stakeholders. 
And I’m not sure how many of them are aware of the changes 
from inactive sites to active sites, which is a critical change, so 
they need to be made aware of this. They need to have an 
opportunity to understand what the government is proposing. 
 
Overall there is a need for orphan well protection. There is a 
need for the industry, and the government benefits greatly from 
this industry. They collect very, very substantial royalties so if 
. . . You know, the government benefits probably almost as 
much as any company does from this. So they need to certainly 
be a part of this. 
 
So before this is finally decided, Madam Deputy Speaker, there 
needs to be consultation with the industries involved. There 
needs to be consultation with the landowners and their 
associations such as the Surface Right Association before this 
moves ahead. So at this time, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cannington has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 14 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to enter debate on the Bill that’s before the 
House at this point, Bill No. 14, An Act to amend The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002. And 
according to the usual procedure the new Act will be identified 
as The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2006 . 
 
This particular piece of legislation I think could be best 
described as a housekeeping measure with a little bit of a twist, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. Because while it seems pretty 
straightforward and uncontroversial or non-controversial, the 
legislation does have some provisions in it that I think need 
discussion in the House today and probably the review of some 
interested third parties that, whether or not they’ve been made 
aware of this particular piece of legislation, they need to bring 
their views on this legislation to us so that we can represent 
them adequately. And we’ll be doing that over the next little 
while, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to refer to the legislation though, sort of piece by piece, 
so that individuals who might be reading Hansard or watching 
this presentation on TV will have a better understanding of 

what is done in this particular piece of legislation before us 
today. It talks of, primarily of the repealing of certain sections 
in the legislation — most of which are redundant. But I think 
for the record we’ll probably identify why the redundancy 
exists and what the government is doing to move on. 
 
In this particular Bill, sections 24, 25, and 26 are repealed. Now 
section 24 is repealed for the following reason as provided by 
the Department of Environment. It says in their notes to this 
particular legislation that section 24 deals with the registration 
of permit notices and easements for land governed by The Land 
Titles Act, and this Act was repealed effective August 24, 2002 
making the section obsolete and creating potential confusion for 
applicants. So what we’ve got here is housekeeping that is 
necessary because a certain Act was repealed previously and 
has made this particular section completely redundant. 
 
Section 25 has also been repealed and, according to the notes 
provided by the department, this section requires the minister to 
register permits to construct and permits to operate waterworks 
and sewage works for land governed by The Land Titles Act, 
2000. Now given that the interest registrations only provide 
notice of construction or operation of work on a large portion of 
land that is outside of the legal survey requirement, 
Saskatchewan Environment believes that this process is of little 
real value and should therefore be repealed. So what we’ve 
once again got is a section of the Act that has been made 
redundant by elimination of The Land Titles Act, 2000. 
 
Then when we get to section 26, this part is repealed effectively 
once again because of the removal of The Land Titles Act 
which was replaced by the later edition Land Titles Act, 2000. 
So there we have basically the justification for these repealed 
sections. 
 
Now we do have new sections. We have a new section 27 and a 
new section 28 replacing sections 27 and 28 that exist in the 
current legislation, The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2002. And when we look at that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that’s the area where this particular piece of 
legislation becomes somewhat more interesting. 
 
According to the department, section 27 as it now stands needed 
to be repealed. Because this section of the Act requires the 
minister to register permits for waterworks and sewage works 
on land governed by The Land Titles Act, 2000 so that an 
easement is created. Now proposed changes would narrow the 
application of this new legislation from any and all waterworks 
or sewage works to just newly constructed sewage works and 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The background 
conversations and noise is not allowing the member on his feet 
to really give the debate that is deserved. I would ask members 
to keep their levels of debate down so we can hear the member 
on his feet. Thank you. The member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I was 
referring to the fact that section 27 as it now stands is to be 
repealed and a new part of the Act will be inserted under that 
section number. But the existing section 27 allowed for 
applications to be applied to any waterworks or sewage works. 
 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

But now the new section 27 will limit the requirement for this 
type of permitting to newly constructed sewage works, 
especially those that discharge effluent across or under lands 
owned by other persons. And we’re going to talk about that a 
little bit later, Madam Deputy Speaker, as we move forward in 
this particular discussion. 
 
But I think that what’s interesting here is, if I can read this 
correctly, if the information given us by the department is 
accurate, none of this legislation will have a retroactive 
application. It will be for new projects from this day on or from 
the day that the legislation is given assent, and so the 
retroactivity doesn’t need to concern people. 
 
But there is a rather interesting change that comes into effect 
here. If I may, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read the new 
provision of section 27 into the record just for clarity on this. 
Section 27, part 2 states: 
 

If the minister is satisfied that any sewage works will 
adversely affect any land other than that on which those 
works are to be constructed or are situated, the minister 
shall provide a written request to the permit holder 
requiring the permit holder to: 

a) obtain from the registered owner of the other land an 
easement, in the prescribed form; 
b) obtain from any other person having a registered 
interest in the land . . . consent to the granting of the 
easement; and 
c) apply to the Registrar of Titles to register the 
easement against the titles to the affected lands. 

 
So while we’re looking at a new permitting process moving 
forward, Madam Deputy Speaker, the emphasis changes 
significantly because the responsibility is moved from the 
minister to achieve the permitting of these new projects to the 
promoter or the individual who’s actually going to undertake 
the construction of this project. And while that may not seem 
like a big deal, it might seem quite reasonable under the 
circumstances I think that what we’re finding here is not just a 
transfer of responsibility but clearly a transfer of cost now to the 
individual who’s looking to build this project — this 
waterworks project, this sewage works project, or whatever. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And what you would find in this situation, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, is the individual having to, having to apply for this 
permit and having the easement registered with ISC, the 
Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, if you remember back a few 
years ago, investment services corporation was a $100 million 
government boondoggle. And frankly the only way that 
investment services corporation has been able to get itself 
anywhere near sound financial footing is to increase the costs of 
registration for whatever title requirements might exist to the 
individuals involved. 
 
The costs of it went up significantly and for a time there, there 
was real consternation on the part of people — both lawyers 
and builders and people who were transferring title in real estate 
transactions — very concerned about the exorbitant cost of title 

registration. And here what we’ve got now is a new way to 
generate revenue for investment services corporation. 
 
Now it might not, it might not amount to hundreds of millions 
of dollars. It might not even amount to millions of dollars. But 
nevertheless it is a way to generate additional cash moving into 
investment services corporation to help them keep their 
financial house in order. I might, I might mention, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that the cost of that particular project . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Morin: — With leave to introduce guests, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres 
has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Great, carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
great pleasure to introduce to you and through you and to all 
members of the Assembly seated in the Speaker’s gallery this 
afternoon a group of people that are visiting Saskatchewan and 
the Agribition this week. They are a group of farmers that are 
here from northern Germany. They are accompanied by a tour 
group, that is Wilhelm Haarenberg, and also by the former 
honorary counsel for Germany and Saskatchewan, Dr. Guenter 
Kocks — maybe he could give a wave — and also my former 
boss when I worked there. And I just want to say . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . well that’s true. And I want to say: 
 
[The member spoke for a time in German.] 
 
And I ask all my colleagues to please welcome them to 
Saskatchewan and that they enjoy a good week here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act, 2006 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Before I 
get back to the very important subject at hand, maybe I could 
concur with the welcome that was just given by the member to 
our guests in the gallery today from northern Germany. I had 
the distinct pleasure of visiting northern Germany as part of a 
parliamentary exchange a few years ago. It’s beautiful country, 
and if I could remember just a little bit of my German heritage, 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

I’d say, “Wie geht’s?” That’s the extent of it, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m sure they know what I said. 
 
In this particular piece of legislation we see the cost of 
registration and the burden for registration moved from the 
minister to the proponents of projects, either the waterworks 
projects or the sewer works projects. And as I was indicating, 
while that might not generate a lot of additional revenue for the 
ISC people and the entity that registers titles, certainly I’m sure 
they will welcome the additional cash that this new burden will 
be placing on individuals undertaking these kinds of projects. 
 
The legislation as it exists, Madam Deputy Speaker, is going to 
affect not just the construction of new plants, whether it be 
water treatment plants or water plants themselves, but it will 
also apply to ditches. If somebody wants to discharge sewage 
from a project that will flow through a ditch to a lagoon for 
instance or that type of runway, water runway of some sort, or 
even pipelines, if those kinds of means by which to move water 
or sewage is crossing any other piece of property, not only is 
the permit holder required to take extensive action but he is 
responsible then to get an easement approved on the piece of 
land that is also being affected. 
 
So you could have a situation, Madam Deputy Speaker, where 
if the piece of land affected was divided by a road and a railroad 
track and maybe a subdivision, a small subdivision of some 
sort, or a piece of property that’s been subdivided out of the 
quarter section, the individual could have a very significant 
effort in front of him or her in trying to get the easement 
approved by all of the individuals that might be affected one 
way or the other by this particular project. 
 
So I’m sure, Madam Deputy Speaker, that members of this 
legislature are familiar with the fact that now that we do our 
land titles registration through ISC, any party that’s got interest 
in a piece of land has to sign off on these projects. And that is 
sometimes much more complicated than it would seem. And of 
course, if you have a right-of-way through a piece of land for a 
road or a railway or some other development, each of those 
individuals are expected to give approval to the project. And 
while on the surface of it that would seem to make sense, it will 
also complicate and make project development much more 
expensive in the long run. 
 
So while we are careful to protect environmentally these 
property holders and want to make sure that everything is done 
in an appropriate and careful manner, we need to give some 
consideration to the impact that this will have on the people 
who are doing the project, who are proposing the project. 
 
I want to just read, Madam Deputy Speaker, a couple more 
items in the new piece of legislation into the record that I 
thought was a little bit of concern to me particularly, and maybe 
to some of the stakeholders that we have yet to talk to. But in 
section 3, subsection (3) I guess it is, of Section 27, it talks 
about: 
 

[The] . . . permit holder who has received a written request 
pursuant to subsection (2) shall comply with that request, 
and notify the minister of the registration of the easement, 
within the time specified by the minister in the written 
request. 

Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s pretty open-ended. That 
phrase within the time frame specified by the minister is not 
identified in any way in the legislation. It might in fact be 
identified more specifically in regulations that are to follow. 
But without knowing exactly what that means, it seems to me 
that virtually all the authority and all the approval granting 
process resides in the minister at his or her discretion. 
 
And there’s no certainty associated with this particular piece of 
legislation, no deadlines, no requirements of the government in 
any respect. And so in that situation I think that it puts the 
applicant or the permit requester at a disadvantage, and he or 
she has no certainty that the minister will respond in a timely or 
appropriate time frame for the advancement of the project. 
 
And lots of times, Madam Deputy Speaker, these projects are 
very important to a community or maybe a whole new 
subdivision that’s being built. Maybe it’s a matter of expansion 
of sewage treatment facilities in an urban environment. 
Whatever the situation might be, Madam Deputy Speaker, it 
looks to me like this is so open-ended it has a potential to create 
problems for communities or individuals who are trying to get a 
project done in a timely and appropriate manner. 
 
And as we know, with today’s construction costs ballooning at 
unfortunately high rates, any delay, any unnecessary delay can 
multiply the cost of a project many times over. And I think that 
we want to be careful that this doesn’t produce unintended 
consequences for the proponents of these types of water work 
or sewage treatment projects. 
 
And then, a little further on in this legislation, it would be 
subsection (5) of 27, it says: 
 

No easement registered pursuant to this section shall be 
discharged without the written consent of the minister. 

 
And so once again we have a situation where the minister has 
the final authority to discharge any easement that has been 
registered as a result of the development of this project. So I 
think we’re aware of the fact that this authority does reside with 
the minister. But it always begs the question, I think, will the 
minister respond appropriately in these kinds of situations? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, we have yet to have an opportunity to 
take this legislation to the stakeholders that may be impacted by 
it. I think it would be important for us to talk to both SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] because 
obviously they could possibly have some real concerns with this 
legislation, and chambers of commerce throughout the province 
because there is a business impact by the changes that this 
particular piece of legislation will bring to the normal course of 
commerce. 
 
And finally I think that realtors ought to be requested for input 
on this particular piece of legislation because when you have 
easements running across land that cannot be discharged, they 
stay in place in perpetuity, that affects the value of the land. It 
affects the resale opportunities that might be associated with 
that piece of land. And so realtors, I think, ought to have some 
input into this particular piece of legislation and we have yet to 
obtain that. 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

So, Madam Deputy Speaker, while we are interested in seeing 
strong environmental legislation and appropriate environmental 
legislation, it’s appropriate for us to make sure that all the 
stakeholders affected by this are consulted and we have yet to 
do that. So in the meantime, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 31 — The 
Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure this afternoon to provide my comments on Bill No. 31, 
An Act to amend the Regional Health Services Act. This Bill 
attempts to formalize the provisions for services provided by 
affiliates and other health care providers that are not designated 
as health organizations. The most obvious example that comes 
to mind would be the ambulance service providers, Madam 
Speaker. 
 
Madam Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has asked for 
formalized agreements in the past that will improve 
performance, clarify responsibilities, and ensure performance 
standards. These formalized agreements would also provide the 
terms and conditions of the remuneration to be paid for these 
contracted services. 
 
We certainly concur with the recommendations of the 
Provincial Auditor in the requirement for adequate formalized 
agreements. Formal agreements should ensure performance 
standards and at the end of the day ensure that the personal 
health . . . regional health authorities and in turn Saskatchewan 
Health are accountable for the services they contract with these 
providers. In this respect, Madam Deputy Speaker, and in light 
of the Provincial Auditor’s repeated recommendations, that is 
the requirements for formal agreements. This legislation is long 
overdue. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, one of our duties in examining and 
debating proposed legislation is to assure that the interests of 
the affected stakeholders have been addressed. If we find that 
this is not the case, then we take seriously the role of consulting 
with the stakeholders that we can identify. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is our understanding that one such 
association, the Saskatchewan emergency measures services 
association, SEMSA [Saskatchewan Emergency Medical 
Services Association], does have some concerns with this 
legislation and that discussions are ongoing with Saskatchewan 

Health at this time. 
 
[16:30] 
 
We would expect that these outstanding issues would be 
resolved prior to the passage of this Bill, either as it presently 
reads or, if necessary, in amended form. In our contact with 
SEMSA, the concerns include the following. 
 
Firstly, the fact that one year’s notice can be given without 
cause is a concern in that it makes it difficult for operators to 
secure financing. Understanding the relative large capital 
investment required to get into the ambulance business, I think 
this certainly becomes evident that it’s a concern that the banker 
may say there’s no long-term business plan to warrant a 
business loan. 
 
Likewise once notice is served to terminate the contract, there 
are provisions for the regional health authority to buy out the 
operator at fair market value. However I’m sure you can 
appreciate, Madam Deputy Speaker, that if you only have a 
one-year contract guarantee, fair market value of your ongoing 
business is certainly limited. 
 
And lastly, the provision that gives 14 days notice to remedy 
any service disputes followed by cessation of payments is 
problematic. Operators feel that there needs to be a longer 
period to resolve these disputes before payment is ceased. 
 
We understand that discussions are moving along and that work 
is in progress. However it would be best that these outstanding 
issues be resolved before this Bill is passed. Therefore, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, in order to allow for these issues to be 
resolved and in order to confer with others that will be affected 
by this legislation, I would move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 20 — The 
Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And it’s a privilege to rise in my place and to speak on 
Bill No. 20, An Act respecting the Mandatory Reporting of 
Gunshot and Stab Wounds Act. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this legislation would compel health 
professionals to report patients that report to hospitals or other 
health care facilities with gunshot wounds or stab wounds. And, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, when you look at the Bill as it’s 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

presented, it’s a fairly short Bill. There’s not a whole lot to it. 
And at first glance, it looks like it would be a good idea, but 
when you look at the details, there could be some issues with 
this Bill. 
 
I know that the Bill was requested by the Saskatchewan 
Association of Chiefs of Police, but I do know that there are 
some people that have some issues with this particular Bill. For 
one I believe that there’s concerns with health care 
professionals. And I can see why they would have concerns 
with this. Not only are they . . . They’re already overworked. 
And we’re talking about doctors and nurses, and they’re 
understaffed in our health care facilities and our hospitals. And 
so you know they’re already busy doing their jobs, and so this 
just adds more work and more pressure. 
 
But also I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, there’s an issue of 
safety, of what consequences that reporting a gunshot wound or 
a stab wound to the authorities would have if the patient that 
they’re dealing with is perhaps of organized crime or a criminal 
in some manner. So there are those concerns to look at. 
 
When I look at the Bill, section 3 of this Bill, mandatory 
disclosure says that every hospital, and I’ll quote this, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

. . . Every hospital or facility that treats an individual for a 
gunshot or stab wound shall disclose the following to the 
local police service: [And it reads] 
 

(a) the fact that an individual is being treated, or has 
been treated, for a gunshot or stab wound; 
 
(b) the individual’s name, if known; 
 
(c) the name and location of the hospital or facility; 
[and] 
 
(d) any other prescribed information. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to me . . . and the heading of that reads that 
it is a mandatory disclosure. Yet in the Justice minister’s second 
reading comments he said, and I quote, that they would later, 
and I quote, “. . . refine through regulation in what 
circumstances a stab wound will properly require reporting . . .” 
 
So there’s a bit of a discrepancy as to whether or not that a stab 
would have to be disclosed if it would be mandatory disclosure 
when you look at the Bill and then when you look at what the 
minister has to say. So there are some concerns on that area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the points . . . And it’s interesting to 
note that there is some concerns with this Bill, and one of the 
people that is concerned is the provincial Information and 
Privacy Commissioner. And the members of this Assembly 
received his comments this afternoon. And so, you know, I 
think it’s worth noting what the concerns are with the 
commissioner. And one of them that I did notice, that the 
commissioner is not aware of any public consultation with this 
Bill. And that seems to be a pattern with this government, is 
that stakeholders don’t seem to be consulted when legislation is 
pending before this Assembly. 
 

I do know that, from the comments, that the Association of 
Chiefs of Police had requested this, but I wonder what, other 
than the law enforcement — and the commissioner does 
mention certain health information trustees — but what health 
care professionals were consulted on this matter. And so I think 
that more consultation is needed before this Bill goes any 
further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commissioner raises some concerns about the 
constitutionality of this Bill, whether or not . . . and I mean that 
is an interesting question. How do you, you know, what is the 
proper way of balancing the right to be secure against 
unreasonable search and seizure as put out in the Charter and 
also information that would be deemed necessary by the justice 
system? And so those are some concerns, whether or not it 
would meet a Charter challenge. And I think that’s something 
that the government needs to look at. 
 
I would quote into the record an interesting quote from a law 
professor at the University of Alberta. And this comes from the 
commissioner’s commentary. This is from Wayne Renke, and 
he says that in the Health Law Review and I quote: 
 

. . . mandatory reporting undermines important differences 
between the health system and the legal system. Medical 
services focus on the health of the patient. Whether the 
patient is good or bad, innocent or guilty, a witness or a 
perpetrator, is largely beside the point. The challenge is to 
preserve the individual’s health and respect each 
individual’s dignity and autonomy: hence, for example, 
the medical emphasis on obtaining patients’ informed 
consent to procedures. 

 
And it goes on further to say: 
 

Advancing interests of the punitive apparatus of the 
criminal justice system is not part of the mission of the 
health system. One might say that the health system is “not 
in the business of justice.” 
 

He goes further to quote, and this is Professor Wayne Renke: 
 

We see the good sense in the following passage from the 
1980 Krever Report on the Confidentiality of Health Care 
Information . . . [where he said that]: 

 
‘the primary concern of physicians, hospitals, their 
employees and other health care providers must be the 
care of their patients . . .’ 

 
And he goes on further to quote, and I think that’s a good point 
too, that we need to be mindful that health care professionals 
are in the business of providing health care, not facilitating the 
justice system to this extent. And that’s one of the concerns that 
the commissioner has raised, and I think it’s something that 
needs to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, if it’s passed in its form, would go 
further than any other law in Canada. I know that Ontario has a 
similar Bill, similar law but it’s only for gunshots. It doesn’t 
include stab wounds. And also several states do have similar 
legislation for reporting. 
 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

Mr. Speaker, the commissioner, the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner does note that this Bill . . . It has no purpose 
clause, but in their comments, in the Justice minister’s 
comments he did say why that the government needs or wants 
this, thinks that this should be passed. And he talks about 
fighting organized crime which, you know, the government to 
this date hasn’t done a very good job at. And you can 
understand why police officers and law enforcement officials 
would be frustrated with this government. 
 
And he also talks about the overall goal of crime reduction, of 
minimizing harm and danger, and the public interest. But he 
does raise the concern — and this is again the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner — of whether or not this Bill would be 
effective at minimizing violence. And I think the point that he 
raises is that even though this would . . . If somebody that has 
been involved in some criminal activity that has resulted in a 
gunshot wound or a stabbing wound, and they do come to a 
clinic, they do come to a clinic or a hospital, but how many . . . 
But it doesn’t really, it doesn’t help those who . . . because they 
are of a criminal element, they don’t report to a hospital, they 
don’t come to a health centre to get, seek attention of a doctor 
or a nurse. 
 
And so there’s also concerns, Mr. Speaker, on whether or not it 
will reduce crime, and the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner quotes the executive director of the University of 
Alberta Health Law Institute, saying that there’s little evidence 
that mandatory reporting actually results in a reduction in 
gun-related violence. 

 
Now the Minister of Finance asks why we’re delaying this Bill, 
and I believe this is only the second time that a member from 
this side of the House has had a chance to comment on this 
legislation. And you know, we’re doing what the government 
should be doing. We’re consulting with groups that should be 
consulted, rather than this government, and we have seen . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Why is the member from 
Saskatoon Massey Place on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the 
Chamber for leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey Place has 
requested leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and also thanks to 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy for allowing me to 
interrupt what I’m sure is a very entertaining and informative 
speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our Chamber today in your gallery, and I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, are some very important guests for our province and 
its future, I believe. As everyone knows, one of the exciting 

possibilities in our province is the development of the very 
large kimberlite formation east of Prince Albert in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course Shore Gold and the joint venture have been 
working very hard for some time and recently they’ve been 
joined by Newmont Mining, which is the world’s largest gold 
producer and is headquartered in Denver, Colorado in the 
United States. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And it’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce several people 
both from Shore Gold and Newmont. First of all someone who 
will be known to many members of the Assembly, I suspect, 
Mr. Ken MacNeill who is the president of Shore Gold which is 
headquartered in Saskatoon. Also Pierre Lassonde who is the 
president of Newmont Mining which is headquartered in 
Denver. And I had the pleasure of visiting Newmont Mining 
this summer in Denver. And also David Harquail is here, the 
executive vice-president of Newmont Mining, who I also had 
the pleasure of meeting earlier this year. Mr. Steve Enders, the 
senior vice-president of exploration for Newmont, and also Mr. 
Harvey Bay who is the CFO [chief financial officer] of Shore 
Gold in Saskatoon. 
 
And I know that all members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, on 
both sides of the House, and the people of the province, are 
very excited about the prospect of adding diamonds to the 
already vibrant mining sector we have — potash, uranium, and 
other. And so I know all members will want to join with me in 
providing a very warm welcome to these business people from 
Shore Gold and Newmont Mining. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member for Melfort on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — To join the minister in welcoming guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I join the minister in welcoming the esteemed 
guests to our Legislative Assembly today. And as much as I 
agree with virtually everything that the minister said, there is 
just one small matter that is in error, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
you would appreciate it. 
 
Actually the kimberlite deposit and Shore Gold’s deposit and 
Newmont Mining’s deposit is not particularly east of Prince 
Albert, but almost vertically directly north of Melfort. It’s been 
my pleasure to have toured the facility on a number of 
occasions. Mr. MacNeill and Shore Gold have been very, very 
generous with their time and their patience in explaining to dry 
landers all the nuances of mining and the very great prospects 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard November 21, 2006 

and enthusiasm they had for the kimberlite deposit. 
 
I also am very, very pleased to see that Shore Gold has joined 
forces with Newmont Mining and they bring their expertise in 
open-pit mining to this project. And we really think that nothing 
but good things will happen from this amalgamation and the 
joining of very, very positive expertise from not only Canada 
but North America. 
 
So we wish you great success in the project. Our province is 
going to benefit mightily by it. And I know that you will look 
forward to doing much of your business with the major 
community directly south of your deposit. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds 
Mandatory Reporting Act 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 
I forget I know the Minister of Finance was saying why don’t 
we . . . why are we holding this up? Why is the opposition . . . 
And you know it’s a pattern from this government. We’ve seen 
it with other legislation. They ram it through this House, they 
want to get it through and then they forget or they make 
mistakes on it and then we’ve got to come back in this 
legislature and fix the mistakes of this government. 
 
So we’re just going to take a bit of time to study what the 
legislation is, to consult people like the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner who obviously this government has not 
consulted with, and some other stakeholders before we move it 
along. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s the issue of The Health Information 
Protection Act and how this legislation would augment that 
piece of legislation. But the interesting comments about that 
from the Information and Privacy Commissioner is that health 
care professionals already have this tool at their disposal. They 
have the discretionary power to report anything that would be 
of a clear and present danger to the health and safety of any 
person. So with this, other than the mandatory aspect of this, if 
a health care professional — a doctor or a nurse — believes that 
a person, say who’s being treated in an emergency room for a 
gunshot wound or a stabbing wound, if say that they’re at risk 
of somebody say coming to the hospital, or afterwards after 
they leave the hospital, of trying to . . . I guess it would be 
called finishing the job of what they wanted to do when they 
were shooting or stabbing this person, that they already have the 
ability to contact law enforcement. 
 
And he does make the . . . Mr. Dickson does make the point that 
if health care professionals are not aware of this discretionary 
power that they already have, that this issue needs to be 

addressed by further education and, he says, not further 
legislation. 
 
And that’s, again that’s something that we’ve seen from this 
government is that . . . proper protocols. And we’ve seen it in 
the Health department that there hasn’t been proper 
communication between the government and the department 
and health care professionals. And this is another indication of 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just going further with some of the comments that 
were put out by the Information and Privacy Commissioner, 
there is a concern that somebody who is injured, that has 
suffered a gunshot wound or a stabbing, that they might be 
deterred from seeking medical attention because of fear that law 
enforcement would be brought into the situation. And I think 
that when you look at, say, Ontario’s legislation, it’s been just 
over a year since it’s been enacted and so there may not be 
enough time to really judge whether or not that it’s been 
successful in achieving the purposes of what it’s doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I can understand why police officers in 
this province would want a piece of legislation like this. Clearly 
they’re frustrated with this government, what this government’s 
been doing. 
 
I remember, I wasn’t an elected official, but I was in university 
when the government in an election campaign in 1999 promised 
200 new police officers. Something that . . . We’re going on 
seven, almost eight years later, and there’s still something that 
they haven’t been able to achieve. So I can understand why 
police chiefs across the province would be concerned with, 
would be frustrated with what this government is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also really . . . And I think one of the 
things that, when we’re discussing this Bill further and as it’s in 
the committee stages, I think there needs to be more 
information provided by the minister in terms of what happens, 
what happens with this information, this information that’s 
collected by law enforcement professionals. What happens if 
they do investigate and it turns out that it wasn’t a criminal . . . 
there was no illegal action, there wasn’t a gunshot or a stabbing 
that came about as a criminal activity? What happens to that 
information about the person that’s being collected? Does law 
enforcement need to keep that on file? Who do they keep it on 
file with or do they destroy it? And how does that happen, and 
who do they report that to? So there are issues around that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is the issue of who this information, who it 
falls under in terms of freedom of information and who the 
health care professional reports the information to — whether 
it’s a local municipal police force or RCMP — Because the 
different freedom of information laws govern each different 
branch whether it’s municipal or whether it’s the RCMP. So I 
think there are some areas as to the freedom of information Act 
that need to be pursued further by the minister and when we 
continue with consulting different stakeholders on this Bill and 
when it moves to committee and when the minister has a chance 
to answer some questions on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that area needs to be looked at further 
when it does go to committee. But clearly the police . . . And 
actually, you know, I think people of this province are pretty 



November 21, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

frustrated with this government when it comes to law 
enforcement. I’ve already spoken about the promise to hire 200 
new police officers which we’re still waiting for. In fact it 
seems the Minister of Justice can’t get an accurate number on 
how many they have actually hired and whether or not it was 
new positions or whether it was backfilling old positions. And 
you know, so there’s an issue of that, but also our crime 
statistics. 
 
You know, it’s got to be frustrating as a province. It’s certainly 
frustrating when we’re known as having the highest crime rates 
here in the capital city and in Saskatoon. And in fact I’m 
looking here and this pertains to this piece of legislation 
because it’s homicides involving firearms. And I notice the 
numbers from 2004 to 2005 in fact more than doubled, Mr. 
Speaker. And so certainly it seems that with this Bill though, 
what the government’s more interested in doing is making it 
look like they’re actually doing something when they haven’t 
delivered on other promises to our law enforcement agencies. 
 
But I think it’s important that the government needs to consult 
further on this piece of legislation. They obviously haven’t done 
so. So I know that members on this side of the House would 
like to speak further on this Bill and put their comments on the 
record, which we all have the opportunity to do. And I’m very 
pleased to take my chance to do that. 
 
And I think before I come to my own conclusion on whether or 
not this is a good piece of legislation, I know that I want to 
speak to my local . . . not only law enforcement officials, but 
also people that work in the hospital in Weyburn and in other 
health care facilities around my constituency. And with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy that the debate on second reading of Bill 
No. 20, The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting 
Act be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in order to accommodate this evening the good work 
of the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies as 
well as the Standing Committee on the Economy, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................489 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................489 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................489 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................489 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................489 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................489 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................489 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................490 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................491 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................491 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................491 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Education Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation (no 2) 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................491 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................491 
  Dearborn....................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................492 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................492 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................493 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................493 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................493 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................493 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................493 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................494 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................517 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................521 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................521 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Multiculturalism Week 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Louis Riel’s Poem for Robert Gordon 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Recognition of Innovation Place Employee 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................494 
 Saskatoon Arn Falcons Win Prairie Challenge 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................495 
 Leo King Celebrates 100th Birthday 
  Borgerson ..................................................................................................................................................................................495 
 Legacy of Nursing Mismanagement 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................495 
 Karnevalsgesellschaft Harmonie Opens 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................496 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Backup Emergency Plans for Rural Health Facilities 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................496 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................496 



 

 Recovering Wage Overpayments 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................497 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................498 
 Grant Process for Community Initiatives Funds 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................499 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................499 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................501 
 Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................501 
 Bill No. 39 — The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................501 
MOTIONS 
 Substitution on Committee 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................501 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................502 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 35 — The Infrastructure Fund Act 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................502 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................502 
 Bill No. 36 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................503 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................503 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Municipal Collection of Other Taxes) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................504 
 Bill No. 15 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2006 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................505 
 Bill No. 13 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2006 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................506 
 Bill No. 25 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2006 
 Loi de 2006 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................507 
 Bill No. 26 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Consequential Amendments Act, 2006 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................509 
 Bill No. 10 — The Limitations Amendment Act, 2006 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................509 
 Bill No. 18 — The Court Security Act  
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................510 
 Bill No. 19 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................510 
 Bill No. 22 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2006 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................512 
 Bill No. 23 — The Securities Transfer Act 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................514 
 Bill No. 5 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2006 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................515 
 Bill No. 14 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2006 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................516 
 Bill No. 31 — The Regional Health Services Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Chisholm....................................................................................................................................................................................519 
 Bill No. 20 — The Gunshot and Stab Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act  
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................519 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


