






















































Hansard: May 02, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 51A  TUESDAY, MAY 2, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1445 
 May 2, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning it’s a pleasure for me again to rise in this Assembly to 
present a number of petitions to the Assembly on behalf of 
people from the communities of Prince Albert and Saskatoon. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer into the record, and the 
prayer has to do with the cancer drug Avastin. I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege once 
again to present a petition on behalf of my constituents and 
individuals from other communities around the Southwest 
concerned about the condition of Highway 32, especially the 
stretch from the community of Leader through to Cabri. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Cabri and the city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very 
timely petition regarding the situation of agriculture as farmers 
around the province are going into the field to seed a crop and 
questioning the safety nets that are available. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that the provincial 
government works closely with the federal government to 
develop a simple and effective farm income assistance 
program that will adequately serve both Saskatchewan and 
Canadian agriculture producers. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Wolseley 
area. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of people concerned that the 
government will not fund the new cancer drug. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition come from the 
communities of Prince Albert, St. Louis, Paddockwood, 
Chapman. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
again today to rise on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the cancer drug Avastin and the fact that it’s not being funded: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from White Fox, 
Tisdale, Arborfield, Prince Albert, and Codette. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
for widening of Highway No. 5. And this is signed by people 
who want to survive the drive down Highway 5. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer of the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from three 
communities: Kamsack, Davidson, and Saskatoon. And I’m 
pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today to do with the inadequacies of the CAIS 
[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program. The 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that the provincial 
government work closely with the federal government to 
develop a simple and effective farm income assistance 
program that will adequately serve both Saskatchewan and 
Canadian agriculture producers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Wolseley, Montmartre, and Glenavon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of funding 
for the cancer drug Avastin. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition appears to be signed by individuals 
all from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I too present a petition with 
citizens concerned with the funding of Avastin. These 
signatures on this petition are from Saskatoon. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

I so present on behalf of the citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to deliver 
a petition with the purpose of funding the drug Avastin. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Martensville 
and Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to be able to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned with the lack of 
funding for the cancer drug Avastin. The prayer reads: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have 
several petitions on citizens concerned about the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, again demonstrate how 
well-travelled this highway is because they’re from Saskatoon, 
Naicam, Quill Lake, Watson, Kamsack, Sturgis, P.A. [Prince 
Albert], Viscount, and Muenster. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from constituents of Meadow Lake who are 
concerned about the safe driving conditions on Highway No. 3: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
resurface and properly maintain Highway No. 3 from 
Fairholme to Turtleford and the Livelong access road. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Livelong and district. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present another petition on behalf of the 600 children under 6 
years old and their parents in the Saskatoon Silver Springs 
constituency regarding a much-needed elementary school in the 
Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The prayer of the petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 
 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

The petitioners today live on Sears Cove, Wright Crescent, and 
Hinnit Place in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens that are concerned 
about the lack, this NDP [New Democratic Party] government’s 
lack of commitment to the agricultural sector in Saskatchewan. 
And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reverse 
the 2006 premium increases and restore affordable crop 
insurance premium to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by good citizens from Shell 
Lake, Shellbrook, and Hafford. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed 
by citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 
government’s handling of the crop insurance premiums. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2006 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures to the petition are from Shell Lake 
and Rosthern. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
read a petition on behalf of our friends in the neighbouring 
constituency of Arm River-Watrous. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Department of Highways 
section shop in Watrous, Saskatchewan remain open so as 
to ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such a 
possible closure. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it is signed by the good people of Watrous and Manitou 
Beach. I so present. 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition from the struggling farm community: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reverse the 2006 premium increases and restore affordable 
crop insurance premiums to our struggling farmers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by good citizens from Parkside 
and Shellbrook. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition regarding the 
funding of the drug Avastin, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the lovely town of Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition that this is the first time in the province’s 
history that the government has denied coverage of a cancer 
drug recommended by the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
regarding autism spectrum disorder. I will read briefly from the 
petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the 
recommendations made by the Government of 
Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services, and 
the recommendations include to coordinate among the 
Departments of Health, Learning, and Community 
Resources with input from stakeholders to formulate a 
provincial comprehensive autism spectrum disorder 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

treatment program and to provide adequate and effective 
early treatment based on intensive behavioural 
intervention, and it includes speech, communication, 
occupational and physical therapy, and medical attention 
for ASD-related conditions. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so present on their behalf. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned with the high 
rate of autism spectrum disorders being diagnosed in 
Saskatchewan and the alarming rate of increase at 159 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer is lengthy, but I’ll just read a couple of 
points from what the petitioners are asking for and they’re 
asking: 
 

To have respite and family support accessible based on 
need, make access to specialized equipment and supplies 
based on need, and encourage and support autism-related 
research in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to present on behalf of citizens from 
Saskatoon and Muskeg Lake. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14 are hereby read and 
received: 
 

A petition calling on the provincial and federal 
government to work on a farm income assistance plan, 
that’s sessional paper 738; 

 
And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 64, 639, 644, and 669. 
 
[13:45] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
happy to introduce to the legislature today 29 students from St. 
Josaphat School along with their teacher, Steve Bradley. And if 
they’ll give a wave, all my colleagues will know who they are. 
There they are. Oh they’re a little shy. We’ll have to have a chat 
at 2:30 when we get together on the stairs for our photo. Thank 
you very much for attending the legislature today, and I ask 
everybody here to join me in welcoming you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the House 23 students from the combined grade 11 and grade 
12 classes from Eastend high school today. They’re sitting in 
the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they’re accompanied today by 
teachers Marie Hanson and Shelley Morvik and were driven 
here by Curt Humphrey — that’s a name you might recognize, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to welcome this group of students here particularly today 
because the grade 11’s is the same group of students that my 
daughter started school with, and I can’t believe how fast 
they’ve grown up. They’re a wonderful group of mature young 
adults. And maybe that says more about how time passes for us 
as we get older than it does for them. But I really want to 
welcome this group here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I want to acknowledge the 
special effort that teachers Marie Hanson and Shelley Morvik 
put into arranging this trip on an annual basis. It’s a real 
commitment on their behalf. I appreciate the effort they put out 
to make these annual pilgrimages to Regina, and I think that we 
need to acknowledge that effort on their behalf today. 
 
And as I indicated, Curt Humphrey, their driver, he didn’t show 
up in the legislature gallery today because I’ve accused him of 
being the best backhoe operator in the Southwest a couple of 
times, and I don’t think he wanted to suffer that same fate 
today. Please welcome this group of students to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly my 
summer student for this year. He’s a young fellow with lots of 
enthusiasm, and I know we’re going to be looking forward to 
working with him over the course of the summer. His name is 
Steve Ryan. And Steve is accompanied by his friend, Morgan 
Reed. And I’d like to have all members join with me in 
welcoming Morgan and Steve to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

International Youth Week 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 1 
to 7 is International Youth Week. On behalf of the official 
opposition, I want to express our support for the positive impact 
that youth make in our province and the ongoing commitment 
of the Saskatchewan Party to build a better province that will 
provide improved opportunities for young people to realize 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

their dreams and fulfill their promise. The excitement, the 
enthusiasm, and the ideas of youth are the hope for tomorrow 
for all of us. 
 
International Youth Week is an occasion for the governments of 
all levels to join with youth, community organizations, and 
schools to celebrate the positive impact that young people make 
in our communities, whether it be through academic 
achievement, volunteerism, excellence in sports and recreation, 
or a commitment to personal and community development. To 
the arts and culture, youth play a pivotal role in our 
communities. 
 
I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
thanking the people and the youth organizations across the 
province who have worked hard to make this week a success 
and wish you success in all your activities this week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Yorkton. 
 

Yorkton Citizen Awarded Papal Medal 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
past Saturday was a memorable day in our city, Mr. Speaker. 
On Saturday, Mr. Stan Kyba of Yorkton received the Vatican’s 
highest decoration. Not since 1964 has a resident of our region 
of east central Saskatchewan received such a distinction. 
 
The name of the medal means, for the church and the Pope. The 
award has been presented since 1888 to individuals engaged not 
only within the church but also beyond its walls. Mr. Kyba’s 
church and community commitments have been long-standing 
and varied. He has been involved in countless groups in the 
constituency of Yorkton. Many of these groups have been 
particularly active in promoting the Ukrainian community — a 
community which has long called Yorkton home, a community 
which contributes greatly to the vibrancy and vitality of 
Yorkton and region, and a community which I am proud to call 
my own. 
 
Among many other things, Mr. Kyba has been a long-time 
member of the Knights of Columbus, active in the St. 
Volodymyr’s branch of the Ukrainian Catholic Brotherhood of 
Canada, a member of the Yorkton Ukrainian Catholic and 
Roman Catholic school board, and a board member of the St. 
Mary’s parish, Ukrainian Catholic Cultural Centre. 
 
As with many of the most accomplished citizens, Mr. Kyba did 
all this without any thought of being given any kind of award. 
When asked what motivated him, he responded selflessly, “A 
sense of duty and obligation to serve my fellow man.” A model 
for all to follow. Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratulating 
Mr. Kyba and his distinction that he received in Yorkton this 
past weekend. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Canadian Senate Reform 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
official opposition Saskatchewan Party has long been in favour 
of democratic reform in Saskatchewan and Canada. Our party’s 
sixth founding principle reads, “Democratic reform to make 
government more responsive to the people it serves.” 
 
During the last federal election campaign, Prime Minister 
Stephen Harper said that his party would move toward an 
elected senate. The Saskatchewan Party is supportive of this 
initiative because it will bring greater and more legitimate 
representation for Saskatchewan into the national capital. Our 
party believes the current appointment process is antiquated and 
undemocratic. Senators number over one-quarter of our 
parliamentarians, and they should be duly elected by the people 
they represent. There are several provinces in Canada that have 
announced support for the idea of an elected senate. Support for 
an elected senate in strong in Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan 
Party eagerly awaits the federal government’s plan for a 
revitalized Canadian senate. 
 
After years of enduring a disastrous national energy program, a 
wildly expensive gun control system, and national farm support 
programs that don’t work in our province, we believe the time 
is now to move forward with senate reform. Members of the 
Saskatchewan Party hope that the NDP provincial government 
will publicly support an elected senate. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca. 
 

Red Earth Cree Nation Returns Home 
After Flood Evacuation 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, the residents of Red Earth Cree Nation are home 
after being away from their community for 11 days due to 
flooding. Evacuating nearly 1,000 people and looking after their 
basic needs, their medical needs, their comfort, their security, 
and their general well-being was no small task. 
 
The list of organizations that stepped up to the plate to 
participate in this extraordinary effort is long, but I do want to 
recognize a few that played a major role, Mr. Speaker: the 
Salvation Army; the Red Cross; St. John’s Ambulance; the city 
of Saskatoon, including the Field House staff; the police and 
fire and protective services; the Saskatoon Health Region; 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] Kelsey Campus; Prairieland Park; the city of 
Prince Albert; the town of Nipawin; the Prince Albert Inn; and 
the Marlboro Inn in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the many provincial public servants who 
spent long days and long nights looking after the needs of the 
evacuees and helping with the efforts at Red Earth. 
 
And I want to make special mention of the Department of 
Community Resources staff who provided direct support to the 
people of Red Earth and who helped coordinate the evacuation 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

and reception services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank Chief Nawakayas, the council 
and elders from Red Earth for their strong leadership, and the 
Prince Albert Grand Council and Indian and Northern Affairs 
Canada. I especially want to commend Vice-chief Elton Head 
who spent the nights and all the nights with his people — a very 
incredible individual that done a lot of great work. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the residents of 
Red Earth who made the most of a very difficult situation, who 
stayed in high spirits, and who were very gracious for all the 
support and services that they received. I wish them well. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Benefit Dance in Melfort 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, 13-year-old Janel Tiefenbach 
is a cheerful grade 8 student who attends MUCC [Melfort and 
Unit Comprehensive Collegiate] in Melfort. Janel maintains a 
high standard of achievement academically and delights in 
many friends, interests, and aspirations. 
 
In March 1996 at the age of three, Janel was diagnosed with 
cancer when a tumour was discovered on the left side of her rib 
cage. A gruelling year of chemotherapy, surgery, blood 
transfusion, and radiation followed. With Janel’s spirit of 
determination and resilience, she conquered the odds and won a 
10-year reprieve. 
 
Over these years Janel has continued to see many specialists to 
address other health problems caused by her cancer treatments 
and surgery. Janel’s sunny disposition and positive outlook was 
undaunted by the relentless treks to appointments and 
restrictions placed on her physical activities. Janel’s focus has 
been to live life normally and to the full. 
 
Almost 10 years to the day of her first diagnosis, Janel was 
again diagnosed with a tumour in her rib cage. Janel has started 
chemotherapy and has undergone surgery and will continue 
with further cancer treatments. 
 
The Tiefenbach family has and will be experiencing many 
stressful, emotional, and financial challenges in the hours, days, 
and weeks to come. Janel’s mother, Laurie, has taken a leave of 
absence for work to be with Janel. Her family will be making 
many trips to Saskatoon to provide Janel with their love and 
support. 
 
Many people wish to help. Mr. Speaker, friends and neighbours 
of this Tiefenbach family have organized a benefit dance this 
Saturday in Melfort, and I urge the community to support in any 
way they can. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Code of Ethics 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
February 12 of this year the Saskatchewan Party adopted a code 
of ethics. Mr. Speaker, apparently this document is not worth 
the paper it is written on. The members across the way have 
already contravened their code of ethics more times than I can 
count. 
 
The latest violation comes from the member from Humboldt. 
Yesterday she stood in this House and attacked the Minister of 
Finance, not just by misquoting him but by misquoting him out 
of context. The member opposite alleged that the minister had 
somehow demonstrated a lack of concern about a specific 
health case. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the minister was 
responding to the member from Cannington who was also in 
violation of their code of ethics. The opposition member 
claimed that people were dying when they were not. Now if the 
member from Humboldt had listened to the tape as she claimed 
she had, she would have quickly realized that her allegation was 
unfounded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that we have pointed out 
that the Saskatchewan Party routinely dishonours their own 
code of ethics. Isn’t it about time that the Leader of the 
Opposition either starts enforcing the code or admits that it is 
nothing but a cheap publicity stunt designed to distract attention 
from the routinely unethical actions of his caucus? Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Provincial 4-H Public Speaking Competition 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now for 
something of interest to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, last Saturday in Carnduff was the 4-H 
provincial public speaking competition, and there was 31 
contestants from across the province, Mr. Speaker, ranging in 
age from 8 to 22. 
 
Mr. Speaker, normally when I think of 4-H, because of my past 
experience only a few years ago, I think of beef, but there was 
also horses and grain at the time. Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
broad range of activities, both in rural and urban Saskatchewan, 
involved in 4-H. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this public speaking 
event, the judges there were very, very impressed with the 
overall quality and ability of all of the speakers. 
 
And to show just how broad range this was, Mr. Speaker, the 
following communities participated: Arcola, Battleford, 
Bracken, Codette, Elrose, Estevan, Eston, Foam Lake, Glaslyn, 
Gronlid, Hudson Bay, Ituna, Kelliher, Leoville, Macoun, 
McCord, Melville, Meadow Lake, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, 
Radisson, Rosthern, Sceptre, Sedley, Spiritwood, Storthoaks, 
Vanguard, Wishart — and I’ve been everywhere, sir. 
 
First place in the senior was Joshua Klarholm of Macoun; 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

second place, Shaylynn Coates of Radisson. Intermediate was 
Ryan Luciuk of Wishart. Junior champion was Natalie Pouliot 
of Leoville; and the Cloverbud — a very interesting name — 
Rikki-Jean Wilson of P.A. [Prince Albert]. 
 
Congratulations to all the participants in the 4-H community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Interprovincial Trade Agreement 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one thing 
we’ve found out about this NDP government, the people of the 
province have found it out, is that they never miss an 
opportunity to miss an opportunity. The most recent, Mr. 
Speaker, is the trade agreement that has been reached between 
our fellow Western provinces of Alberta and British Columbia, 
a trade agreement an arrangement between those provinces 
within a new and emerging West that will result, they believe, 
in billions of dollars of new investment activity and new jobs. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan under the NDP we are 
losing jobs and losing population — losing our young people — 
in the middle of a boom. So with that context set, why in the 
world would this Premier choose, Mr. Speaker, to leave 
Saskatchewan behind, to not be proactive, to not know at least 
something about what was going on to the west of us, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I appreciate the question. I might point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that one thing that Saskatchewan people have also 
learned is that the rhetoric by the member, or the Leader of the 
Opposition, greatly exceeds his understanding of issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, let me again point out that this is 
an issue that all of the provinces have been working on through 
the Council of the Federation. Part of what they have asked 
Alberta and BC [British Columbia] to do is to come back with 
two models for interprovincial agreement on trade issues and 
this is one of the models I guess that these two provinces have 
chosen to make public in anticipation of a meeting that is going 
to be held in Halifax within a month’s time. We look forward to 
reviewing that agreement. All the provinces would look forward 
to reviewing that agreement to see how that can be made 
applicable to all of the jurisdictions in Canada. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing. Is it the minister’s 
understanding then, or the Premier’s understanding that this 
isn’t actually an agreement, it’s just a model for other members 
of the federation to consider? Because if that’s the case, Mr. 
Speaker, he ought to do a little bit of homework. 
 
What we know today is that these two provinces have agreed to 
an interprovincial arrangement with respect to interprovincial 
trade that has the potential to attract money and people through 
new job creation to their areas. Where might those people come 
from, Mr. Speaker, if we can’t get rid of this NDP government? 
Well they might come from our province. 
 
My question to that minister or anyone over there that cares to 
answer is very simple. Did the Government of Saskatchewan 
not know about these discussions between our two western 
neighbours, BC and Alberta? Did they not know about the 
arrangements? If they did know about them, why didn’t they get 
to that table and represent Saskatchewan that deserves to be a 
leader within the new West, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the Council 
of the Federation and the committee of the internal trade 
ministers has asked various jurisdictions to head up various 
areas of investigation with respect to interprovincial trade and 
the member, the Leader of the Opposition, should know this. 
One of the tasks that we have asked Alberta and BC to pursue is 
to develop two models that we might all look at with respect to 
interprovincial trade. They have chosen to make public one of 
the models. We look forward to reviewing both models with 
these jurisdictions, as we look forward to reviewing any number 
of contributions by provinces individually or jointly, Mr. 
Speaker, at this meeting in Halifax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that response from the government 
is ridiculous, and it’s unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that two provinces, Alberta and BC — 
major sources of energy, major sources of fossil fuel for the 
continent and for the energy-starved world — have decided that 
there’s a lot of merit in sitting down as economic partners, 
harmonizing where they can in terms of interprovincial barriers 
to trade and investment. They’ve decided to do that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our government has decided to opt out and 
maybe look at this as an example of what they could have done. 
I think the people of this province want and deserve a 
government that is prepared to show leadership, that is prepared 
to get at that table and ensure that we are attracting investment, 
that we are creating jobs. Mr. Speaker, BC attracted 54,000 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

more people last year; Alberta, 80,000 people. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I invite the Leader of the 
Opposition to just put his question once more please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question is this: why is this NDP 
government refusing to be proactive on this issue? Why are 
they refusing to show leadership at a time when we’re losing 
jobs and population in a boom? Why aren’t they doing their job 
on behalf of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of 
leadership, speaking of trade, and speaking of real impacts on 
the Saskatchewan economy, I’m surprised that the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t take the opportunity in question period to 
raise issues such as the deal that has been struck between 
Ottawa and Washington with respect to the softwood lumber 
industry. This is a deal that will have a real negative impact on 
Saskatchewan. Why is it that the Leader of the Opposition isn’t 
raising these questions? Could it be that he chooses to support 
his cousins in Ottawa over and above any real issues in trade for 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in The StarPhoenix today a major 
chartered bank in this country is predicting parity — the 
Canadian loonie with the US [United States] dollar — by 2007. 
Certainly that government understands the pressure that’s going 
to put on an export-dependent economy like our province, like 
Saskatchewan. Now, right now in the middle of an oil and gas 
boom, we’re already losing jobs and people under the NDP. We 
need to be doing whatever we can, Mr. Speaker, within Western 
Canada to ensure that this economy is competitive, to ensure 
that we’re creating jobs, to ensure that we’re keeping our young 
people in this province. 
 
And we hear from this government, Mr. Speaker, that they were 
apparently completely unaware of these negotiations happening 
just to the west of us, which speaks to incompetence. And if 
they were unaware, they did nothing about it which speaks to 
incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why won’t this government now accept the invitation of the 
Premier of Alberta for other provinces to get on board, for this 
province, Saskatchewan, to be a leader in the new West, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, all provinces will 
have an opportunity to review the agreement between BC and 

Alberta to see what applicability it has for the rest of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking of the economy, I find it interesting to 
note that notwithstanding the member’s doom and gloom about 
what has taken place in the Saskatchewan economy, that as 
recently as March the Royal Bank of Canada, the RBC 
Financial Group, highlighted Saskatchewan in its latest 
economic outlook, calling it one of Canada’s top performers 
and predicting the province’s economy will grow at a healthy 
pace of 3.9 per cent in 2006. Mr. Speaker, they particularly 
looked at industries such as oil, potash, and uranium, 
notwithstanding what the member of the opposition had said, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Employment Prospects for Teachers 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Learning minister admitted that some tough choices will have to 
be made by school boards in the coming weeks. She admitted 
that declining enrolment means teachers will have to be cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this top-performing province will lose 10,000 
students over the last three years. The Learning minister 
believes that 300 classrooms will need to be cut. Mr. Speaker, 
this is indeed a black mark on this top-performing NDP 
government. They have failed to grow this province. They have 
failed to grow the economy. And they have failed to grow the 
population. And now teachers and students and parents are 
going to have to suffer as a result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many teachers does the minister expect will 
be cut across the province of Saskatchewan this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, one thing I would like to 
say right off the bat is I have never said the number of 300 
classrooms, so I don’t know where the member opposite is 
getting that. Here again, Mr. Speaker, they are distorting the 
facts and inserting words that they feel are appropriate, that are 
in no way to do with anything that I have said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have until May 8 when the mill rates will be 
set, when divisions will have their budgets finalized. We will 
have a better number and assessment of what changes will take 
place at that time. Mr. Speaker, we know that there has been a 
decline in enrolment over the last three years of 10,000 
children, and that will mean changes to the system. What those 
numbers will be, Mr. Speaker, we will find out in the coming 
weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, school boards are now in the 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

process of finalizing their budgets. They could use some 
guidance from this minister. They need to know if she believes 
teacher cuts are the answer to make up for the drop in funding 
and the declining enrolments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again to the minister: if 300 isn’t the right number, 
can she tell us how many teachers she expects to cut across the 
province this year? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, in fact here again another 
correction. Funding has not been reduced. The foundation 
operating grant has increased $10.8 million this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s never-ending. These folks can’t keep their 
facts straight. They know that the school boards have the 
authority at the local level. We rely on our elected officials at 
the local level to know what’s needed within their community 
and within their divisions. And, Mr. Speaker, those decisions 
will be made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Right now 
students in the College of Education are finishing up their 
classes and are looking for teaching jobs. What kind of a signal 
does this send to students? Teaching jobs are going to be cut 
across this province as we have lost 10,000 students. And these 
students will have no choice but to find a job, Mr. Speaker. 
They have student loans. They need to get on with their careers 
and their dreams. They have top-notch skills. They have 
top-notch training and education. And they’re very portable, 
Mr. Speaker. It looks again like other provinces will reap the 
benefits of Saskatchewan’s top-quality grads as they leave this 
province to build another one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government are job-killing monsters. 
They’ve killed 6,300 jobs this year, and now they will be 
adding more to the total. Mr. Speaker, what will the minister 
say to this graduating class of teachers who will have no choice 
but to leave the province to find work? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here the member 
opposite realizes that the boards have the authority at the local 
level. Now he expects me to make decisions for them, just like 
the former leader of the Saskatchewan Party wanted the 
minister of Justice to meddle into the justice system and make 
suggestions and make direction of how decisions should be 
made. Mr. Speaker, this opposition is meddling in areas where 
there is authority to do that. They expect us to do it. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not the way the system works. 
 
There is school boards in place that were duly elected within 
their communities. They know what’s needed in those 
communities and they’ll make the decisions. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is accusing us 
of meddling, then we’re meddling because we are going to 
meddle to grow this province and then grow, increase . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re very 
proud to meddle in the economy so that the economy will grow 
in comparison to the NDP’s record of losing 6,300 jobs in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that minister is responsible 
as a part of that government for these loss of jobs and the loss 
of population and the loss of hope for our students and our 
teachers and the parents of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this minister explain how she expects to be 
resolved of any responsibility for declining enrolments, to 
blame local school boards for the economy that this NDP 
government has created? How will she explain to students that 
they have no future here under this NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go; we’re 
just stretching it out, forever off the line. Mr. Speaker, I would 
say to the member opposite, all he has to do is look at a Friday 
and a Saturday night paper, look at the jobs that are listed and 
the help wanted ads that are in the papers. All he has to do is 
drive around the city and look at the help wanted signs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we met with the consulting engineers this 
morning. They are looking for people. There is lots of 
opportunity here in the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
Minister of Immigration is working hard to promote 
immigration into our province. There are many opportunities. 
And for young people that are graduating, I would say, look to 
Saskatchewan first because we’re on a roll. Our economy’s 
doing well, and we’ll continue in that direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Crop Insurance 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier in the session 
we asked the Minister of Agriculture to show some compassion, 
extend the deadline for crop insurance. A number of producers 
were telling us that they simply didn’t have the cash flow to 
meet all the demands of the new crop cycle and, in turn, the 
deadline. Many told us they only needed a month or less than 
that. But what did the minister do? He refused. And 500 crop 
insurance contracts were cancelled this year, up from 350 from 
last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the crisis and tough economic times facing a 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

number of farm families this year, can the minister tell this 
Assembly why he’s not prepared to look at making some 
changes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the assumption that we’re not looking at any changes 
is completely wrong. We’re always looking at how to make this 
industry stronger, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in Crop Insurance they are now investigating the spot loss 
hail which I expect we’ll probably have a recommendation on 
whether that will be implemented for next year. 
 
Are we making changes? You bet we’re making changes. We’re 
making investment in research and development that is going to 
move agriculture forward. 
 
Are we making changes? Yes we are. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
supplying support to help build the feedlot and the meat 
processing industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re making changes. We’re working with 
producers. And we will see a strong agriculture industry in the 
years ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Darryl Perry’s is a 
producer who’s farmed and owned land in Hawarden for more 
than 30 years. He has rented out his land for the last two years. 
Unfortunately this year the deal with his renter fell through at 
the last minute and now he must farm the land himself. This 
happened just days after the crop insurance deadline. Crop 
Insurance told Mr. Perry that he can’t get insurance this year 
because the deadline is past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government start showing some 
sympathy for the plight of our farmers and when will this 
government take in account the crisis and some of the 
unforeseen circumstances producers are facing? If you want to 
make some changes, you look at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, compassion, it seems to me from my understanding of 
the word, means that you feel with and work with and work for 
other people. Mr. Speaker, compassion also has within it the 
understanding that there are limits and there are guidelines, Mr. 
Speaker. 

And when we look at this system, we are working for the bulk 
of the farmers in the province who want a good, strong crop 
insurance program, Mr. Speaker one that has integrity, one that 
is fiscally responsible. Mr. Speaker, that means deadlines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we kept the deadlines compassionately for those 
who need a good, solid crop insurance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as that, we are investing in agriculture. We 
are looking at the biofuels as one of the really high potentials 
for the future. We’re investing, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got ethanol 
developments. We’ve got biodiesel moving ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
We are investing. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think Mr. 
Perry of Hawarden is alone. Landowners across the province 
are facing difficulties in finding farmers to rent their land. 
That’s because long-term renters are giving up on farming due 
to financial hardships. That means landowners are suddenly 
finding themselves having to farm the land at the very last 
minute. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re finding now . . . they’re 
finding themselves uninsured. Without insurance, it’s next to 
impossible to get a bank loan. Again to the minister: doesn’t he 
recognize that the crop insurance program must be more 
flexible to meet the needs of today’s farmers? Will he commit 
today to ensuring producers facing difficult circumstances will 
obtain crop insurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll stick 
to good policy in terms of crop insurance and the development 
of good, solid program. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there is very little 
credibility on the subject of compassion for farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. Not too long ago the members opposite had 
opportunity to join with myself and agricultural leaders in this 
province to go and speak to their federal cousins, Mr. Speaker, 
to try and make sure that we could get more support for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan to help them with this seeding season. 
Mr. Speaker, what did they do? They stayed here, Mr. Speaker. 
Did nothing, Mr. Speaker. Talk about a lack of compassion and 
a lack of credibility, Mr. Speaker — they got it all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Agriculture minister reminds me of a steer I used to have. He 
made a lot of noise. He kicked up a lot of dirt. But when it come 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

right down to it, he produced absolutely nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the federal budget is out today 
and there are . . . some of the numbers are starting to come out, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure the Agriculture minister is aware of 
them. The federal government says they are going to produce or 
put in an additional $2 billion into the farming sector over the 
next two years. Of that, 1.5 billion will be provided this year 
and 500 million will be an additional 500 million for farm 
support. My question to the minister: if any of these programs 
are cost shared or asked to be cost shared, will that government 
just once come to the table for Saskatchewan farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 
member opposite at least needs a history lesson. He talks about 
this government coming to the table once for farmers. Every 
time we have had need, every time we have been asked, we 
have been there, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been there in spades, Mr. 
Speaker. We have provided significant funding through the 
BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
We have been there for farmers on every front with new 
programs coming in, Mr. Speaker — fully funded those 
programs. Mr. Speaker, this government cannot be faulted on 
that front. We have been there, and we will be there in the 
future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that minister says they keep coming to the table. Well 
what farmers ask this spring — unlike the last two or three 
years — they’ve asked them to fully fund the CAIS program so 
they can go to the banks and maybe get an operating loan. 
 
What did that minister say at the cabinet table over there? He 
said we don’t need to fully fund CAIS. We’ll just put the base 
in and maybe later we’ll think about fully funding it. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that doesn’t fly with the bankers in Saskatchewan. 
They won’t give operating loans under the whim that that 
government and that minister may fund it sometime later, 
maybe in December. It’s time for that government to come to 
the table, help Saskatchewan farmers — not just talk about it — 
actually pull out the purse strings and help Saskatchewan farm 
families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly it doesn’t matter how loud the member opposite gets. It 
doesn’t change the fact that we have been there, with money, 

fully funding the programs as they’ve come forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to CAIS this year, we’re six months 
ahead of the schedule, Mr. Speaker. And when we announce the 
funding in the third quarter, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be in time for 
any of the applications which start to come in, start to come in 
January 2007. And the deadline isn’t until June 15 and June 30 
for those applications, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are there. We do have money on the table. 
And, Mr. Speaker, with the federal funding that we are counting 
on coming through, Mr. Speaker, we will be there to support 
our farmers. I just hope that that funding is adequate to meet the 
needs because I’m counting on more funding from those federal 
partners. I’m sure that there is concern there. I’m counting on it 
coming today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
another rumour here coming out of the federal government is 
that they may increase the spring cash advance from $50,000 to 
$250,000. This is great, Mr. Speaker, for the farmers that are in 
the crop insurance program. 
 
And as my member and my colleague from Arm River-Watrous 
said today, 500-plus farmers have been excluded from crop 
insurance. That’s this year. Three hundred were excluded last 
year. Maybe it’s time that minister and that government give 
those farmers an amnesty. Give them a chance to get back into 
crop insurance so they can qualify for this spring cash advance. 
Mr. Speaker, where it was 50,000 before if they do increase it to 
$250,000, it could be the thing that helps carry our farmers 
through until this fall. Will that minister consider doing that, 
helping Saskatchewan farmers get back into crop insurance so 
they can qualify for things like this spring’s seeding cash 
advance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said clearly that we will maintain the 
crop insurance program’s integrity. And, Mr. Speaker, I find it 
passing strange that the member opposite would be encouraging 
greater loans for farmers. I would also find it passing strange 
that the member opposite is now talking about cash advances 
and kind of talking about that in a positive way. Seems strange 
from a party that seems bent on undermining the Canadian 
Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. That is an absolutely essential 
component of cash advances. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know, really, what is the 
credibility of those members opposite, Mr. Speaker? Do they 
actually care or is it just rhetoric they’re interested in? No 
credibility, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I ask 
leave of the House to go to motions for returns (debatable) to 
deal with returns no. 572 and 573. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move to motions for returns (debatable) on page 5 of 
the blues. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Return No. 572 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member for Melfort, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 572 showing: 
 

A copy of the Government of Saskatchewan’s funding and 
service agreement with the File Hills Tribal Council with 
regards to the Oyate Safe House. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest, seconded by the member for Melfort, that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 572 showing a 
copy of the Government of Saskatchewan’s funding and service 
agreement with the File Hills Tribal Council with respect to the 
Oyate Safe House. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government I 
will be tabling response to return no. 572. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 572 has been tabled. 
 
The Chair recognizes the member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Return No. 573 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 573 showing: 
 

A copy of the Government of Saskatchewan’s funding and 
service agreement with the Oyate Wankanyeaja 
Owicakiyapi Inc. with regards to the Oyate Safe House. 

The Speaker: — On the motion by the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest and seconded by the member for Melfort, will the 
members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling response to return no. 573. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 573 has been tabled. 
 
The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, leave to return to orders of 
the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
to return to orders for the day. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government 
I’ll be tabling response to written questions no. 1,064 and 
1,065. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 1,064 and to 1,065 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 55 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Bill 
that we have before the Assembly, Bill No. 55, deals with the 
monitoring of closed industrial sites — particularly mine sites 
in northern Saskatchewan. It’s a new Bill. It’s not an 
amendment to an existing piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and 
therefore it has the required sections to it and outlines the intent 
of the Bill, the powers of the minister, and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And it’s a Bill that certainly seems to be . . . The intent of the 
Bill seems to have the right purpose in that there is a need to 
outline mine sites that are no longer in production, how they 
need to be closed down so that the environmental footprint is 
minimized. It’s been identified that these sites need to be 
monitored over a long period of time. In fact there’s language 
. . . The minister in his second reading remarks talked about 
monitoring these sites into perpetuity. 
 
There are a number of sections within the Bill that need to have 
some consideration given to them, and we as the opposition 
intend to do that. I might just, for your information, Mr. 
Speaker, and those who may be watching our proceedings this 
afternoon, just briefly outline what is contained in the Bill and 
make some remarks as to some of the concerns that we may 
have with certain sections of the Bill. 
 
Section 5 of the Bill talks about the acceptance of a closed mine 
site, and it talks about establishment of two funds that will be 
set up. And the site holder must pay a deposit into these two 
accounts for the purposes of monitoring the mine site and any 
additional cost that may be incurred. The one fund is called the 
institutional control and monitoring maintenance fund which is 
a fund set aside for the routine monitoring and maintaining of 
the closed site. 
 
There’s another fund set up, Mr. Speaker, the Institutional 
Control Unforeseen Events Fund. And I’m guessing by the 
name of the fund that it’s for the very purpose if something 
unforeseen should happen at the site, that there’s additional 
funding to deal with that. 
 
On first examination of this idea of two funds, I don’t think we 
have any problems with that. I guess problems that we may 
have — and it’s something that we need to discuss with 
stakeholders — is the amount of the deposit, if they’re fair and 
not overburdensome but still adequate to maintain the 
environmental integrity of the site. And so we need to have 
some discussions with stakeholders in that particular area. 
 
The Bill the minister is proposing to establish a registry of the 
various sites that qualify for this program — the institutional 
control program — so that in the future there will be a 
permanent registry of where these sites are and, I would 
presume, some of their history as far as what type of a mine it 
was and so on. And as I said, most of this at least I understand it 
to pertain to Crown land in the northern part of our province 
which houses the vast mineral resources or many of the vast 
mineral resources that we have in our province. 
 
Section 7, Mr. Speaker, talks about the minister’s ability to 
monitor closed sites and it mentions in one of the subsections 
that the minister may amend monitoring requirements in the 

future. And I suppose I would think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
companies who are entering into this program and people of the 
province would want to know what ability the minister has to 
amend. Is it wide open? Are there guidelines as far as minister’s 
ability to amend requirements after an agreement has been 
reached with a company with regards to a particular site? Some 
of those sections need to be clarified, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It talks about the minister’s . . . the requirements as far as 
maintenance and again giving the minister some flexibility to 
make some changes. And we realize that that ability needs to be 
there but it needs to be used with caution. It’s not something 
that we feel the minister should use indiscriminately and we 
would hope that regulations that I am assuming will be attached 
to this particular Bill will set out clearly what conditions must 
be present before the department, through the minister, can 
change the initial agreement as far as the long-term monitoring 
and maintenance of sites. 
 
There’s one section, Mr. Speaker, section 9, that talks about the 
ongoing responsibilities that the minister has under this 
program. It talks about the ability to use qualified people to 
carry out certain duties and accept certain responsibilities. It 
also talks about the option to use qualified employees of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And the third option is it gives 
the minister the ability to engage outside services, professional 
services and technical services for certain requirements. 
 
And I would just like to make a few remarks, Mr. Speaker, with 
regards to a couple of these points. In Saskatchewan, and 
particularly under the current government, it seems that 
whenever the government of the province needs to perform 
certain duties it seems these people look normally to enlarge the 
bureaucracy and enlarge the number of civil servants that we 
have. And that is only one option. And sometimes it may be the 
best option, Mr. Speaker, depending on the circumstances. But 
on the other hand it may not be the best option. Perhaps a better 
option may be to contract outside qualified individuals or 
companies or service agencies that can provide the expertise, 
who have the knowledge and have the ability to deliver the 
service and take the responsibility and the consequences of their 
actions. And I would encourage the minister to look at all 
options. 
 
I have been made aware that in some cases we have civil 
servants, particularly dealing in the environment and in the 
northern part of our province, who have been asked to take on 
responsibilities in the environmental area but really don’t have 
the training and the professional background to adequately 
perform their duties. And I’m certainly not faulting those 
individuals within the civil service who have been asked to do 
these, perform these duties. I think where the fault lies is with 
the ministers and the Public Service Commission, and I think 
policies of the government, where adequate training and 
foresight hasn’t taken place and therefore sometimes we’re 
caught short. 
 
There’s a need for people to conduct inspections, do 
environmental impact studies, those sorts of things, and we 
don’t have the trained personnel within our civil service. And 
that’s an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, where the government needs 
to look outside the civil service and to make sure that the work 
being done is the very best that it can be so that the people of 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

the province, 2 or 3 or 5 or 10 or 15 years down the road, aren’t 
left with a huge mess to clean up because the work wasn’t done 
in a proper fashion. And so therefore in section 9 it does give 
the minister the opportunity to get the job done with whatever 
method is best suited for the conditions of the day. 
 
Section 10, Mr. Speaker, talks about controlling access to these 
closed sites. And I don’t certainly have a problem with that 
because it would seem to me that in some of these sites there 
may be toxic substances that are contained within a pond area 
or stockpiled and covered with earth, of various methods that 
are used today to contain these toxins and minimize their effect 
on the environment. And we really don’t need to have 
individuals or companies or what have you going into these 
sites unbeknown to the people who are responsible for 
monitoring them and disturbing the sites and causing some 
future damage down the road. So the Bill does give the minister 
and the department the authority to prevent access to the closed 
sites, and it also later on in the Bill there is an area which 
outlines the penalties for unauthorized access to the sites. 
 
There’s another section, Mr. Speaker, section 11, which talks 
about how the minister is to deal with the monies that are put 
into the two funds. It talks about the areas of investment that are 
authorized. You know, I think that’s pretty straightforward and 
unless someone who is more familiar with the whole investment 
area and the general practice brings something to our attention, 
I don’t think we really have a problem with that whole area. 
 
So that, Mr. Speaker, and then of course the Bill has its normal 
clauses as far as coming into force and regulations, talks about 
regulations and so on and those sorts of things. Now I listened 
closely when the minister made his remarks upon second 
reading, and he said that this Bill has been in the making for 
several years. There was extensive consultation with the 
industry, with environmental groups, and that is a process, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that needed to take place. 
 
Now having heard the minister, we certainly need to do our due 
diligence and consult with the stakeholders to see if the 
provisions of the Bill meet their requirements. But certainly I 
mean we’re not going to give away environmental protection 
and regulation to industry without a very good reason. And in 
fact that would be by far the exception rather than the rule. 
 
But still, if there was input from stakeholders as the minister 
said, we want to know if the stakeholders’ advice and 
recommendations have been accepted because it seems to me 
that we can accomplish much more through a process of 
consultation and co-operation rather than the adversarial 
process. And this is an area that we need to have the experience 
and expertise from all these stakeholders to make sure that what 
we are doing is in the best interests of the environment and the 
people of the province because what this Bill does is sets up a 
regime to deal with closed mine sites as to how they are to be 
prepared and how they are to be monitored and maintained for 
many, many years, and in fact as I said, the minister used the 
term into perpetuity. 
 
So we better get it right when we set this whole process up 
because it’s a long-term process. And if we don’t do it right, 
we’re going to experience the negative effects sometime down 
the road, perhaps not in our generation but the next generation. 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, until we have had an ability to 
talk to the stakeholders and discuss the clauses of the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood that debate on second reading of Bill 55 
be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 48 — The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to stand in this Assembly today and speak to The 
Parks Amendment Act, Bill No. 48. Mr. Speaker, as we look 
through the Act as has been presented to us, we have a number 
of concerns regarding the Act. And while the Act maybe seem 
somewhat simple and to the point, it raises some significant 
questions especially when it comes to lease fees and the amount 
of consultation that has actually taken place. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So the government indicates that they’ve had long-time 
consultation. They’ve had a broad consultation with affected 
lease owners and the impact that these changes in legislation 
may have in regards to current leases and . . . As well, Mr. 
Speaker, it almost appears the legislation as well is a bit of a 
threat to cottage owners and lease owners to pay up their leases 
before the end of April. Otherwise they may face major changes 
at which time they would be directly impacted; whereas if they 
paid their leases by April 1, the new lease fees would not come 
into effect till next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason we raised some of the concerns is 
because we’ve seen the record of this government when it 
comes to consultation and how they consult with landowners, 
with leasehold owners. And I think, Mr. Speaker, just have to 
look at some of the debate we’ve had in the most recent time 
and in regards to Kenosee park. 
 
Now we talk about Kenosee park, and I want to talk a little bit 
about . . . Monday morning, the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Environment talked about a new strategy for 
provincial parks. And he said that “Provincial parks will be 
getting greener as the government uses them to illustrate its 
vision of a ‘green and prosperous economy’ . . .” The minister 
went on to say, Saskatchewan: 
 

“. . . parks can serve as important models of sustainable 
development and contribute to the public understanding 
and support for the implementation of the Green Strategy” 
. . . 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve looked through reports and looked 
through the paper in regards to some of the comments made by 
the minister responsible, I certainly can agree that there are 
some real opportunity and potential. However on the other 
hand, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen through past involvement 
of this government, when it comes to changing lease fees and 
leaving it in the hands of the minister, there can be some 
significant impact to leaseholders and certainly cottage and 
business owners in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’re probably aware of, as are most members of 
the Assembly, a debate that took place — about three years ago 
I believe it was — when the significant change took place in 
parks. And the government attempted to move forward with an 
assessment that SEIMA [Saskatchewan Environmental Industry 
and Managers Association] had come down with and the impact 
it had on cottage owners. 
 
And at that time, Mr. Speaker, we saw . . . many cottage owners 
found themselves in a situation where the lease fees that they 
were facing were jumping any three and fourfold the current 
lease fee. And for a lot of cottage owners, it basically put them 
in a position where they were looking at a lease on their cottage 
that they might use for maybe two or three months of the year, 
lease fees that are actually higher on their principal residences 
which were in communities not that far from the current park or 
the park that they had their cottage in. In fact in the case of 
Kenosee, we see the situation where there was quite a disparity 
between even the village of Kenosee and the cottage owners in 
the park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look back and we saw what took part in the 
past and the debate — and at that time I remember a meeting 
with cottage owners, both individually and a couple of public 
rallies — there was a real question raised as to, well on one 
hand, government indicated that they had long and deliberate 
consultation with cottage owners. The sense we got from the 
cottage owners is that that really didn’t take place at all. Cottage 
owners had no knowledge of what was happening until they 
received notices in regards to their lease fees and how those 
lease fees had jumped dramatically. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, we have some real questions in 
regards to the current legislation that is before us at this time. 
And we have concerns, Mr. Speaker, because of a number of 
things. As the minister said, they’ve done consultation. Mr. 
Speaker, as well the minister talked about a green and 
prosperous economy and talked about Saskatchewan’s parks 
playing a role in that green and prosperous economy. 
 
And I quite proudly stand here and talk about Kenosee park 
because . . . Moose Mountain Provincial Park and Kenosee 
Lake because that’s a park that I’m quite familiar with. And I 
know that it . . . As we’ve looked through the estimates through 
the years, Kenosee park or Moose Mountain Provincial Park 
has through the years been one of the leading parks in the 
province of Saskatchewan when it comes to tourism, when it 
comes to visits, when it comes to revenue generated by 
provincial parks for the economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan — not only in the southeast part of the province, 
but certainly in the province in general. 
 
So when we talk about lease fees and how they impact 

individuals and how it impacts individuals such as Kenosee 
park, it’s important that the government indeed take the time to 
consult with people appropriately and that the changes in the 
legislation don’t dramatically impact the lessees to the point 
that the lessees really question whether or not it’s really worth 
maintaining their lease. 
 
And I know that, Mr. Speaker, a lessee like Golf Kenosee for 
example who have spent an awful lot of time and money to 
enhance the golf course at Moose Mountain Provincial Park, if 
this . . . these changes to the legislation would impact them 
significantly, Mr. Speaker. It may put them in a position where 
they find it very difficult to continue to operate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had individuals in the last little while, 
and certainly last fall even from the community in Regina who 
haven’t actually taken the time to go out to Moose Mountain 
Provincial Park and enjoy the golfing out there and at White 
Bear, commented about going out last fall and they were quite 
surprised at the changes that had been made to Golf Kenosee, 
the golf course at Kenosee. And they basically said with what 
they had seen being done, the changes that were being made, it 
made the course much more interesting to golf on. 
 
There were a number of issues in the past that golfers had 
looked at, issues that had turned golfers away from using the 
course. And as they were out there last fall, and they were 
golfing on the course, and they were seeing the developments 
that were taking place as a result of a lot of intensive work by 
the management of Golf Kenosee. They were indicating to me 
that they were looking forward to going back because they 
wanted to see how the changes would impact the golf course 
over the years. The impact . . . and the fact that they really 
appreciated, they enjoyed golfing the course because of the 
initiatives that had been taken by Golf Kenosee and the 
management in enhancing the course. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, through the enhancements at the park, 
through the enhancements being made to Golf Kenosee, what it 
does, Mr. Speaker, it also contributes to the province — to the 
well-being of the province — and through the tourism to this 
province as well. So, Mr. Speaker, there are some issues and 
some concerns that we’ve had raised with us. We certainly want 
to ensure that individuals who continue to buy property in the 
park and in the village of Kenosee . . . And not just as I 
indicated earlier, not just in this park, all across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Because as we see the dollar rising against the American dollar, 
we know, Mr. Speaker, that outside of the cost of fuel, that 
people will start looking again to go outside of the province to 
places in the United States as that dollar value gets closer and 
it’s much more reasonable. And in fact it becomes even an 
enticement to move across the border to spend your money. 
 
We want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that people not only in 
Saskatchewan but outside of the province and certainly North 
Dakota or states along the American border continue to come to 
our province to enjoy the tourism that we have in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while there are a number of issues that we feel 
need to be looked at very carefully, it’s imperative that we take 
the time to discuss some of these issues, make sure we’ve got a 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

good handle on what the government’s intent is in regards to the 
parks Bill and the parks Act, where the government intends to 
go and how it’s going to enhance the use of our parks in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s imperative that we do proper 
consultation, and therefore at this time, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill No. 48, The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2006 be now adjourned. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 30 — The Film 
and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: —The Chair recognizes the member for Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
to speak to this Bill, Bill No. 30, An Act to amend the Film and 
Video Classification Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand in general that this Bill introduces 
new provisions to cover video games which were not included 
in the classification Bill before and updates penalties under the 
Act. It also provides new powers to Executive Council for 
establishing classification schemes for films. 
 
A little more specifically, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 30 introduces 
provisions into the Act to cover video games and defines the 
provisions governing adult video games. The Act also deals 
with the classification, exhibition, and distribution of video 
games separate from those of films. 
 
As I see it, Mr. Speaker, there are five main provisions in the 
Act that deal with video games, and they are that video games 
are to be classified under the Act unless an exemption applies. 
The government would be authorized under this Bill to 
designate other bodies to classify video games. A new section is 
introduced that would deal with adult video games. Basically it 
would state that all adult video games are to be approved before 
being exhibited, rented, or sold in the province. 
 
Another provision deals with procedures for approval and 
reconsideration of approval for classifying video games, Mr. 
Speaker, and one that deals with businesses that distribute only 
computer or video games and no other types of films, and that 
they would not have to be registered with the Film 
Classification Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under this Act, penalties are also dealt with, Mr. Speaker, and 
very substantially increased — up to, in fact, a fine of $500,000 
for corporations who would contravene this Act. 
 
 

Regulatory authority is given to the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, Mr. Speaker, under this Act under two main points, I 
would say, Mr. Speaker. One that sets out the classes of video 
games not included in the definition of video game under the 
Act. And two, regulations setting out a classification scheme to 
be used for classifying films including provisions establishing 
different classifications for different classes of films, and that 
adopt by reference a classification scheme established by 
another person or body subject to changes the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council considers appropriate. And thirdly, 
regulations that prescribe the process to be followed in making 
appeals pursuant to renting of films. 
 
And for the purposes . . . regulations, Mr. Speaker, for the 
purposes of classifying video games, deal with prescribing the 
criteria to be followed by a person or body in the classification 
of video games. 
 
I’m concerned that not enough consultation has been held with 
the stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. The process was not adequate. 
The consultation process was not adequate. And we believe that 
further review is required to address the concerns of impacted 
stakeholders. 
 
Business and organizations that comprise the LAN [local area 
network] gaming industry in Saskatchewan have not been 
consulted, to the best of my knowledge and according to my 
most recent information. And, you know, this Act can impact 
the viability of that fledgling but growing industry in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It appears that government doesn’t understand particularly well 
the nature and evolution of the video game industry and its 
distribution channels and the futility of this proposed legislation 
as it relates to restricting access to video games. It would 
facilitate a process for constructive dialogue. I think that that’s 
what’s required, Mr. Speaker, and feedback that would enable 
the industry and government to work together to consider and 
develop possible solutions that may address concerns of both 
government and industry. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And to my most recent knowledge, Mr. Speaker, the 
stakeholders that have not been adequately consulted are 
members of the LAN gaming industry, parents that support and 
patronize the LAN gaming industry, and youth that support and 
patronize the LAN gaming industry, Mr. Speaker, as well as 
fundraising groups. 
 
So accordingly, Mr. Speaker, until such time as further 
consultation is held with the stakeholders, I would move that 
this Bill be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek that second reading debate on Bill 30 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

Bill No. 53 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 53 — The 
Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and talk on this particular Bill today. It comes from the 
economic and co-operative development end of it. It’s one of 
. . . the only Bill that’s probably come through there. It’s kind of 
funny, I kind of thought that Economic and Co-operative 
Development should be helping to grow the province at that end 
of it and Bills that would help to grow private sector or things 
there instead of just a Bill that’s going to, I think, grow the 
government ITO [Information Technology Office] a little bit 
the way I understand this Bill at that end of it. 
 
You’d think with coming from The Economic and Co-operative 
Development Act it would be pertaining more to the growth of 
Saskatchewan which has been suffering over the last many, 
many years under this with population loss and job loss. It’s an 
issue, it’s a huge issue in rural Saskatchewan and it’s getting to 
be an issue in the cities. The young people are leaving this 
province unfortunately, which is very sad with that. 
 
Dealing with this particular Bill, I think, from what I 
understand, this agency’s requesting to do more IT [information 
technology] government services, that agencies can use the 
government agency. My question would be that, why wouldn’t 
they maybe just put that out to the private sector rather than 
trying to grow the in-house end of it services? 
 
And it’s just not on this. Is another example is with engineering. 
I know we’ve met with a consulting engineering which 
government has . . . they’ve met with them. I believe this 
morning they had a breakfast meeting with them. And one of 
the concerns that they raised, that a lot of the services are being 
provided by in-house. And some of it has to be. You always 
need some in-house services, whether it’s on the engineering or 
whether it’s on the ITO end of it. But why not, when you can, 
promote it out to the private sector? We have a very excellent 
consulting engineering department or department in 
Saskatchewan that looks after that. I think there is something 
like 50 members, 50 firms that do it, plus 11 or 12 that are 
associate members that provide a service. 
 
And also when it comes to providing technical, computer IT 
services — which this Bill pertains to — I would imagine that 
there is services that can be provided from the private sector at 
that end, that you can contract a lot of this out rather than doing 
some in-house, growing your in-house services at that. Because 
to me that’s how you’re going to grow this province. If you’re 
going to grow it at any amount, it has to be grown through the 
private sector, and it has to be grown through the businesses. It 
has to be by handing out contracts rather trying to build it on the 
particular in-house. 
 
I know the member from Cannington had raised up quite a few 
issues on this particular Bill. And that was one of his main 

concerns was, why grow the in-house services of it if there’s 
places that you can contract it out for IT services? I know that 
we have an ITO department here, and they do a very capable 
job. But I think they can also, for other department agencies, if 
there’s need for them to develop their computer and their IT 
technology, to expand it through the private sector at that end of 
it. 
 
Another concern that the member from Cannington had raised 
is also, is this going to be done at a cost recovery service? 
Provide services not only to the private sector, it’s also going to 
provide some services to some government agencies that they 
do back and forth. Is it going to be basically on a cost recovery, 
or are they going to look at charging and what are the rates of 
it? And also is government agencies, are they — this particular 
Bill — are they being forced to deal with the ITO services? If 
they have some ITO work that needs to be done will it have to 
be done through this particular department? Or if they can, will 
they be able to do it outside if they can contract it cheaper? 
That’s some issues that are going to be raised on, coming up on 
. . . we’ll be asking also in committee. 
 
But these are concerns when you look at a Bill that is dealing 
with ITO services at that end is, are they setting it up to benefit 
financially or are they going to do it at a cost recovery? Because 
I’m hoping that all the computer and ITO services, when it’s 
done intergovernmental, should be done on a cost recovery. It 
shouldn’t be looking at trying to charge one government 
agency, moving money to another government agency at the 
other end of it. 
 
Because basically all you’re doing is it’s the taxpayer, you have 
to remember it’s the taxpayer that’s paying this at the end of the 
day, that’s paying for these services here. And every time, even 
if you’re over billing or billing from one department to the next, 
you know, there’s always the costs that are added and that. 
 
We always believe that a lot of these services that if they can be 
contracted out can be a huge benefit to the government. 
Because there, not only do you get a different perspective on 
expertise — which you can do in the private sector rather . . . 
you get that in government — but it’s always nice to do the 
mix. Because when you’re working with somebody different, 
sometimes you always pick up a lot of different ideas and you 
trade ideas back and forth and at that end of it. 
 
On another dealing with that, the same thing, when you contract 
it also then there is . . . You can look at money savings at the 
end of it. You put it out to the lowest tender at that particular 
end. 
 
Be quite a few questions, I believe, in committee because at one 
end of it, it was raised by me by one person at I think it’s, I 
think RMs [rural municipalities] and school divisions . . . I 
think if they want to they can use these services through the 
government. IT services, right now it’s set up as a voluntary 
service of if they want to hire them they can hire them, 
voluntary services. 
 
But what was pointed out to me by one member, he says, you 
know, what happens if further down the road that they make it 
mandatory that if you’re dealing with the government, like a 
school division that gets funding from the government, that they 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

have to get all your IT services provided through the . . . If your 
funding comes from the government you have to get all your IT 
services through the economic co-operative, through this 
particular Bill at that end of it. 
 
And I mean, I couldn’t assure him that no, the government 
wouldn’t do that. These are questions that we will be raising in 
committee at that end of it. But does that open up down the 
road? And I think it does allow — and I could be wrong at that 
end of it — I think it does allow school divisions, RMs, or 
private people to hire the IT services in the government right 
now if they prefer to. I know back home, municipalities, if they 
were setting a computer program they, I think they hire a firm. 
They don’t hire the government. But there might be an odd one 
that does. I may have to check on that. And I think that service 
is available through the government for them to hire. 
 
But I’m also wondering of the cost of it too, whether, where the 
government actually enters in tendering out if an RM or . . . 
Well right now with the school divisions, the size of the school 
divisions right now, the computer network and IT service on it 
is going to be quite huge. It’s not going to be like the smaller 
divisions where . . . of years ago, I mean, where you had one 
little office, a couple of office staff. Now, you know, my school 
division stretches from Craik, basically the edge of Craik all the 
way to the Alberta border. You know, it covers, basically 
covers an area that it’s bigger than some of the eastern United 
States — some of the states in the eastern part of the United 
States — an area almost that huge, at that end of it. So there’s 
going to be quite a few services that are going to need to be 
provided at the IT end, whether you’re setting up school 
programs at the end of it. So it’s going to be quite extensive for 
the computer and the IT services at that particular end. 
 
So I was wondering if the government is going to try to get in 
competition with some of the companies out there that are 
going to provide it, that provide servicing and setting up 
computer programs that are going to be stretching from, you 
know, halfway across Saskatchewan at that end of it. Some of 
the questions that we will be asking in committee at the 
particular time when this Bill does come up . . . Because I hope 
that this government isn’t planning on competing with private 
businesses. Because unfortunately when that happens it seems 
like private businesses always seem to come out on the losing 
end of it because they just don’t have the resources the 
government has, and also the government’s also making the 
rules at that particular end. 
 
We should be encouraging businesses to be growing in this 
province. And I know coming from this particular department, 
the Economic and Co-operative Development, the only thing 
that they’ve brought forward so far is just how to grow the 
government. They haven’t brought one initiative in anything 
forward at this particular session and this — they’ve only 
brought one Bill forward — and this doesn’t deal with growing 
the province. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is a shame because this government . . . 
The way Saskatchewan is right now with losing people and 
losing population is, you know, that’s something that should be 
addressed. And they should be looking at trying anything they 
can on growing the province, making initiatives, changing some 
of the rules, working on stuff. 

But this is the only Bill that came from the Economic and 
Co-operative Development. That basically replaced the old 
Rural Development ministry which that replaced the old Rural 
Revitalization ministry. And them three ministries now, in the 
last I think four years have . . . this is their third name change 
you know, and they did nothing. 
 
I’ve seen nothing that came out of them three departments, yet 
that is going to help promote rural Saskatchewan, at that end of 
it. And I think that’s a shame. The only expenses I’ve seen is 
changing the name of these three departments. I don’t know 
what the cost of that is. You know, that’s the only thing that 
they’ve done. 
 
And you keep wondering why they keep changing their name, if 
they’re trying to fool the people out there, like they’ve got all 
these different departments that are actually trying to do 
something when they’re actually not, not out there. But the 
people, at least they see what’s going on in rural Saskatchewan. 
They see how the jobs are lost, population going, your highway 
deteriorating. 
 
I had a constituent from . . . he’s not a constituent. He delivers 
the newspapers to the towns. He comes from Regina. And he 
tore his gas tank out on No. Highway 44 on Saturday. You 
know, that highway is that broke up. I’ve got highways now 
that people can’t even travel on. And one of them’s 44, and 
another one is around Semans is Highway 15. Highway 20 is 
also . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would like to remind the 
member that the question before the Assembly is second 
reading of Bill No. 53, The Economic and Co-operative 
Development Amendment Act, 2006 and that issue of relevancy 
here is paramount. So I invite the member to relate his remarks 
to Bill No. 53. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — When I start talking about my constituency in 
rural Saskatchewan, I kind of digress from the Bill. But on this 
particular . . . I guess I was trying to tie it in to the ministry that 
has presented the Bill which is Economic and Co-operative 
Development, that there has been very little done out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And this particular Bill dealing with IT services, I don’t think, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to help to grow Saskatchewan. I can’t see 
anything in this Bill coming from this particular ministry, from 
Economic and Co-operative Development, where, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’s not going to grow, help to grow rural Saskatchewan, 
and not going to grow Saskatchewan at all because that should 
be our objective here in the legislature, especially with the 
things that have been happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
That should be the focus. It is for the opposition. And I’m not 
sure if it’s a focus for this government when I see a particular 
piece of legislation like this. In fact this may even hurt some 
businesses throughout Saskatchewan. You know, I imagine in 
Saskatoon and Regina there are some major IT firms that are 
looking forward to . . . that do contract work. And this, I don’t 
know if this Bill allows this department to actually start bidding 
against that, at that end of it. 
 
[15:15] 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

Now we have sent the Bill out. And like I say, in the reading of 
it, you hope that it doesn’t, but you can never be too sure 
because how you word a Bill is . . . does it open things further 
down the road? And this Bill when you look at it, it does, it 
does leave the wording further down the road to actually where 
the government can actually start competing against IT services 
in the private sector, at that particular end of it. 
 
But like I say we have numerous questions in committee which 
we will be asking, and those are the main concerns which we’ll 
addressing with committee, at that end of it, that it’s not going 
to be competing with it, because any piece of legislation that 
comes forward through here should not be to hurt 
Saskatchewan. It should be to help it grow, at that particular 
time. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move that this Bill 
go on to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 53, The 
Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 
2006 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
referred to the policy Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 53, The Economic and Co-operative 
Development Amendment Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wartman that Bill No. 28 — The 
Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to speak on The Veterinarians 
Act. As we all know, on both sides of the House, it’s created 

somewhat of a controversy out there, whether it be with the 
veterinarians or whether it’s the producers out there, whether 
it’s horse owners, or stock growers, cattle owners out there that 
are affected by the contents of what the original Bill had 
brought out. We have I think on both sides — the minister has 
and we have on this side — met with many of these groups and 
listened to their concerns. And I believe everything that . . . or 
pretty well everything that they have been concerned with will 
be dealt with in committee, and we’ll make amendments and 
changes at that point. 
 
I guess one of the concerns that many of the producers out there 
that we have talked to, Mr. Speaker, are not only concerned 
with what is in this Bill. But I think they are concerned with 
what some of these changes may lead to down the road and 
where we will go at that point and what controls are taken out 
of their own hands as owners and producers and the people that 
actually raise the livestock and deal with the livestock on a 
day-to-day basis, and what are the changes that may come about 
that actually end up costing them more money and taking some 
of their autonomy away from decisions that they would 
normally make themselves and are handed to somebody where 
they have to pay for this service on an ongoing basis whether 
they agree with it or not. 
 
And I think that’s one of the concerns that was brought to us 
over and over again is, not just the changes that were originally 
intended in this Bill when it was first brought forward, but what 
will the changes lead to down the road? What additional 
changes will it lead to down the road? And I think that’s what 
many of the stock growers, the horse owners, and many of the 
farmers and ranchers out there were very, very concerned with. 
 
And I think we have those same concerns that many on this side 
are actually involved in farming or have been involved in 
farming and know exactly how costly many of these procedures 
can be and some of the things that we . . . such as preg testing 
out there where you have someone in your area that is very, 
very good at it, takes care in doing this job, and is very accurate 
and reliable. And things like that may be taken away where we 
have to on a case-by-case basis. And many do this every year, 
Mr. Speaker, for productivity reasons and for things where they 
need to know whether a cow is in calf and will be having a calf 
in the next upcoming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of these things I think we take for granted 
that they will be cheap and down the road they won’t cost us 
that much money if we make many of these legislative changes. 
And I’m very concerned if we did that, that would not be the 
case. And I know many producers are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to equine ranchers that actually 
employ equine dentists in preference of . . . or instead of 
actually getting a vet out to deal with the teeth and horses. And 
many of these people are very well trained and have spent 
many, many dollars on equipment that they use. And I know the 
horse owners that we’ve talked to and that I talked to said that 
the last thing they would do is get somebody in that could 
actually hurt the animal or cost them dollars down the road 
where they have to have a follow-up case — somebody come in 
to actually deal with the problem created by the person that was 
actually doing the dentistry. And the people that they’re getting 
in, in their words, were very good at what they did and were 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

very adequate in doing the job that they’ve been asked to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the farmers — in fact all the farmers that 
we talked to — said their first concern is for the animal’s health 
and well-being, and they certainly weren’t just for the sake of a 
dollar not putting into that animal what they need because these 
animals are actually their livelihood and would cost them down 
the road. 
 
In many cases, Mr. Speaker, we have found and I’ve been told 
that equine dentists actually were more expensive to get out 
than a veterinarian was to do the same work. So it isn’t a cost 
saving measure. Again it’s the quality of the care that these 
people are receiving from these equine dentists. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we feel that the changes that we hope are 
going to be removed from . . . they’re amended in this 
legislation. We can do in committee. And at this point having 
talked to the minister and having an agreement that in 
committee we will make the adjustments we need to this Bill, 
and go back to just the housekeeping measures that were 
originally planned to be part of the Bill, would all that . . . the 
changes that we would see within this Bill and we would 
remove the other parts in committee. So, Mr. Speaker, at this 
point I would like to let this Bill go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Agriculture and Food that Bill 
No. 28, The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? The Chair recognizes the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be referred 
to the policy field Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 28 be referred to the policy field 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Bill 28 is referred to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. I do now leave the Chair 
for the Assembly to go into Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I propose a short recess while we wait 
for officials to enter. 

[The committee recessed for a period of time.] 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The committee will come to order. 
We’re dealing with Environment estimates. But just before we 
start those, I’m going to recognize the member for Batoche with 
a request to introduce visitors in the gallery. So I recognize the 
hon. member for Batoche. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would request leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The member for Batoche has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That is carried. Please proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To you and through 
you to the rest of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 26 
students from the East Central School in Prince Albert, grades 7 
and 8, and with them is Lynn Phaneuf, their teacher. And glad 
to have you here and welcome to your Assembly. And I’d like 
all members to welcome you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Members of the committee will come to 
order. The estimates before the committee are the estimates for 
the Department of Environment. I think there are other 
members who are ready to ask questions. 
 
So the estimates before us are the estimates for the Department 
of the Environment. And we’ll go to central management and 
services, item 1. And I would invite the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. I’m pleased to 
have with me three assistant deputy ministers, Dave Phillips 
and Alan Parkinson and Bob Ruggles. And I look forward to 
the questioning this afternoon. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Cannington. 
 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to welcome the minister and his officials here today. The 
question I have is related to the provincial parks and more 
specifically to the operation of the golf courses within some of 
our provincial parks. I know that in the past couple of years 
they have been really struggling with the revenues that they 
have been able to garner and that they pay a share of their 
income to the provincial park for the operation and the privilege 
of operating that provincial golf course in that provincial park. 
 
The one I’m specifically interested in is the golf course at 
Moose Mountain. They’re going through quite a renovation 
there. They’re paying for the cost themselves, even though it’s 
park property and at the end of the day when their lease expires 
or if their lease isn’t renewed, those improvements that they 
have made in the golf course become the property of the 
provincial government and Moose Mountain Provincial Park. I 
know that they were struggling because of the shortfalls in 
revenues. What has your department done to help them to 
mitigate those costs and to make their golf course a viable 
operation for both themselves and for the clients using the 
provincial park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I thank you for that question. I appreciate 
the concern about the parks and specifically Moose Mountain 
Park. What is actually happening is that a number of the parks 
within the province have golf courses similar to the golf course 
at Moose Mountain Park. And people within the provincial 
parks system have been meeting with a group of the operators 
of the golf courses to look at their specific concerns as it relates 
across the province. 
 
But in the parks legacy announcement that we made yesterday, 
which we released this, ensuring the legacy: provincial parks 
future directions, one of the aspects of this particular document 
is that over the next four months we will be going to every 
specific park to look at issues that relate to that particular park. 
And we have already identified that the golf course and its 
long-term viability as a really important asset in that area will 
be a focus of the discussion. 
 
And I know that we’ve also received correspondence from a 
number of the people who are avid users of the golf courses, but 
I would say that the people involved have been meeting with 
the provincial parks officials to see what kinds of things we can 
do that will work. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This has been 
an ongoing issue now for a number of years, probably two to 
three years at the very minimum. The costs of upgrading the 
golf course at the park, which when it was built was built during 
the 1930s as a depression-era work project and wasn’t really 
built to any golf course standards . . . It was basically the bush 
was cleared and you now have a pathway for a golf course. And 
there was no real work done on the greens and on the fairways 
to ensure that grass could actually grow there. I know the one 
fairway on there was, basically all the topsoil was stripped off 
of it to form the green and there was nothing left to grow grass 
on you know, and so the people who are leasing the golf course 
are putting considerable amount of their own money into this. I 
believe it’s in the neighbourhood of $700,000 or more to 
upgrade it. 
 

So my concern with your announcement yesterday and the 
four-month period of consultation is that they’re going into the 
golf period right now. And I’m sure that they would like to have 
some assurance that some recognition is going to be given to 
them for the investment that they’re making into the golf course 
that will eventually be property of the provincial government 
and the parks system. It’s not an asset that they are going to 
own or be able to realize on in the sense of a sale or leasing it 
out to someone else. 
 
So I think it’s important that some consideration be given to 
mitigating their rents so that they can move ahead on this in a 
proper manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for those comments. And I 
know, as anybody who has experienced the golf course at 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park recognizes, that no matter 
how it was originally built, it’s now a very beautiful place and a 
good place to play golf. 
 
What the department officials in the parks area have been doing 
is trying to figure out a way whereby some of the capital 
improvements that are made will be reflected in the commercial 
rents that are charged. And that’s where a solution lies. And I 
know people are interested in making sure that the continued 
operation of the golf courses continues in a very positive way. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just have one 
question regarding some written questions that we put in 
regarding ski hills and the fact that the department saw fit to 
grant $20,000 to a ski club that’s operating out of the White 
Track ski hill to get that operating. It was for outstanding bills I 
guess and to make sure that the club and ski hill was operating 
this year. 
 
And I certainly . . . They did have another request from Mission 
Ridge. I had talked to those group of owners. And they were 
quite concerned because the fact that White Track was 
operating and, as the only other ski hill in southern 
Saskatchewan, it impacted their business. 
 
Mission Ridge just put in a huge investment into a chairlift 
because they were feeling that they were going to be the 
provider of ski services in southern Saskatchewan. And then to 
see the department put in $20,000, grant or give $20,000 to 
White Track ski hill and the ski club was a little disconcerting. 
And I just, you know, if you can have an even playing field on a 
ski hill basis, they were wondering why they were not able to 
access $20,000. Because I can guarantee you, they have some 
pretty major bills forthcoming after just installing a chairlift. So 
I’d like to know the department’s rationale for why they would 
grant one area $20,000 and the other ski hills received nothing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The White Track ski hill is operated by a 
non-profit organization on parkland. And Mission Ridge ski hill 
that you’re talking about is a commercial business operating on 
private land. Also Saskatchewan Environment doesn’t provide 
funding assistance to commercial business operators in 
provincial parks, and that’s not part of its mandate. 
 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here today. I have a few questions. I 
want to start with an issue that is regarding your colleague’s 
constituency and that is in the constituency of Meadow Lake. 
 
There’s a town in that constituency known as Chitek Lake, and 
for years and years and years on the west side of Chitek Lake 
there was a bridge. It was part of the Carlton Trail for many, 
many years. Travellers used that trail to go up into the bush and 
here some, I believe it was, three years ago that bridge was 
removed. Now it was a wood bridge at the time and I do have 
pictures of it here and I will pass these pictures on to the 
minister at a later date. 
 
This bridge is part of the economic wealth of the village of 
Chitek Lake. It’s a resort area. That bridge is utilized for quads, 
for whatever have you. Being that it is a tourism town, there’s 
many people that come to the village of Chitek Lake and utilize 
those trails for benefit to the town of Chitek Lake. 
 
With the removal of that bridge — and it was a log bridge — 
some three years ago, that has hurt and damaged the town. And 
I’m wondering if you’re aware of this incident, Mr. Minister, 
and can you enlighten me on what’s happening to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. The 
explanation appears to be this, that around 2001 the bridge was 
dilapidated and was no longer safe to be used and so it was 
removed. But at that time there were discussions between the 
village of Chitek Lake and I think possibly the RM and then the 
First Nation about others contributing to put a new bridge there. 
 
What happened was, it appears that it was just the First Nation 
that was interested in a new bridge. So what they did was they 
took the old bridge that was no longer usable and put in a rock 
crossing which means that, for most times of the year when the 
flow is low, you can drive right through on the rocks. But if the 
water flow is high, obviously in the spring then you can’t get 
across that particular spot. 
 
But there’s willingness to work with the local people to see 
whether there can’t be something done to put the bridge back 
there. There’s no problem with that but it just related to the fact 
that the one that was there was worn out and didn’t seem to be 
common will at that point from all of the different parts to 
rebuild the bridge. But the people in Saskatchewan 
Environment are quite willing to work with whomever is 
willing to proceed with that project. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the answer. I 
would if I may, Mr. Chair, pass these pictures on so they can be 
passed on to the minister now, please. The pictures, Mr. Chair, 
will give a vivid idea to the minister and his colleagues as what 
was there some time ago — actually for years and years — in 
regarding the wood bridge and why it needs to be reinstated so 
that a bridge be there. 
 
I know the ministry of SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management] has done some work in regarding with 
a rock reef but with the last few years, with the water levels as 

high as it has been, that water in that creek right now is in the 
neighbourhood of 5 to 6 feet. 
 
So in order to address all the issues that’s surrounding this 
bridge, I really believe that the Environment minister, his 
colleagues need to consult with the people from Chitek Lake — 
specifically the town — because this bridge is in the park area 
of Chitek Lake. And one of the reasons why there has not been 
a bridge put back in is because of . . . the quads use that trail 
and they go through the park itself. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now in talking to the CO [conservation officer] from Chitek 
Lake, he has quoted that there’s roughly about 18 calls on an 
average a year where there is problems with quads going 
through the park — whether it’s high speed, whether it’s 
reckless driving or whatever it is. But he said there’s roughly an 
average of 18 calls. But it’s only on certain periods of the 
summer months, whether it be the long weekend in May, 
whether it be the July 1 weekend, whatever. So it’s at a very, 
very small part of the season. 
 
The quads are the biggest problem in regarding that area and 
that’s one of the reasons why the bridge has not been reinstated. 
I again urge the minister and officials to contact Chitek Lake 
and work in that regards. The pictures that I have passed on to 
you were taken by an Albert Sullivan from Chitek Lake, who 
has been a long-time resident of Chitek Lake and has seen that 
bridge right from when it started to when it was taken out. And 
at that time, according to Mr. Sullivan, when the bridge was 
removed it was supposed to be another one reinstated to bring 
safety to crossing of that river or that creek. 
 
Also, in contacting the minister and the member from Meadow 
Lake in regards to this bridge that’s not there, he was saying 
that there was a group looking at what they can do with it. But 
apparently the group that I understand now was within the 
environment that’s looking at it, it’s not a big group where 
officials plus members from Chitek Lake will also be contacted 
in advising us what to do with that creek. 
 
So can I get the assurance of the minister and his colleague that 
they will contact Chitek Lake and work in that regards to come 
up with a plan to reinstate a bridge of some sort so that it can be 
utilized to a full benefits for the village of Chitek Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, officials from Saskatchewan 
Environment will contact people at Chitek Lake and others who 
are interested in this project as identified by the people up there. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure the 
people from Chitek Lake look forward to meeting with you and 
your colleagues in regards to it. 
 
I have some other questions, Mr. Chair, and that is in regard to 
the meeting that took place in Mayfair here a couple of weeks 
ago, and your deputy deputy minister was present. And I can 
honestly say from the people that were there — there was 18 
people plus the deputy deputy minister and another guy by the 
name of Mike Gollop — that it was a very positive meeting. 
Everybody that I contacted said that it was positive, and we 
look forward to more results coming from this meeting. 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

This meeting was in regard to the predator problem in that area, 
whether it be Spiritwood, Shellbrook, Mayfair, or whatever. I 
believe it actually goes right across the whole province as far as 
the forest fringe. At the meeting there was comments made by 
the deputy deputy minister and also the gentleman from 
Resources, Mike Gollop. I would just like for the record, Mr. 
Minister, to find out if the deputy deputy minister has talked to 
you in regards to this meeting and what went on at that meeting 
so that you’re up to date on what took place at Mayfair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I can confirm that I’ve been fully briefed 
about this meeting, and I was pleased that people were able to 
get answers to many questions and sort out some of the issues 
that have arisen over the last number of months. The 
commitment at that point was to have a letter go back to the 
people in the community which would set out the procedure for 
local people as it related to various predator issues, and that 
letter is just now being drafted. It was promised within two 
weeks, and I think the two weeks will be up next week. So the 
plan is that it will go out in the next week. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know the 
residents of that area are looking forward to that letter. In that 
letter does it state as to when your officials and possibly 
yourself might be able to get together with that group or a larger 
group or whatever you would like regarding some of the 
resolutions or changes that will be required to make in order to 
deal with the predator problem in the area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think that particular issue will be 
addressed in this letter because that would be a letter coming 
from me about when I would be available. But this particular 
letter will set out the various procedures that are available for 
local people to deal with predators and what happens if certain 
things happen. And so they’ll have that as a message and 
clearly the officials who were there are quite willing to come 
back and discuss that letter to make sure everybody understands 
it. And if it needs clarification, they would do that. But I still 
intend to come up and visit the people in that part of 
Saskatchewan and will hopefully be able to do that once we’re 
out of the House. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I take 
it from that then, the earliest that something of a meeting that 
may take place would probably be in later June or July at the 
earliest then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s possible that it could happen sooner 
than that, but sometime over the next few months. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I think the urgency, Mr. Minister, regarding 
this is we need to have something in place before the fall time. 
In my talks with officials and also with your assistant deputy 
minister and yourself, that the urgency for this predator problem 
needs to be addressed with urgency. Like I say, the meeting that 
we had in Mayfair was very, very good. There was a lot of 
things that got out on the table, and we would hope that in the 
near future, long before the fall time, that we can address many 
if not all of these issues. 
 
The problem with the predator problem — and when I’m 
dealing with a predator it’s not only the coyotes and the bears 
and the wolves, it’s also cougars — and a lot of the damage that 

is done to the beef animals, to the farmers and ranchers is in the 
summertime. And therefore there needs to be some urgency 
taken now so that in the fall time we can get preparations ready 
for the farmers and ranchers that they can deal with it in the fall 
time when the trapping season occurs or when it’s the best time 
to alleviate some of the problems in regards to the wolf and 
predator problems. 
 
Just to give an example, Mr. Minister. I passed over some 
petitions in regards to just the town, or just the RM of 
Spiritwood, and there was a number of people that signed their 
names to that in regards to the predator problem. 
 
But just to go one step further, and it wasn’t mentioned at that 
meeting in Mayfair, if you take roughly a 15- to 20-mile radius 
around the town of Spiritwood alone — and I’ve been in 
contact with most of the people around there to find out how 
many wolves were taken by trappers, by people that just shot 
them off their land, and people that had problems with the 
wolves dealing with their cattle operations — just in that very, 
very small area, Mr. Minister, there was almost 30 wolves 
taken. Now that is an enormous amount of wolves taken in that 
little area. 
 
Now if you look at the number of wolves that are in a pack, 
their average numbers are anywhere from seven to nine. So if 
you take roughly two of those animals out of that pack, how 
many packs of wolves are in that area? And there again, Mr. 
Minister, I’m only talking of one area. If we go over to 
Shellbrook it’s just as bad. If we go down to the RM of Meeting 
Lake it’s also another bad area. 
 
This problem has not just risen this last year. This problem has 
been arising for probably the last three years. That’s why 
there’s an urgency, Mr. Speaker, in regarding decisions made 
by your department and your officials to address the problem 
now and very soon, so that the people regarding this issue can 
deal with it after you have made the proper procedures and 
regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for those comments. And 
I think one of the key points in the meeting that was held not 
that . . . 10 days ago or approximately, was the fact that the 
local people providing the information exactly as you’ve 
described now, will be of great assistance to the Saskatchewan 
Environment officials as they continue to work. 
 
We know that the deer populations have risen, and that at the 
same time the wolf populations have risen as well, pushing 
some of the animals down into agricultural areas where they 
haven’t been in as great a numbers. And so we need to end up 
working together with the local people. And one of the things 
that they can do — and I think they understand this — is to 
keep good records of where they find the predators. And if they 
end up destroying them, making sure that information gets in to 
the local conservation officers. Because how the officials work 
is gathering information from many sources, whether it’s 
sighting by some of the officials or whether it’s stories or 
comments from local people. But also the records of people 
who live in these areas are crucial. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. One of 
the resolutions that came out of a meeting in early January in 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

Shellbrook was the fact that in order to deal with the predator 
problems, that it was set up through the Saskatchewan Sheep 
Development Board. Now some years ago, whether it’s the 
set-up five years ago, seven years ago or whatever, at that 
specific time there was problems with coyotes. Well now the 
problem has gotten a lot bigger, Mr. Speaker. And now we’re 
dealing . . . Or pardon me, Mr. Chair, we’re dealing with 
problems with cougars and wolves, and especially the wolf 
problem. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can tell me that in your 
discussions as to making some changes, because we’re dealing 
with cattle and cattle operations, would there be an effective 
way to dealing with this problem better if the predator problem 
was not dealt with through the Sheep Development Board and if 
it was set up through another board to administer funds to 
dealing with the safeguard of the animals from the predator 
problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate the comments about the 
methods to deal with predators that relate to the sheep and 
primarily the problem then was coyotes. And what we’ve seen 
is an increase in the number of wolves. And so we need to work 
at some new rules and some new tools for the local people to 
deal with the wolves as predators and also some of the cougars. 
 
And so a good part of the meeting that was held up in your area 
was . . . well it informed everybody about what are some of the 
things that local people have asked for that would assist them in 
this particular problem. And that’s why we’re doing up a letter 
setting out how some of the things can be done, whether it 
relates to informing the conservation officers if a animal is 
taken or if it relates to having possession of . . . or having guns 
with them when they’re out in the fields and things like that. 
 
So I think that those are exactly some of the kinds of things that 
need to be done, and we will work together with the local 
people to give them the ability to provide control in their local 
areas because that is the most effective. And it’s something 
where the conservation officers and the biologists who were 
sort of reviewing the overall situation from a statistical basis 
can work together with the local people and hopefully provide 
solutions that will work for everybody. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the answer. 
Mr. Chair, another issue that was raised at both the Shellbrook 
and the Mayfair meetings was in regard to cougars. Now, Mr. 
Minister . . . Thank you, Mr. Minister. The problem of cougars 
five years ago wasn’t around. It’s only been in the last few 
years that we’ve had an enormous amount of pressure put on 
the stock growers and the cattle ranchers because of the cougars 
in the area. 
 
Now whether the government wants to take credit or not take 
credit for cougars coming into the province of Saskatchewan, if 
they were brought in to look after the deer problem, then take 
credit for it because it was a great idea to bring them in to look 
after the deer. The unfortunate thing is right now they’re not 
relying on the deer only. They’re relying on the cattle 
operations. 
 

To my understandings, cougars are protected under the office of 
the Environment of Saskatchewan. That creates a huge, huge 
problem. If someone was to trap a cougar or shoot one, then the 
SERM officials have to be notified and SERM officials will 
take that animal, because it is a protected animal. 
 
If they were not brought in and they came in on their own and 
they’re under the protection of the government, can Mr. 
Minister assure that there is some way that the farmers/ranchers 
in the area can be assured that there will be compensation if it is 
proven that an animal has been taken by a cougar? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I just want to start right off and say that 
these rumours about the government bringing in cougars are 
false. There’s no truth to that at all. 
 
And what has happened is that there have been cougars in 
Saskatchewan probably for 40 years at least, but in very low 
numbers. And as the population doesn’t live on the farms all 
year round, there’s been more room for cougars across the 
province and so we see and hear about more of them in the 
province. 
 
But there’s absolutely no truth to the rumour that the 
government had anything to do with bringing cougars into 
Saskatchewan to . . . such as has been suggested. And I’ve met 
this comment a number of places across the province and it’s 
just not true. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But, Mr. 
Minister, you failed to address the question I had in regard to a 
cougar problem in the province of Saskatchewan with the 
farmers/ranchers. If the animal is protected under the ministry 
of Environment, then what happens to a farmer/rancher that has 
cougar kills on their land where animals are taken? There is no 
compensation for that animal, yet the person that has the animal 
taken cannot go out and shoot the animal because it is a 
protected animal through the ministry of Environment. 
 
Can you assure me that there will be changes made in your 
negotiations in the next months to come regarding predator 
problems, that cougars will be dealt with in a manner that, if a 
farmer/rancher has an animal taken that there will be some 
compensation to the landowner regarding this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think we need to start off with 
some facts. Cougars are not protected. They’re not a protected 
animal and so . . . It’s just there’s no hunting season for them 
because it’s not one that is included in the hunting season. But 
they’re not protected. And so if a landowner has a problem with 
a cougar, they can shoot the cougar. 
 
Now I think one of the reasons that we want information about 
cougars that are shot is so that we can keep track of where they 
are in the province. But it’s not a protected animal. So if your 
whole question is based on the premise that they’re protected, 
well then that’s . . . I don’t have to answer that one. So maybe if 
you have some other questions about this that relate to cougars, 
I’m happy to answer them. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If the cougars are 
not protected then and they can be shot as you just mentioned 
by the local farmer/rancher, what happens to that animal when 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

the farmer/rancher shoots it and brings it home? What happens 
to that animal then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What has generally happened, because it’s 
not a very common occurrence, is that those animals have been 
picked up by the conservation officers and taken to the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum. And they’re used there for 
experimental or research purposes to learn about the cougars 
who live in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well let me 
relay a story. And your assistant deputy minister heard this 
story in Mayfair about an incident that just happened some two 
months ago in Shellbrook where a person raising horses has lost 
a number of horses — well, five to be exact. The last horse that 
was taken was worth $16,000. Now the gentleman that had this 
kill — and it was definitely a cougar kill — when he talked to 
the SERM officials, they said that they would come out and 
look after the problem, and that the only way to track down this 
cougar was to find some dogs. 
 
Well another resident from Shellbrook found dogs close to 
hand, and they started tracking this animal on a weekend. But 
the SERM official stated that there’s only three people that can 
shoot this animal — he is one of them — and that when the 
animal is shot, they will take that animal. Mr. Minister, if the 
farmer/ rancher has lost this animal but yet has the power to 
shoot it, then why is the enforcement officer saying that this 
animal is under the protection and therefore he is the only one 
that can take the animal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that this particular 
issue does relate to the fact that the landowner is able to shoot 
an animal on their farm, and the SERM officer, obviously. And 
I assume the third person probably is a police officer, if that’s 
required. 
 
But one of the issues that was discussed at the meeting of all of 
the people who were there from various RMs was the fact that 
we need to figure out a way whereby local ranchers can have an 
ability to hunt a cougar that might go across a whole number of 
landowners’ land. And that’s exactly what the officials are 
working at, to figure out how to do that, which then basically 
says that for ranchers in a particular area — and it could be, you 
know, 20 to 30 kilometres wide or bigger — they would have 
an ability and an agreement amongst themselves that would 
allow them to hunt for the cougars on each other’s land. And 
that would then be able to comply with some of the rules that 
we have that protect wildlife in general. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you for the 
answer. If in fact there was something set up that a farmer in 
tracking this animal goes how many miles it is to retrieve this 
animal and shoots it then, when he does shoot the animal, the 
animal still has to be turned over to the ministry of 
Environment. Is there some way that the ministry could look at 
compensation for that farmer/rancher because of the loss of 
animal? Yes, he is shooting the animal so it doesn’t do it again. 
But is there some way a compensation package can be set up to 
help with the losses that the farmer/rancher incurs in regards to 
the animal taking one of his farm animals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding this particular issue 

was discussed at the meeting, and it’s one that officials have 
taken back to look at and see what some options are. 
 
I think as you know, RMs are able to declare certain animals a 
nuisance. And you know a recent example was dealing with 
wild boars. In a few RMs they were able to declare them 
nuisance animals which then allowed for their destruction by 
people within that area. 
 
I think this other issue around what you do with a cougar after 
it’s been shot and the issues around compensation, we just need 
to have more information about how often this happens, what 
kinds of situations arise there. And I know that’s what the 
officials said they were going to try to look at. And therefore 
it’s very important for people in your area up there to keep good 
records of what happens and where the animals are and what 
kinds of problems are arising because that’ll give us an ability 
to maybe create some policies that will solve this. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for that. And 
I look forward, and I know the residents of the area look 
forward, to the negotiations you and your department officials 
will have to do in order to come up with a reasonable plan for 
the farmer/ranchers in that area. 
 
One of the main issues that was raised there, and it wasn’t under 
a resolution, was the fact that — and this came out of 
Shellbrook — was we need to address and make changes 
necessary to the above-mentioned issues. SERM officials in the 
field have to make regional offices in Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Prince Albert aware of these problems so that they can be dealt 
with more effectively and . . . a more time-consuming manner. 
 
And the reason that was put in, Mr. Minister, is there’s a huge 
problem between the local COs in the area dealing with the 
issue and then getting to Regina, Saskatoon, or P.A., wherever 
it may be in order for you to make the changes needed to 
address the problem. 
 
That has been the problem for some time, and I believe this is 
why the wolf problem has risen to the state now where it needs 
some control immediately. When we have officials in the area 
. . . And I can well speak for some of the COs in the area with 
their comments regarding the first meeting we had set up in 
Shellbrook. And one of the COs from the area said we will not 
attend the meeting. Why would we go just to deal with angry 
farmers? Another CO said there is no problem with the wolf 
problem. Yet on many occasions there have been people 
phoning regarding predator problems, whether it’s a wolf, 
whether it’s cougars or whatever. 
 
So the point I’m trying to make, Mr. Minister, is the COs in the 
area can’t take the law into their own hands and deal with it on 
their local level. They’ve got to get to and represent the people 
that live within that area and the concerns and the problems in 
that area, and have the assistant deputy minister, the minister 
and so on deal with these issues so that they can come out with 
changes to make it more affordable and accountable to the 
people in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I appreciate the member’s 
comments, but I don’t think they’re that helpful to state them 
that way. And I think, let’s look at how do we move forward to 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

solve this particular issue. 
 
One of the reasons for setting out in a letter to the local people, 
which will also go to staff at Prince Albert and Meadow Lake 
and other places and the local officials, is so that everybody 
sees what the plan is around dealing with these predators and 
has a common rule. 
 
I think also it was promised at the meeting that — the two 
officials who were there — the next time that the meeting was 
held they would bring the conservation officers along so that 
any specific questions that local people had could be answered. 
And that’s a much more positive way to move forward than to 
try to point fingers relating to an issue that is much broader in 
that it relates to the increased deer population, the increased 
number of predators, and some of the pressures that happen 
clearly in the, you know, forest fringe area as agriculture meets 
up to the northern forest. 
 
And those are all issues that need to be dealt with. But let’s look 
at them in ways that we can actually solve them. And that’s 
what we intend to do. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Well 
thank you for that answer, Mr. Minister, and I agree with you 
that there has to be some changes made. But I can honestly say 
that when we had our first meeting in Shellbrook on January 5, 
had the COs from Prince Albert been at that meeting where 
there was only 82 people . . . Now maybe that’s a large group of 
people. But had the COs come to that meeting when they were 
invited and said they were going to come . . . did not show up at 
that meeting, then I’m sure we could have had changes made 
long before the due dates that we had to have. 
 
There again, what I’m trying to stress is somewhere along the 
line the COs on the local level have to be more accountable to 
the people with the concerns they have because it’s not just a 
handful of people that have concerns. 
 
[16:15] 
 
That meeting in Shellbrook, there was 82 people there that had 
concerns regarding this, and that just touched the little bit of the 
area. Had we had a public meeting, we probably would have 
had 3, 400 hundred people there. That shows the extent of the 
problem in the area, Mr. Minister, and that’s why the urgency 
of that meeting between some officials and your officials 
needed to be addressed. And I’m glad it happened in Mayfair. It 
was a very, very good meeting and hopefully we can build on 
that. But again I stress to the minister that somewhere along the 
line the officials, the COs in those areas at the local level, have 
to be more accountable to the people where the concerns are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I also I think would remind the member 
again that let’s move forward. Let’s look at the things that we 
can do together. I think it’s also incumbent upon the public to 
learn as much as possible about the changing nature of the 
predators in Saskatchewan. And the COs and the department 
can be very instrumental in providing information as we move 
forward, but it needs to be done in places where the discussion 
can be constructive. It appears that we have that process in 
place now, and I look forward to continuing to have department 
officials work with people in that area and other areas of the 

province as we deal with certain special issues that happen in 
different parts of the province. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thank you for 
that. And I know, like I said before, not only myself but the 
citizens and the residents of the Shellbrook, Spiritwood, and 
Mayfair areas look forward to your officials getting together to 
come up with some resolutions or some answers to the 
resolutions that were given out at the Mayfair meeting. And 
hopefully that the citizens of there . . . whenever a meeting is 
called and whatever size that meeting will be, later on that both 
sides will be in agreement as what changes need to take an 
effect. So thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I had a constituent call me, and this is regarding 
the Lutheran Bible Camp, the area that surrounds it. It’s south 
of Hitchcock along the Rafferty lake area, and there’s been 
thousands of trees planted in that area. They were planted a few 
years ago. And this constituent called me very concerned that 
these trees are now getting to be a nice size, and the cattle are 
running in that area. And when the trees were planted, no cattle 
were permitted in that area. And people were either told or 
assumed that this land would be left in, you know, its natural 
state except of course for the trees that were planted. 
 
And it has been a haven for hunters, but now with the cattle in 
there, you know, they’re just actually destroying that whole 
area. And I guess what I would like to know, has the policy 
changed regarding the function that is under the jurisdiction of 
the Watershed Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question, and I will try 
to explain the context here so that viewers who have happened 
into our conversation will understand what happens. 
 
When the Rafferty dam was built, it created a reservoir which 
then flooded parts of the valley. And so in mitigation of the 
flooded bottom of that valley, the Souris River, the land was 
purchased higher up on the banks and planted with trees. And it 
became then, and it’s becoming each year more trees and grass 
and effectively a good place for wildlife and birds. And it’s an 
important thing. 
 
This particular area did have an incident in the last while where 
there was some overgrazing in one of the areas, and it was 
identified by the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. And one of 
the officials at the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority has met 
with them a number of times to try, well, to address this 
particular issue. I don’t have sufficient information to know 
whether it was just by mistake that they overgrazed a certain 
part, but it did cause some damage to some of the trees and 
some of the grass. 
 
Now to counter that, there also is the point though that when 
you do have grass growing in the trees, it’s very important for 
the health of the grass that it is grazed. And so they do want to 
have some grazing take place, but clearly they don’t want to 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

have the overgrazing that did take place which then also 
resulted in some of the damage to the trees. So this is an 
incident that nobody likes and they’re trying to make sure that it 
doesn’t happen again. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — So, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying is the 
policy hasn’t changed as far as that area is concerned. It’s just 
kind of a one-time thing and they’re presently looking into it so 
that it doesn’t happen again. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think that’s correct as it relates to the 
overgrazing. But what we will see is some cattle in there 
grazing in a reasonable rate because when you have grass like 
that growing, you need to have some grazing to make sure that 
the grass stays healthy. But clearly, steps will be taken to 
prevent another incident like the overgrazing that took place. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there any area 
around that Lutheran Bible Camp where you are proposing to 
allow cabins to be built? Is there any area in that immediate 
area, I guess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At the present time the only place where 
there are cottage lots developed is at Dr. Mainprize Regional 
Park. And there are quite a number of lots that are still available 
there and so there is no intention to create other cottage areas at 
this time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and to your officials 
also. I appreciate your responses. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the hon. member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats raised the issue of the Qu’Appelle 
Valley lakes and particularly Round and Crooked lakes and the 
water level in that area. And also I asked the question, a written 
question with regards to Echo and Pasqua lakes and had to do 
with the interim agreements that have been reached with the 
First Nations in that area. The answer that was provided . . . 
And we certainly thank you for the information. This particular 
answer did provide information; it wasn’t a response. I noticed 
the Government House Leader wasn’t listening, but that 
comment was for his benefit. And there is a difference between 
answers and responses. And the information was very helpful. 
 
The interim agreement, the second interim agreement is in 
effect till the end of this year, I understand. I have a number of 
questions dealing with the four lakes and I’ll start with the Echo 
and Pasqua lakes. Are they part of the same set of negotiations 
as the Crooked and Round lakes, or are there two separate sets 
of negotiations taking place at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The negotiations are happening with each 
of the First Nations. And so Muscowpetung and Pasqua First 
Nations, the issues relate to those same two lakes, but they are 
happening at separate tables and obviously they’re making sure 
the information goes back and forth. But the arrangements are 
being made with each First Nation as is possible. 
 
But clearly all of the issues are tied together in one sense, and I 
think it’s the federal negotiators that are working on this. And I 

don’t totally understand how they’re doing all of these things, 
but they are keeping track of what happens at each table to 
make sure there’s balance across the board. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, could you 
comment on the prospects of reaching a final settlement with 
the Muscowpetung and Pasqua First Nations. It seems those 
two communities were willing to sign interim agreements, and I 
don’t know if that’s an indication that we’re getting closer to a 
final resolution on the issue. Perhaps it is. And I think the 
residents and the property owners and people who use the 
Pasqua and Echo Lake may have put that interpretation on it. 
 
And so we would like comments as to, do you feel that we’ll 
see a final resolution with those two First Nations within or 
before the end of this year and therefore we won’t have that 
uncertainty for next year? What are your comments with 
regards to the negotiations taking place with those two First 
Nations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As I mentioned before, this is negotiations 
between the federal government and the federal negotiators, Mr. 
Si Halyk from Saskatoon, and then also with the First Nations. 
But clearly the provincial officials in the Watershed Authority 
have been part of the discussions because it does relate to the 
overall watershed in that particular area. And so some of the 
issues that they’re working on . . . And I think people are 
optimistic. They’re hopeful that final resolutions are going to be 
reached. And a lot of it relates to defining the boundary 
between the . . . as it relates to the actual water there, you know. 
And that’s something that is taking a lot of time, but I think 
people are optimistic. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Minister, you said that some of the main 
stumbling blocks and unresolved issues is the — can I interpret 
it this way — the amount of First Nations land that has flooded 
as a result of the installation of the dams and defining that area. 
Is that one of the main issues that remains to be unresolved? 
 
[16:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you very much for that 
question because it’s not often that you get a chance to explain 
some of the interesting things about water law in Western 
Canada and western North America. 
 
Not a lot of people realize that the boundary waters agreement 
with Canada and US was created in the early part of the 19th 
century to deal with water flowing from southern Alberta into 
Montana and into the Missouri River system. When that was 
done, it created an agreement which now has become the rule 
which is used for the Great Lakes. And it’s used for a lot of the 
lakes and rivers in British Columbia and Washington state, 
Idaho, Montana. 
 
The reason I mention that is that these negotiations that relate to 
our beloved lakes that are real close to here — we all know very 
well — have as one of the key points of negotiation where the 
boundary is for the First Nation and where the shoreline is. And 
so there are quite a number of First Nations right across Canada 
where the boundaries are defined by the shorelines, whether it’s 
on a river or on a lake. 
 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

And the federal negotiators are thinking about the whole 
country. The local people are saying, well we just want to solve 
this particular problem here. But the federal negotiators have to 
be very careful that whatever rules that they create in that 
particular area will also apply as it relates to lakes in British 
Columbia or Nova Scotia or Northwest Territories or Nunavut 
or wherever and, you know, wherever there is a similar 
situation. 
 
And so I think people are optimistic in that they are developing 
these proposals that will work here but resolve issues right 
across Saskatchewan and across the Prairies. So it’s kind of a 
long answer to your question, but I think it puts it into a bigger 
context about why this is seeming to take a long time for 
something that we all can go out and look at it and say, hey, this 
shouldn’t be too hard to fix. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister, for that explanation. It 
certainly does explain some things as to why it is taking the 
time it has and, you know, we are dealing with a bigger picture 
here. And so I guess if we don’t see resolution with the 
Muscowpetung and Pasqua bands by the end of this year, I 
guess it’s my hope and the I think it’s the hope of the people in 
the valley that perhaps another interim agreement could be 
reached with those two communities. And if in fact that is the 
case, are you prepared to fund part of that interim agreement as 
you have in the past two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The plan is to have a final agreement. So 
we haven’t necessarily asked that question yet, and we’re 
optimistic that we can get a final agreement. But as I said 
before, the people that have to agree on what the final 
agreement is, is the surveyor general for Canada, the controller 
of surveys for Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority. All of them have very important interests in making 
sure the definition between land and water is right. 
 
But I think there’s a fair degree of optimism that that will be 
resolved which will then allow for a permanent agreement, and 
then hopefully we can deal with the other issues in the valley 
shortly thereafter. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Minister. From your comments I 
would take it that provincial officials are actively involved in 
this file in providing assistance wherever they can be. And that 
is certainly good news because it wasn’t too long ago when one 
of your colleagues was the minister responsible and we raised 
this issue. From his answers it appeared that the stance of your 
government was at that time that this is a federal issue, and the 
province really didn’t have a role to play. And we felt that, we 
agreed that it’s certainly a federal issue but we felt that your 
government through your department certainly had a role to 
play, and it, you know, it seems that that is happening. And 
we’re certainly pleased that, you know, efforts are being made 
on all . . . you know, by everyone who has an interest in this 
area to get this issue resolved. 
 
So I understand now the status of where we’re at with Echo and 
Pasqua. From your earlier comments, there are a separate set of 
negotiations going on with those First Nations communities that 
are affected by water levels around in Crooked Lake. And I 
guess a question that I would have is, why have you and the 
federal government not been able to reach an interim agreement 

with those communities. those First Nations communities, to 
allow lake water levels to, you know, rise to their levels that 
they were prior to this whole dispute. You were able to reach it 
with Pasqua and Muscowpetung. What’s different in the Round 
and Crooked Lake area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’ll try to answer this as briefly as 
possible. But as you know, the original discussions involved a 
group of all of the First Nations in the Qu’Appelle Valley as 
together. And at a certain point the federal government . . . You 
know it was clearly a negotiation between the federal 
government and the Qu’Appelle Valley organization of First 
Nations. And eventually the federal government said this isn’t 
going to work, so they stopped the negotiations. And what 
happened is some of the First Nations came back and started 
negotiating sooner than others. 
 
I think the positive news is that now today there are some 
discussions with every one of the First Nations taking place, but 
they’re all happening at different levels because of the fact that 
some came back to the discussion sooner than others. But even 
in the last number of weeks there have been some new 
conversations which are reason that everybody is more 
optimistic that a resolution will be found. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister, for that information. 
Minister, I wonder if you could tell me what time frame we’re 
looking at as far as lake levels in Round and Crooked Lake. I 
mean we are in the spring runoff time, and I imagine that the 
water levels in those two lakes, I’m assuming, is at least 
somewhat acceptable or reasonably high. How much time have 
we got before we see lake levels go down to where they were 
the last couple of summers? 
 
And what I’m looking at is . . . I guess the second part to that 
question is, do you feel there’s any chance at all of reaching an 
interim agreement by that time where we could, you know, we 
could still preserve at least reasonable lake levels for this 
upcoming tourist season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for that question. In a 
normal year the timeline would pretty well be the end of May as 
far as the effect of an interim agreement making a difference for 
Round and Crooked Lakes. But in this particular year we have 
an interesting situation whereby Last Mountain Lake is quite 
high and so that the flow of water out of Last Mountain Lake 
into the Qu’Appelle River system will extend that time clearly 
till, probably until the end of June, maybe a little longer. 
 
And so if agreements can be reached over the next couple of 
months, it will probably be able to keep the levels of the lake 
relatively back to where they were before. So everybody I think 
is working hard to come to some resolution here. And the fact 
that Last Mountain Lake has some extra water in it this year 
also gives a bit more space or time for negotiation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister, for reminding me about 
Last Mountain Lake because I just . . . My constituency 
assistant actually faxed me some information that we got as a 
result of a telephone conversation she had with a constituent 
who was very concerned about the high water level in Last 
Mountain Lake. So I guess my question is, are you currently 
releasing water from Last Mountain Lake? And when will the 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

residents along the Last Mountain Lake see a return to what has 
been sort of a normal water level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I appreciate this question. We’re 
slowly moving our way up the province so I don’t know if we 
have enough time to get to all the different places. 
 
But I think not everybody understands that Last Mountain Lake 
is a very large lake, and it has the flow coming in from Lanigan 
Creek at the north, and there’s been a fairly steady flow from 
that whole drainage area into Last Mountain Lake. Because 
everybody understands that the lake is up probably between 6 
and 8 inches higher than would be sort of the summer level, 
they have restricted the flow coming into the Qu’Appelle River 
valley from the west and so that means that they have controls 
at Diefenbaker Lake which . . . and so there’s less water coming 
there to allow for some of that volume in Last Mountain Lake 
to get into the Qu’Appelle River system. And so everybody’s 
watching this very carefully. 
 
And as you know from last summer, some of those big 
rainstorms in Alberta changed a lot of the plans. And ultimately 
it’s still the weather and the rain and the natural courses that 
govern much of this, but people are using the information that 
they have from many, many points to try to make the right 
decisions. And we’re pleased in Saskatchewan to have the 
Watershed Authority getting more and more coordinated 
information right across the system. And I think as the years go, 
we will see that we truly value water — especially in southern 
Saskatchewan — but that we also become better and better at 
predicting where some of the troubles are going to be but also 
then where some of the solutions are going to be. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you for that, Minister. I will have 
some information that I can pass along to my constituent, and I 
guess they can look forward to seeing a return to more normal 
water levels in the not too distant future. At least I believe I can 
take it from your comments, I can tell him that the level 
probably isn’t going to get any higher, or if it will, not very 
because we are discharging at the bottom end into the 
Qu’Appelle system. 
 
Minister, I’d like to just turn my attention to another issue. I 
have a number of issues that I’d like to cover although we don’t 
have a lot of time. We probably would cover a number of these 
smaller issues and then when we, the next time around, we’ll 
get into more policy oriented discussions. 
 
You recently, last month, announced that there’ll be a ban on 
alcohol in all provincial parks in the upcoming May long 
weekend. We certainly understand why that move was 
necessary. It seems it’s the old proverb where a few bad apples 
spoil it for the rest of the people. And with some of the 
destruction and some of the situations that occurred in our 
provincial parks last year, we could certainly understand why 
the need was there to move forward on that. 
 
I guess the question I would have is that do you, by moving 
forward with this ban on alcohol, do you feel or have you done 
any analysis or have you been in discussion with the regional 
park folks to . . . Because, you know, what I suspect that is if 

those individuals who are looking at a place to have a party and 
those people who have been causing the trouble that we’ve seen 
in the past, they can’t go to the provincial parks, they may be 
going to the regional parks. And it just seems to me that the 
regional parks, which are community owned and operated, may 
not have the resources to deal with the issue. And have you 
been in discussion with the regional park association over this 
issue? And if so, what’s been the outcome of those discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m happy to respond to that 
particular question. The Saskatchewan Regional Parks 
Association has been part of the discussion as we move forward 
with this policy, and they have been supportive. We’ve actually 
reviewed The Regional Parks Act, and in that Act they do have 
the power themselves, each individual park, to put in bylaws 
that control the use of alcohol in their parks. And so what they 
have said to me — but more importantly to the officials who 
have been working in this area — is that they will be 
monitoring this and to see whether it is a problem. And they 
will create some of the bylaws that they need to enforce that if 
it’s necessary. 
 
We’re all interested to see what the effect is across the park 
system this May long weekend. We have been able, both as 
regional parks and as provincial parks, to have information 
from Prince Albert National Park and Waskesiu where they’ve 
had some bans on alcohol for a long time. We’ve also had 
information from other provinces where they have implemented 
similar policies, so we’re not going into this whole thing 
without some advice about what the effect is. 
 
I think it sends an important signal that the parks are there for 
families and for people to gather together in a safe way and that 
we have no room for the kind of hooliganism that we’ve seen 
recently. And so therefore we’ll do that for this May long 
weekend, and we hope we don’t have to do that for any other 
weekends. But if in fact that becomes something that we will 
need to do, it’s something we will look at. And once again, 
we’ll look at it in conjunction with our friends in the regional 
park system as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Good. Thank you for that, Minister. Just staying 
on the regional parks for a moment, it’s my understanding that 
the regional parks don’t receive any assistance, provincial 
assistance in their operation or any capital dollars for 
construction of facilities and development of the park. I believe, 
and I stand to be corrected, that there was some one-time 
assistance last year under the centennial grant. I wonder if you 
could clarify that issue for me. 
 
And then also as part of the same question, in meetings with the 
regional parks association, they’ve identified the whole issue of 
capital dollars for park development as one of their priorities. 
And my question I guess would be, are you looking at 
providing some assistance? It seems to me that in a period of 
time where we do have additional dollars, perhaps taking some 
of those dollars which may be only around for a short period of 
time and using them for some capital purposes within the 
regional parks, as you are doing this year in the provincial 
parks, may be a good use for some of those dollars. So I ask for 
you comments in that area, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for your question. The 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2006 

centennial funds were used over four years. It was $2 million 
that was provided for capital for the regional park system, and 
that was $500,000 a year over four years. And what was done 
was the money was given to the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 
Association where a peer group of regional park officials — 
sort of I think board members — would review the projects that 
were brought forward, and that’s how the dollars were used. 
 
And unfortunately this year we didn’t have any more of the 
centennial money going forward. But we have been in 
conversation with officials there, and we’re looking at what 
other kinds of things that we can do to work together with them. 
Some of the regional parks have some fairly large capital 
requirements as it relates to sewer and water issues because they 
have a number of residents who live there year-round. 
 
And in 2004 the Act was changed to make sure that borrowing 
powers were there and available in The Regional Parks Act, 
which would allow them to do a project and then have it 
amortized or paid for over longer periods, whether it’s 10, 20, 
30 years, if that was required. So in many ways we’ve worked 
at accommodating them. 
 
Also in our parks legacy document which we released 
yesterday, it includes also looking at how provincial parks 
system as itself works together with the regional parks and also 
with the national park system. And we’re going to continue 
discussion along that route as well. The regional parks have, or 
most of them have very good support in their local areas, and 
we want to work with them to deal with problems that they 
identify, see if we can fix those. And we’ll also be examining 
again the kind of capital funding that we had before because 
some very positive things happened with the money that they 
got. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister. Thank you for that 
response. And as I said I would urge you to look at, you know, 
using some of the one-time dollars that we have available 
currently for those type of capital projects. 
 
Another issue that I would like to deal with just very briefly — 
I see the hour is getting late and this probably shouldn’t take 
just too long. I was provided with a copy of a letter from the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business that April 19 they 
sent to you, Minister. And the issue that they were dealing with, 
raised with you, is the rate that vendors of fishing and hunting 
licence receive as compensation from your department. They 
feel it’s too low. In their letter they say that the rate hasn’t been 
adjusted in the last 13 years. And I wonder if you have 
responded to the federation and if so what was your response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for that question and I’m 
pleased to be able to provide a nice, clear answer for you. A 
new fishing licence, hunting licence vendor policy for all public 
licensing vendors was implemented on June 1, 2000 and at that 
point the commission rates were reviewed. Although the new 
policy then didn’t increase the vendor commissions, it’s been 
well received by most of the public vendors with only a few of 
the really low-volume vendors that are requesting that there be a 
review of the commissions structure. 
 
The Environment officials have made a commitment to review 
the vendor commission annually among all Canadian 

jurisdictions, so that in other words they look across the country 
and see what kind of commissions are there. The next vendor 
commission review is scheduled for this fall, the fall of 2006. 
 
At this time the five provinces and territories have a 
commission structure that’s higher than Saskatchewan, and six 
have a commission structure that’s lower. So I think we’re right 
in the middle. And so at this point we won’t be changing the 
commissions but we are looking at that for this fall. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Minister. I guess I would ask 
then that you make the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business] aware of the — or perhaps you’ve 
already done that — that you’ll be reviewing them and asking 
for their input so that, you know, they can present their case and 
be part of the discussions. 
 
Just one other quick question that is somewhat related. At least, 
it has to do with fishing. I understand that the fisheries 
management unit was conducting a survey of anglers to gather 
information as to their experiences, angling experiences, in 
2005. A letter that I have indicates that this survey is conducted 
every five years. And I guess, Minister, you know, I wonder if 
you could just briefly explain the information that is gathered, 
what it’s used for, and as a result of this survey, will the anglers 
of the province see any significant changes in the fishing sport 
and those sorts of things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This survey that you ask about is a 
national survey so all of the provinces and territories participate 
and so we are participating and it’s presently in progress. It’s 
done every five years so we would have information from the 
survey from five years ago but we will be awaiting the 
information that we’ll get this summer and then we’ll be using 
it as we move forward in developing policy. 
 
But it’s quite helpful because it provides a comparison as to the 
value of recreational fishing to the communities and to the 
provinces and to the country. And it also gives us some sense of 
concerns that may be there and also some things that people 
would like to have and that then gives us a chance to adjust the 
recreational fishing policy that we have now. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I see our allotted time is near 
expiration so . . . the clock on the wall is ticking and so I would 
just really like to thank the minister and his officials for the 
information that they’ve provided this afternoon. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I would move that the 
committee report progress on estimates for the Department of 
Environment and then proceed to the next estimates. 
 
[17:00] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It has been moved that the committee 
report progress on the estimates for the Department of the 
Environment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



May 2, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

The Deputy Chair: — That’s carried. I want to thank the 
minister and thank his officials. And we will go to the estimates 
for the Department of Health. And we will recess now, it being 
5 o’clock, and gather here again at 7 p.m. 
 
[The committee recessed until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1445 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Wakefield.................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Cheveldayoff............................................................................................................................................................................1446 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1447 
  Kerpan .....................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1448 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1448 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1464 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Youth Week 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1448 
 Yorkton Citizen Awarded Papal Medal 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1449 
 Canadian Senate Reform 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1449 
 Red Earth Cree Nation Returns Home After Flood Evacuation 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1449 
 Benefit Dance in Melfort 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1450 
 Code of Ethics 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1450 
 Provincial 4-H Public Speaking Competition 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1450 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Interprovincial Trade Agreement 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1451 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1451 
 Employment Prospects for Teachers 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1452 
 Crop Insurance 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1453 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1454 
  Wartman..................................................................................................................................................................................1455 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 Return No. 572 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1456 



 

 Return No. 573 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1456 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1456 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 55 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Act 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1457 
 Bill No. 48 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2006 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1458 
 Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1460 
 Bill No. 53 — The Economic and Co-operative Development Amendment Act, 2006 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1461 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1463 
 Bill No. 28 — The Veterinarians Amendment Act, 2005 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1463 
  Hagel (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................1464 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Environment — Vote 26 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1464 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1465 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1466 
  Eagles .......................................................................................................................................................................................1470 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1471 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


