






















































Hansard: March 16, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 21A  THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 617 
 March 16, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker is not present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, I rise again to present a petition on behalf of 
constituents from Cypress Hills concerned about the condition 
of Highway 32 running from the community of Cabri to Leader. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Madam Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
communities of Leader, Liebenthal, Prelate, Lancer, and other 
communities in the immediate area. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have 
a petition with citizens concerned about the safety of Highway 
No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And there’s a number of pages here, Ms. Deputy Speaker. And 
the signatures are from Semans, LeRoy, Humboldt, Annaheim, 
Muenster, Lanigan, Lake Lenore, Carmel, Watson, Burr, and 
Bruno. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I also have another petition from 
constituents who are opposed to any possible reductions to their 
health care in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Perdue, Asquith, and Biggar and 
district. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a petition 
here with citizens calling the government not to close any of the 
highway section shops. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways’ section shop in Watrous remain open as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Sask Highways 
employees who would be affected by such possible 
closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Watrous, Young, and 
Simpson. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I have a petition to 
present regarding the widening of Highway No. 5. I will read 
from the prayer for relief, Madam Deputy Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 
Humboldt, LeRoy, and Middle Lake. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kerpan: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too rise today 
on behalf of citizens who are concerned with the condition and 
the narrowness of Highway No. 5 between Humboldt and 
Saskatoon. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

Madam Speaker, signed by good citizens of Humboldt, 
Meacham, Carmel, Englefeld, and Annaheim. I so present. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received: 
 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

Petition concerning repairs to Highway 32, being sessional 
paper no. 64; 
 
Petition concerning upgrade of Highway No. 20; that’s 
session paper no. 65; 
 

And addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 5, 7, 8, and 27. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: —I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Madam Speaker, I give notice I shall on day 
no. 26 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister for SaskTel: how many towns and villages 
in Saskatchewan currently do not have access to SaskTel 
high-speed Internet? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Deputy Speaker: —I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, it is my privilege this afternoon to introduce to 
you and to all members in the House a group of 35 grade 5 and 
grade 8 students seated in the east gallery. They’ve made their 
way to Regina. 
 
I know that the teachers involved have been very active in 
ensuring that discussion occurs about democracy and levels of 
government. So I want to thank, first of all, Mr. Jordan and Mr. 
Dean Turchinetz for ensuring that these students are here. And 
of course I want to thank all 35 students. But I understand that 
the group of students needs a fair number of chaperones, so I’d 
like to introduce Mrs. Strand, Mrs. Wilgosh, Mrs. Cook, Mrs. 
Karcha, Mrs. Olson, Mrs. Townsend, Mrs. Walker, and Mrs. 
Englot. 
 
So I hope you’ve enjoyed your trip thus far and that you enjoy 
the proceedings in the legislature. Welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier, the member 
from Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
Madam Speaker, this is a very exciting day in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This morning the province of Saskatchewan and 
our capital city of Regina was awarded the bid to host the 
Canadian Country Music Week in 2007. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And it is my privilege, Madam Speaker, 
to introduce to members of the legislature the people who made 
this announcement possible. Seated in the west gallery, Madam 
Speaker, we have Heather Ostertag, who has many years of 

experience working in the not-for-profit sector of the Canadian 
music industry. She is currently the Chair of the Canadian 
Country Music Association. 
 
Heather is also the president of FACTOR, the Foundation to 
Assist Canadian Talent On Records. Heather is a respected 
leader in the Canadian music industry, having twice been voted 
one of Canada’s 30 most influential music executives. Heather 
is the recipient of many other music industry awards. Her work 
has also been acknowledged by her appointment as a member 
of the Order of Canada in 1993. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Also seated in the west gallery is Jan 
Cody. Ms. Cody has been involved in the music and 
entertainment industry both in Canada and the United States, 
including projects such as the Calgary Winter Olympics; the 
live stage show, Today’s Country; and the television series, 
Inside Country. Jan is the president of the Canadian Country 
Music Association. We welcome Jan Cody to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But of course the success of the 
Saskatchewan bid is due to hardworking Saskatchewan people 
who devoted a great deal of time and effort in this project. 
Some of them are here today. I’d like to introduce them. 
 
First of all, J.P. Ellson, president of the Saskatchewan Creative 
Music 2007 Inc. and the Chair of the Conexus Arts Centre. J.P. 
is also Co-Chair of the host committee of the 2007 Country 
Music Week and the CCMA [Canadian Country Music 
Association] awards. J.P. Ellson. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Ken Taylor is with us. Ken will now 
co-chair the host committee of the 2007 Country Music Week 
and the CCMA awards. He is also the general manager of the 
Craven Country music. Welcome to Ken. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And three, not strangers to this province 
or to many of the members — Steve McLellan, executive 
director of Tourism Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Wayne Folk, a host committee member. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And one of Saskatchewan’s best talents, 
Saskatchewan recording artist, Marney Duncan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure on behalf of all 
members we thank the Canadian Country Music Association for 
choosing Saskatchewan to host next year’s Country Music 
Awards and to thank those who have worked so hard to make 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

this event possible. Thank you very, very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Premier, if I may, to welcome our guests to the 
Legislative Assembly and also to thank them for choosing 
Saskatchewan to be the host community in September ’07 for 
these very prestigious awards, and congratulate Tourism Regina 
and the local host committee. This will be a very, very 
significant event for the province. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I think I’d like to thank, on behalf of 
the official opposition, the CCMA for the work that they have 
done historically to further and foster the development of 
Canadian country music. Obviously their work has really paid 
off as you look internationally at the impact that Canadian 
country music artists and songwriters and musicians are having, 
both as solo performers . . . And I know recently even at a Brad 
Paisley concert, I think almost half of his band were from 
Canada, many from Saskatchewan. I think there was some from 
Prince Albert as well. 
 
So we’re grateful for their work in that regard. And we’re also 
grateful for the work they do to ensure that the Canadian 
Country Music Hall of Fame is open to the public and available 
for people to go and check out the history of Canadian country 
music there in Calgary. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, congratulations to the 
host committee. Welcome to our guests, and a pre-emptive 
welcome for the September ’07 CCMA Awards. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
It’s with great pleasure that I have the opportunity to introduce 
to you and through you to members of the House a number of 
guests that we have sitting in your gallery. Later today we will 
have a debate on early learning and child care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m very pleased that our early learning and 
child care partners — so many — could join us this afternoon 
from right across the province. 
 
Madam Speaker, I would ask that our guests just give a wave 
when I introduce them. We have Lance Bean, president; Bill 
Wells, executive director; and Ardith Stephanson, from the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association. 
 
Sue Delanoy, executive director, Communities for Children, 
Saskatoon Day Care Directors Association; John Ellis, Success 
by Six; George Folk from the Prairie South School Division, 
Denise Fields from the Regina Daycare Directors, Elaine Fisher 
from Turtle Park Day Care, Leanne Friedenstab from 
Saskatchewan Early Childhood Association, Roger Gauthier 
from Fransaskois Parents Association, Joan Hoehn from Prince 
Albert Daycare Directors, Shirley Humphries from the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Bev Leung from the 

Saskatchewan Family Child Care Home Association Inc., 
Patrick Lewis from the Faculty of Education, University of 
Regina, Anne Luke from Early Learning Centre. 
 
Tanya Mazurek from Northeast Directors Association, Charlene 
Mironuck from the Saskatchewan Early Childhood Directors 
Association, Kay Molnar from SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology], Shondel Neithercut from 
Kids First Daycare Centre, Linda Nosbush from the Minister’s 
Early Learning and Child Care Advisory Board, Jennifer 
Petracek-Kolb from the South Saskatchewan Early Education 
Centre, Anne Rodgers from the Saskatchewan Early Learning 
and Child Care Coalition, Lois Saunders from the Holy Trinity 
School Division, Gail Szautner from the Saskatchewan Early 
Childhood Association, Debbie Thompson from the South 
Saskatchewan Early Education and Care, Robyn Torrie from 
the YMCA [Young Men’s Christian Association] Child Care 
Centre, Dolores Wagner-Owens from Holy Trinity School 
Division, and also Leane Zborosky from the Wascana Daycare. 
 
Madam Speaker, I would ask that all members in the Assembly 
welcome these partners from across Saskatchewan that 
contribute so much not only to children but to families right 
across the province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, I would like to join with the minister in welcoming all 
these many people and the organizations they represent who are 
here today to witness a debate on the delivery of child care 
services. 
 
Madam Speaker, I think it is a great tribute to the fact that all of 
us here in this House, in this Assembly, and in this province 
indeed recognize that our most precious resource in this 
province are not the material things but are our children and that 
a commitment to their welfare and well-being and their 
opportunities to succeed in life are paramount priority for all of 
us. So thank you folks for being here today. Welcome to your 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. I ask the members’ 
indulgence as I introduce a few guests I have with me today and 
in doing so I didn’t invite them but it’s just by chance that it’s 
also on a day that’s very historic for me as well. 
 
In the Speaker’s gallery I have Joan and Ralph Wood that have 
come from Kitimat, BC [British Columbia] to support family 
members but also to take in the Brier. As you can see Joan has 
been to the Brier and collected some Parti Gras . . . and if you’d 
give a wave to the Assembly. When my husband and I lived in 
Burns Lake, they were our nearest relatives, and they were so 
good to us there. I hope I can in some way repay that warm 
hospitality. 
 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

Also in the Speaker’s gallery Margaret and Leif Riesach who 
moved to Regina within the last year from the member from 
Melfort’s constituency, and before from Saskatoon, I am 
appreciating the time that we’ve had to get to know each other a 
bit better and become friends. So I’d ask all members of the 
Assembly to give a warm welcome to the guests in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Holy Cross Crusaders Senior Boys’ Basketball Team 
Wins City Championship 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure to rise in the legislature today to congratulate the Holy 
Cross Crusaders senior boys’ basketball team for capturing the 
Saskatoon city high school basketball championship this past 
weekend. 
 
The Crusaders claimed their third straight city title by defeating 
the Evan Hardy Souls 86-54 Saturday night at the University of 
Saskatchewan PAC [Physical Activity Complex]. With a season 
of 16 wins and zero losses, the Crusaders captured the league 
and city titles and now advance to the provincial 6A 
championship which begins today in Moose Jaw. Under the 
strong leadership of coaches Barry Rawlyk and Brett Czarnota, 
the skilled Crusaders team, many of whom are proud 
constituents of Saskatoon Southeast, will represent Saskatoon’s 
Holy Cross High School well at this tournament. 
 
Once again, congratulations for winning the city final and I 
wish the entire Holy Cross Crusader basketball team good luck 
at the 2006 Hoopla provincial basketball championship. Thank 
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca, the Minister of Community Resources. 
 

Oilsands Quest Inc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Madam 
Speaker. I bring good news today, good news for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan and good news for our province’s 
booming resource sector, Madam Speaker. 
 
This winter Oilsands Quest Inc. has been doing some drilling in 
the Clearwater River area, about 60 miles east of Fort 
McMurray. There was exploration in the ’70s that indicated that 
we have oil sands in this province, and the drilling results 
released by the company today confirmed that this is the case. 
Madam Speaker, in fact the Oilsands Quest results show the 
quality of the oil sands from the core samples is better quality 
than the Alberta deposits. We don’t know the quantity yet, and 
that will be a very important factor yet to be determined. 
 
Madam Speaker, the company is doing it right. It has been 

working closely with the First Nations and the village of La 
Loche, providing opportunities for jobs and businesses in the 
area. Oilsands Quest is drilling 25 wells, investing about $10 
million, and is employing about 40 local people this year. Next 
year, Madam Speaker, the company will hire 100 people, spend 
about 20 million, and drill 150 other wells. 
 
This is really early stages for this project, but we’re all very 
encouraged about the drilling results released by Oilsands Quest 
today and yesterday about the potential for jobs, for revenues 
for the provincial economy, and new hope for the residents of 
Saskatchewan’s North. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nominations 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today with a good-news, bad-news story. The good news is the 
Saskatchewan Party has nominated two new candidates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — The bad news is for Mr. Speaker. It is one of 
them that is in the P.A.[Prince Albert] Carlton constituency. Mr. 
Darryl Hickie won the P.A. constituency nomination of Carlton, 
and he is a proud member of the Prince Albert police force. He 
would like to be part of the change that is needed in this 
province, and he believes that his background and experience 
will help the Saskatchewan Party make that change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — The second candidate is Mr. Kevin Shiach, and 
he would nominate for P.A. Northcote constituency. Mr. Shiach 
is an ordained clergy in P.A. and feels that really to help the 
families of P.A. Northcote there have to be some changes made 
in government policy. Mr. Shiach would like to work through 
the Saskatchewan Party to address family issues, youth crime, 
and gang issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to congratulate these two 
fine gentlemen and wish them well in the upcoming election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Regina to Host Country Music Week and Canadian 
Country Music Awards 

 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Well, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the stars shine brighter under a prairie 
sky. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — And so Regina has been chosen to host Country 
Music Week and the Canadian Country Music Association 
Awards in September 2007. 
 
Country music has deep roots in our prairie province. We have 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

been graced with the talent of so many artists and performers: 
Brad Johner, Mark Smith, Debra Lauren, Freddy Pelletier, Sean 
Hogan, Tara Lee, and Tom Jackson just to name a few. Country 
Music Week is another great opportunity to showcase 
Saskatchewan talent at one of the country’s most exciting 
national events. 
 
And the CCMA Awards will be televised internationally to the 
United States and Australia. Not even the Juno Awards, also 
being hosted by Saskatchewan in 2007, can boast that kind of 
reach. In addition to the obvious cultural benefits and the 
national-international exposure, hosting Country Music Week 
and the CCMA Awards will bring significant economic benefit 
for our accommodation, service, and tourism industries. 
 
I want to extend thanks and congratulate the bid committee, 
Saskatchewan Creative Music Inc., and the committee 
Co-Chairs, J.P. Ellson and Neil Donnelly, as well as the 
Co-Chairs of the new host committee — J.P. Ellson and Ken 
Taylor. Thank you. 
 
I know 2007 Country Music Week will be a tremendous week 
for Regina, for Saskatchewan, and especially for Canada. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

Saskatchewan Centennial Baby Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. On February 6 at 
the band office of the Kawacatoose First Nation, I had the 
honour to present the Saskatchewan Centennial Baby Award to 
Taron Ashton Desjarlais. The award, recognizing all 
Saskatchewan residents born on September 4, 2005, is the 
historical honour due to those born exactly the same day as the 
province was constituted a century ago. 
 
There were only 27 children born across Saskatchewan on this 
date last September, and Taron is the only one in Arm 
River-Watrous constituency. On behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, I presented the award to Taron’s mother, 
Gwendolyn Vanessa Worm, of Kawacatoose. 
 
The award consists of a gold medallion, an official certificate 
signed by Her Honour Lieutenant Governor Dr. Lynda 
Haverstock, and as well as a $100 Saskatchewan savings bond. 
Assisting me during the presentation was Kawacatoose First 
Nation Band Councillor Edward Poorman. 
 
I spoke about the province’s centennial celebrations in 2005 and 
their historical significance. I talked of Saskatchewan’s 
centennial celebrations as a tribute to the people who first set 
out to build this province 100 years ago. Then as now, our 
vision of Saskatchewan was an act of partnership with the First 
Nations people. Together we have worked hard to develop our 
province and share in its prosperity. 
 
The birth of a child on the day Saskatchewan became a 
province is a significant symbol of a bright new future for our 
province, working together for new generations. I would ask all 

the members join me in congratulating Gwen and Taron of 
Kawacatoose First Nation on receiving this centennial award. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Northeast. 
 

IPSCO Retiree Honoured 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recently had the 
pleasure of attending a recent surprise retirement party for Peter 
Susa. 
 
Peter retired from IPSCO after 34 years with the company. 
During those 34 years, Peter’s work record was second to none. 
He proved to be a very conscientious, dedicated, and loyal 
employee. 
 
Peter was also a very proud member of his union, the United 
Steelworkers of America, Local 5890, where he served as 
president for nine years as well as holding other positions in the 
local executives for another nine years. During his leadership, 
Peter was able to build a strong relationship with management 
which was based on his reputation for being straightforward and 
honest. Those who sat across from Peter at the negotiating table 
soon found him to be a strong supporter of the rights of working 
people but also found him to be fair and reasonable. 
 
And the large number of people who turned out to help Peter 
celebrate his retirement was a testimony to the way he touched 
so many. Peter has always been ready to give a helping hand to 
those who may need one. 
 
Peter and his wife, Elizabeth plan to travel and visit with friends 
and family in various parts of Canada while continuing to live 
here in Saskatchewan. Madam Speaker, I want to wish them 
both many years of happiness and health in their retirement. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Congratulations to Winter Olympians 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Today I wish to highlight two former constituents 
from my riding of Canora-Pelly. They are held in high esteem 
because they were participants in the 2006 Winter Olympics. 
 
The first I wish to congratulate is Ken Kotyk, the son of Alfred 
and Grace Kotyk of the Rama area. Ken is a member of the 
Canada 1 four-man bobsled team. Although he is from the 
Rama area, Ken graduated from Invermay School. 
 
Olympic fever touched the entire communities of Invermay and 
Rama on February 24 and 25. Students and staff at Invermay 
School wore red and white on Friday. And on Saturday, TVs 
and a satellite dish were installed in the Rama skating rink for 
all to follow the bobsled events. 
 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

There was only one-half second difference between the gold 
medal winning German team and Ken Kotyk’s fourth place 
team — the same time it takes to blink an eye. For that, we 
should all feel proud. 
 
The second former constituent I wish to acknowledge is a 
woman who was born in Norquay and attended grade 1 in Pelly. 
Shannon Kleibrink is the skip for Canada’s bronze medal 
winning women’s curling team. Although Shannon’s parents 
Tom and Mabel Getty moved to Alberta while she was quite 
young, her aunt and uncle continue to live in Pelly. 
 
Despite battling a nasty flu bug during their time in Turin, the 
Kleibrink team still managed to bring home the bronze medal. 
For that, all Canadians are quite proud. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I ask you and all members to join with me in 
congratulating our winter Olympians, Ken Kotyk and Shannon 
Kleibrink. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

Plans for Population Growth 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
My question is for the Premier. I wonder if the Premier would 
please tell this Assembly and the people of the province what 
his goal is for population growth in the province of 
Saskatchewan for 2006. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will return that question 
to the Leader of the Opposition. When the member of Rosetown 
was the leader of that operation, they had a plan. I think they 
called it Grow Saskatchewan — Grow Saskatchewan. And they 
put some very specific population targets within that plan. I 
want to ask the Leader of the Opposition what’s happened to 
that plan. 
 
In fact, I want to ask the Leader of the Opposition what’s 
happened to any semblance of policy from the Saskatchewan 
Party. Some of us hearing the news today understand why the 
policy director of the Saskatchewan Party caucus office has 
flown the coop and gone to the Conservatives in Ottawa, 
Madam Speaker. The fact of the matter is there’s no policy over 
there to debate or to formulate. Madam Speaker, this 
government has set out a plan for this economy and this 
province which will see economic growth, job growth, and 
population growth that comes from within. We’ve set forward 
an immigration policy. Madam Speaker, we are seeing this 
province prosper today and will prosper in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The goal 
that we have set for this province has never changed. One per 
cent a year is the national average. It’s eminently achievable 
and we’ll hear more in a moment about what the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] think of that particular goal. 
 
You didn’t hear the Premier answer the question. It’s pretty 
simple. Does he have a goal in terms of population growth for 
the province of Saskatchewan? It was a rare moment of truth 
that he didn’t offer one, though. And we saw again another rare 
moment of truth, frankly, yesterday when the NDP Health 
minister was asked what’s his goal for a number of new nurses 
we need in Saskatchewan. Here’s what he said. Even if we put a 
number on it, there’s no guarantee we would be able to meet 
that number in any case. Doesn’t that tell you all you need to 
know about this NDP government, Mr. Speaker? They’re so 
used to failing they’ve even stopped trying. 
 
What is the goal for population growth for our province set by 
this Premier and his government? Will he tell the Assembly and 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Speaker, contrary to the 
opposition who will set out plan with no detail, who will set out 
policy that has no connection to reality, this government 
through our Throne Speech, through economic development 
plans, have put in place some very specific, tangible plans and 
targets. 
 
Let me refer, Madam Speaker, specifically to the issue of 
immigration. We began a focus on immigration two to three 
years ago now, when a former member of this House conducted 
for this legislature a study as a legislative secretary, set out a 
plan. Ms. Lorje set out a plan for immigration. 
 
We have now established a ministry of Immigration and we 
have put the support in place to develop this policy, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. We have said as recently as the Throne Speech 
— if the Leader of the Opposition would care to read the 
Throne Speech — we have set some very specific targets for 
ourselves in terms of immigration. Over the next several years 
we will grow the immigration to this province with a target 
towards 2008-09 of 1,500 to 2,000 nominees. What that 
represents, Madam Speaker, is an average immigration increase 
to the province of Saskatchewan by 2008-09 of between 4,500 
and 6,000 new people each and every year, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well then, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier has all that 
information with respect to immigration, why won’t he answer 
the question? What are his goals to grow the population of this 
province in 2006 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He did. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well no he didn’t, as a matter of fact, if you were 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

listening. 
 
In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, when the Premier and the 
Minister of Industry held their press conference after the 
congress that was held last year to unveil their new plan with 
their targets, there were no targets at all. There was just sort of 
general platitudes. You remember that — 80 of them or so, I 
think. They wanted there to be more jobs and for there to be 
more investment and for it to be less windy and for winters to 
be shorter. I’m not sure what else was in there. 
 
But it was widely panned by pundits and those in economic 
development alike because there were no targets. There were no 
measures and I think the reason is is because this NDP 
government is tired of failing by its own targets so it’s stopped 
even trying. The Premier’s own target for youth in-migration — 
he said in 2001 that we would be in a net position by 2005. 
What’s happened? We’ve lost 8,800 people in their 20s in that 
time period. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what is the Premier’s goal for 
population growth in the province of Saskatchewan for 2006? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it is of note that 
the Leader of the Opposition today would stand in this House 
and refer to the centennial economic summit that was held in 
Saskatoon last January. 
 
The only group of men and women in Saskatchewan who 
boycotted that Centennial Summit was the Saskatchewan Party, 
the Saskatchewan Party. As we sat down with industry leaders, 
with business leaders, with leaders from the trade union 
movement, with young people, with Aboriginal people, with 
people from across the province to build a plan for the future of 
Saskatchewan’s economy, there was one notable absentee — 
that was the Leader of the Opposition. And his entire caucus 
boycotted Saskatchewan’s economic summit. 
 
Out of that summit, out of that summit, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, arose the recommendations and the plans of 
Saskatchewan people working in partnership with their 
government. I think there were 81 very specific plans that came 
directly from that economic summit. One of the plans talked 
about immigration. We’ve taken that plan, we’ve given it meat 
and bones, and we are seeing people coming to this province 
today in new and record numbers. And we’ve set some very 
ambitious targets for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Madam Deputy Speaker, you can 
kind of piece, you can kind of piece together this NDP 
government’s hidden agenda. Unfortunately it’s an agenda for 
mediocrity. It’s a plan for mediocrity. They don’t set goals 
because, as the Minister of Health said quite candidly yesterday, 
they’re not able to reach goals so they’ve stopped setting them. 
They don’t want to grow the province, as the Minister of 

Highways and Transportation said, because when people leave 
there is more left for the rest of us. The former minister of 
Finance said, you don’t talk about tax hikes during an election 
campaign because people might not vote for you. Another NDP 
member said that she believed it was statistically impossible for 
this province to even grow at the national average of 1 per cent 
a year. 
 
It all adds up to a lack of vision. There is no economic plan. 
What there is is a plan for mediocrity, evidenced by the fact that 
the Premier is unable to articulate a goal for population growth 
for the province. Will he not do that? Will he stand in his place 
and give hope to the people in Saskatchewan that he at least has 
a goal, a target in mind to grow this province in 2006? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier 
said, the action plan that we released — based on the summit 
that the Leader of the Opposition did not attend — to listen to 
Saskatchewan people, set out 81 specific goals. And you know, 
Madam Speaker, it’s not enough, it’s not enough just to pick 
numbers out of the air. You actually have to have a plan. 
 
What is the plan of the Leader of the Opposition? When asked 
for his plan last year, Madam Speaker, his answer was, I’m 
going to appoint a committee if I become premier to tell me 
what to do. That was his answer, Madam Speaker. And what 
does he say this week when asked what his plan is? He says 
this: elect me because I am a different brand. That’s what he 
says. Well you know what, Madam Speaker? The brand maybe 
has a little bit of sizzle but there’s no steak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I 
understand yesterday that the new Minister of Health had quite 
a bit of difficulty answering the question, articulating the goal 
of the number of nurses that we need in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He had about four questions in this Assembly to 
try and answer the question. He had 25 minutes out in the 
rotunda answering questions and not once could he ever 
articulate a goal. 
 
But this is what he did have to say — and we’ve heard it once 
before; we’ll hear it many times again, I think: even if we were 
to put a number on it, there is no guarantee we would be able to 
meet that number in any case. What is the minister saying, 
Madam Deputy Speaker? Don’t set goals because we can’t meet 
them — is that what the minister is saying? 
 
Is that the strategy? The strategy is give up because we can’t 
meet any particular goal. If the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses’ 
number of 600 more nurses was too many, will the minister 
please stand in the House today and tell us what his number is? 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
If there’s any shortage of anything in this Chamber today, 
Madam Speaker, it’s credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I ask the members to come to 
order and respect the member that’s on his feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I 
don’t mind being quoted in this Chamber, Madam Speaker. I 
very much appreciate it. And the members opposite, the 
members opposite are quite used to — we know from past 
experience — quoting members of this House without fully 
extending the language that was used in those quotes. 
 
Madam Speaker, members of the media who did talk to me 
yesterday for about 25 minutes on this issue know that the 
context of the quotation used on the opposite side signifies that 
there is a significant challenge North America wide concerning 
the recruitment and retention of professionals in the health care 
field. 
 
Madam Speaker, if we set targets, if we set targets, Madam 
Speaker, the target is the issue of building a nursing and 
physician base in this province that meets the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. And, Madam Speaker, when we looked 
at the needs of Saskatchewan people in 2001, this government 
set a target of addressing the issue. And, Madam Speaker, the 
results have been quite impressive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. He 
refuses to set a target or a goal, a number that we should be 
reaching. 
 
And it reminds me of a story. A number of years ago when I 
used to play hockey, an old hockey coach would come into the 
room before a big game and he goes, boys, they’re keeping 
score tonight; we better darn well win. That’s what he would 
say. And when you think about it, it makes a lot of sense 
because if they’re not keeping score, if you don’t really matter 
whether you win or lose, if you don’t have any goals, if you 
don’t have an end goal to get to, it just doesn’t matter. 
 
What the province needs right now from that minister is 
leadership in this area. He needs to set a goal, a target, and work 
with Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, work with the health 
authorities to reach that mark. No mark, no success. He doesn’t 
have a clue where he’s at. He’s floundering. Why won’t this 
minister set some goals, work with the organizations to meet 
those goals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Madam Speaker, I’ll discuss a very 
specific number right now, and I think it’s a very important 
number. Currently, based on the job postings that exist 
throughout the province, there are 251 nurse job postings in the 
province at the moment. This adds up to approximately 190 
FTEs [full-time equivalent] that are going unfulfilled. We have 
committed to work with Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and 
other professionals in the province to ensure that goal number 
one, step number one, is to fulfill the unfulfilled jobs that 
currently exist in the system. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, this is a very complex and broad issue, 
which is why our consultation with Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses and other professionals is so important. Madam 
Speaker, we currently have, in the last budget, $700,000 
allocated for bursary money for nursing graduates. Madam 
Speaker, 185 undergraduate nursing students are currently in 
line to receive those bursaries, 38 primary care nurse 
practitioners. And, Madam Speaker, I want to indicate to the 
members of the opposition . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Madam Deputy Speaker, the minister does 
not have any strategy to reach any goal that he hasn’t set. That’s 
his whole game plan. This is what he had to say outside the 
Assembly yesterday — for a young nurse coming out of school 
in Saskatoon, having a chance to work for higher wages in a 
first-class facility is an attractive proposition. What does that 
mean? What is he saying? That our facilities are second-class? 
That people have to go outside of our province to work in 
first-class facilities at higher wages? Is that what he’s saying, 
Madam Deputy Speaker? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s bad enough that the work 
environment is chasing nurses out of our province. Now the 
minister stands up and calls our facilities second-class and tells 
about how there’s higher wages in other jurisdictions. Why 
doesn’t he sit down and work with the organizations to come up 
with a game plan to retain nurses in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
And we talk about credibility. The members of the media that 
were a part of that discussion yesterday know exactly what I 
was referring to when I was asked the question about, is it 
wages that are moving people away from the profession? 
Madam Speaker, there are a whole lot of issues that are 
wrapped up in the recruitment and retention issue. All of them 
are addressed in the action plan, workforce action plan, 
prepared by this government in consultation with Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses and others, and is the game plan for the future 
of this province. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, to continue my answer previously where 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

I indicated 185 undergraduate nursing students, 38 primary 
nurse practitioners in line for bursaries — every one of them 
will be offered jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 

Eligibility for Subsidized Child Care Spaces 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. My 
question today is for the Minister of Community Resources. 
Can the minister tell this Assembly who subsidized daycare 
spaces are specifically designed for? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Just to inform the members opposite, when the 
Premier made the cabinet shuffle on February 3 of this year, 
there was a division within the Department of Learning. There 
is now the Advanced Education which includes training and 
that aspect along with post-secondary education. And the 
Department of Learning now has responsibility for early 
childhood development and child care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well again, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
really wasn’t an answer. Does the minister know how many 
working families and low-income people now earn too much to 
qualify for subsidized child care spaces? 
 
In order for a family of one to qualify for any subsidize, pre-tax, 
monthly income cut-off of families with one dependent child is 
$640 or less. For two dependent children, it’s $1,740 or less. 
For three dependent children, it’s $1,840 or less. A working 
family where both parents earn minimum age brings home just 
under $2,400 before tax, and they don’t even qualify for a 
subsidy. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this gross family income cut-off below 
which families actually qualify for fully subsidized spaces 
hasn’t been raised since the 1970s. This government is 
essentially discouraging working families from seeking 
opportunities that would improve their situation. Why is this 
government leaving working families behind by cutting off 
their access to subsidized child care spaces? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is 
why we have many of our partners here with us today and why 
we have a debate that is slated for later this afternoon, is to talk 
about child care in the province of Saskatchewan, and early 
learning, and to look at the Saskatchewan plan and the areas 
that we have worked with our Saskatchewan partners to develop 

a blended method of dealing with early childhood development 
and child care. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there is not one thing in this province 
that operates in isolation. When we talk about child care, it also 
affects so many things. It’s important to children in our 
community to be given a very good start in life, but it’s also 
good support for families. Madam Deputy Speaker, when we 
talk about labour force and shortages in the labour market, for 
parents to be able to enter the workforce they also need supports 
that are there and provided to them so that they are free to enter 
and advance their careers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
Since this has been going on since the 1970s, I’m glad today 
we’re finally going to have the debate. The NDP government 
always claims that it cares about working families when in 
reality it’s shutting the door on many of them when it comes to 
accessing subsidized child spaces. Even the government’s own 
commission into improving work opportunities for 
Saskatchewan residents made note of this unfair practice. 
Recommendation 21 in the final report calls on the government 
to, and I quote: “ . . . raise the gross family income level below 
which families are eligible for subsidy.” 

 
This afternoon the Saskatchewan Party will be adding an 
amendment to the motion in the emergency debate on child 
care. We’ll be calling on this government to stop leaving 
working people behind by raising the income cut-off for 
subsidized child care spaces so that many people earning 
minimum wage can actually qualify for these services. Then on 
a go-forward basis this could be extended to . . . indexed to 
inflation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Will the minister support this amendment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 
aware Child Care Saskatchewan has been working in a number 
of areas, not only in commitments to expanded child care 
spaces, but also commitments to increased wages for child care 
workers. There was a number of announcements that were 
made. This is something that we believe in and we have 
committed resources to. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there is also a number of 
improvements and reviews that are under way, and one of them 
is the subsidy issue. Because this is something that we have 
heard often from families, as to where the turning point is, there 
has been increases made to the subsidy rate. And with the 
previous federal government when they had been making 
commitments toward the national child care program, that was 
one of the main areas that we were looking at, as to increase the 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

subsidy and have it go out farther so that it covered more 
families because, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Written Questions 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, yesterday the Government Whip rose in the House and 
ordered two more written questions. That means in his infinite 
wisdom, the Government Whip thinks he needs 180 more days 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member on his feet would 
like to place his question before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Needs 180 more days to respond to 
these simple questions. 
 
Madam Speaker, these questions were asked on Thursday, 
December 1, 2005. That means that this government has had 
105 days to figure out the answer to them. Now they want 
another six months — 285 days they want. It’s totally 
unreasonable. 
 
Madam Speaker, what are they hiding? To the Government 
House Leader, what is the NDP government hiding by not 
answering these questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader, the member from Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Madam Speaker, I said it the other 
day and I say it again today: the world has changed. The world 
has changed substantially since the Leader of the Opposition 
served as a staffer in a cabinet minister’s office in the Devine 
government. It was a time in this province, when I served in 
opposition, Madam Deputy Speaker, that questions were not 
answered. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there were an avalanche of questions 
that were asked in the fall session. I said the other day that those 
questions . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members have expressed a desire to 
hear an answer to a question. I’d ask them to respect that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, it does kind of 
defy credibility, does it not, when they ask a question and then 
don’t want an answer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I made a 
commitment to this House the other day, and I stand by my 
commitment. We take the questions very seriously, and they 
will be provided to this House and they would be provided 
substantially before the deadline as required by the rules of the 

House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Speaker, there are 566 questions that remain unanswered 
because of this government hiding the answers. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, while the government chooses not to answer the 
questions, this hiding has become a pattern of financial 
incompetence. 
 
Madam Speaker, there’s no excuse for this delay. In last year’s 
budget, the Premier increased his staffing budget by 60 per 
cent, almost half a million dollars in extra taxpayers’ money, 
for more communication staff. Last year the Premier said 
during the Premier’s estimates, and I quote from Hansard of 
May 25, 2005. Quote: 
 

. . . the need . . . [of] greater staffing resources in 
Executive Council, to provide accurate, timely responses 
to the written questions provided by the opposition . . . 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, why do these written questions 
continue to go unanswered when the necessary staff and 
resources have been put in place? To the Premier: do they have 
one staffer for each question and they have to take a year to 
answer them so they can keep their jobs, or are they just 
political hacks that are in there not doing duties in the 
legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Madam Speaker, credibility is 
strained yet again. Here we hear, out of the mouths of the 
opposition, the basic position that they have about people who 
work for the people of Saskatchewan in the administration of 
public service. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hacks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Hacks. In fact I think . . . Was it skunks 
and deadwood was the phrase that was previously used by the 
Saskatchewan Party in referring to the people who work in the 
public administration? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, what we are seeing here is purely and 
simply the expression of attitude. This is attack the public 
service. It’s not about putting forward your policy alternatives. 
 
Heaven only knows, Madam Deputy Speaker, that they have no 
need for a director of policy because they sent him off to 
Ottawa with their cousins with whom they are not related, as 
they sent him away today. Madam Deputy Speaker, credibility 
is strained yet again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Requesting to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has requested the 
Assembly to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Madam Speaker, to you and through you to 
the Assembly, in your west gallery I’d like to introduce a 
former friend or . . . no, a former co-worker and friend I hope 
still — I hope now a close friend, Madam Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you Jim Holmes. Jim is a trade unionist who had a 
very successful career with the Canadian Union of Public 
Employees as a staff representative and as a director. And I 
think Jim has achieved respect and that has been through his 
work and his passion for fighting for the working people of this 
province, Saskatchewan. And throughout the province all 
people hold Jim in high respect. So I’d ask all members to 
welcome my friend and former co-worker, Jim Holmes. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification 
Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
30, The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 30, The Film and Video Classification 
Amendment Act, 2006 be introduced and read the first time. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting 
Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 31, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting 
Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 be now introduced and read 
a first time. 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 31, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Accounting Professions) Amendment Act be introduced and 
read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes 

d’actes criminels 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 32, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 32, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 
2006 be introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/ 
Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 35, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 35, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
2006 be introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au 

profit des administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (no 2) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 36, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 36, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ 
and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act 
(No. 2) be introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 

Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 37, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 37, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ 
and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act 
(No. 2) be introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Settlement of International Investment 
Disputes Act/Loi sur le règlement des différends 

internationaux relatifs aux investissements 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 38, The Settlement of International Investment 
Disputes Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 38, The Settlement of International 
Investment Disputes Act be introduced and read the first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 40, The Income Trust Liability Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 40, The Income Trust Liability Act 2006 be 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 41, The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Justice that Bill No. 41, The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
be introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting of the House. Why 
would the member be on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I ask leave of 
the Assembly to honour the memory of Senator Allan Bird. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member asks leave to make 
remarks to honour the memory of Senator Bird. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the leave? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Remembering Senator Allan Bird 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday 
was a very sad day when we learned of the passing of Senator 
Allan Bird. And some of us just saw him yesterday at the FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] assembly. 
 
Senator Bird was a well-known and a well-respected First 
Nations elder and leader in Saskatchewan and Canada. He was 
also a recurring war veteran and member of the First Nations 
Veterans Association. 
 
Senator Bird was a strong believer in First Nations treaty rights. 
He was a strong supporter of First Nations self-government, in 
particular in areas of education. He often said, it is for our 
grandchildren so they may have a good future. 
 
Senator Bird was a strong family man, a community man who 
taught his children well. His teachings and guidance led to his 
children taking on many high-profile leadership roles of First 
Nations people, including Alphonse Bird, the grand chief of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. Senator Bird spent 
his entire life in the service of others, and his efforts will never 
be forgotten. 
 
Like me, Senator Bird was a devoted Maple Leafs fan, and he 
loved to golf. And he had a great sense of humour. Personally, 
Madam Deputy Chair, Senator Bird was like a second father to 
me. I will miss him and his guidance. Please join me in offering 
our prayers for his family and friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Madam Speaker, I would request leave to also 
offer remarks of condolence. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Leave has been requested to offer 
remarks of condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Okay. 
 
Mr. Wall: — First off, Madam Deputy Speaker, let me thank 
the hon. minister for her obviously very heartfelt remarks about 
the passing of Senator Allan Bird. If I may, I just have a few 
brief remarks of my own. And some of it will repeat what 
we’ve just heard, but I think the time of the legislature is 
certainly worth it. 
 
Senator Allan Bird’s life was one of service and belief. He 
served his First Nations community. He served this province, 
and he served the country. He had strong beliefs in terms of 
right and wrong, in terms of guiding our youth — First Nations 
and non-First Nations. Senator Allan Bird had made many 
contributions to our province. He was an elder and a teacher and 
a mentor to countless young people on the Montreal Lake Cree 
Nation. 
 
He was active in First Nations politics. He served for a time as 
the chief of his First Nation at Montreal Lake. He was a 
vice-chief of the PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council]. He 
served because he wanted to improve the lives of First Nations 
people, both on his own First Nation at Montreal Lake, within 
the P.A. Grand Council area, and across Saskatchewan. He 
wanted to leave things better than he found them. 
 
Senator Allan Bird instilled this sense of service into his sons. 
Former Chief Ritchie Bird went on to follow in his father’s 
footsteps in leadership at the Montreal Lake Cree Nation, and of 
course his son, Alphonse, is the chief of the FSIN. 
 
He was a Korean war veteran and he served honourably and 
courageously with Tommy Prince, the decorated First Nations 
war hero. And after his service in Korea, as the hon. minister 
has said, he dedicated much of his time to furthering the cause 
of First Nations veterans. In fact he was even doing that a 
couple of days ago. 
 
I had the chance this morning to talk with his son, Chief 
Alphonse Bird, and offer the condolences of the official 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

opposition on the passing of his father. And Chief Bird 
indicated that just, well a couple of days ago during the 
presentation of the national chief, Chief Fontaine, it became 
evident that Senator Bird wanted to offer a few remarks. And 
Chief Bird reminded me that that isn’t the role of senators at an 
assembly for them to speak. And so, he actually stood up and 
went around to, you know, ask his dad what it is he wanted to 
say and he just said, I have something to say. And according to 
Chief Bird, it was a former FSIN chief and now senate Chair 
Roland Crow who said no, let him speak and so they did. And 
he offered some comments to the national chief. 
 
The national chief had been talking about the importance of the 
residential school issue and the settlement of that issue and 
Senator Bird encouraged him in that. He encouraged him to 
continue with that work, but he also reminded him to not forget 
about First Nations veterans. True to his passion, he wanted to 
talk about the importance of First Nations veterans and 
encourage the national chief to make that a priority. And 
according to Chief Bird this morning, he had said to him and if 
the national chief wasn’t prepared to do it, then he, Senator 
Bird, would do it because he said, he ended his comments by 
saying, that he was rough and tough and took no guff. 
 
And Chief Bird recounted that and other stories of his dad and 
how he felt about his father and the role model that he was. And 
obviously there was a major impact there on the lives of two 
sons who went on to be First Nations leaders, but on the lives of 
so many other First Nations and non-First Nations. 
 
I think specifically of Senator Bird’s passion for the treaties, 
that both non-First Nations and First Nations would realize the 
importance of respecting those and that they’re absolutely 
foundational and elemental to our economy, to really everything 
that is Saskatchewan. 
 
So on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, 
we want to join with the hon. minister and the government in 
passing on our condolences to the family and the friends of 
Senator Allan Bird and indeed to the entire FSIN, the senate 
who have lost an excellent First Nations leader with the passing 
of Senator Bird. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before orders of the day, why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise to ask leave 
of the Assembly to introduce a motion appointing the Deputy 
Chair of committees. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader that he have leave to change 
committees appointment. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Deputy Chair of Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly I move, seconded by the Government Whip: 
 

That Mr. Peter Prebble, member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Greystone, be appointed to preside as Deputy 
Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the 
Government House Leader, the member from Moose Jaw 
North, and seconded by the member from Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

That Mr. Peter Prebble, member of the constituency of 
Saskatoon Greystone, be appointed to preside as Deputy 
Chair of committees of the Assembly. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly in favour of the 
motion placed before you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 

Early Learning and Child Care 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to make some 
statements and then read a motion into the record concerning 
early learning and child care. 
 
Children are born with great potential. Their first five years set 
the stage for health, behaviour, and learning for the rest of their 
lives. And that’s why early learning and child care is so very 
important. 
 
Last April this government signed an agreement in principle 
with the Government of Canada to develop a system of early 
learning and child care in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
committed to developing a plan, Madam Speaker, that would 
make quality early learning and child care more accessible and 
affordable for families. And the Government of Canada 
committed to providing us with $146 million over five years to 
make this plan a reality. 
 
That window of opportunity now appears to be closing. The 
federal government has advised that it will not proceed with the 
five-year funding agreement and will terminate funding by next 
spring. In its place they are introducing a community child care 
investment program that would appear to be based on a tax 
credit for creation of child care spaces in workplaces. 
 
As well they have established the Choice in Child Care 
Allowance where parents will receive a taxable benefit of $100 
a month for every child under the age of six. 
 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

Madam Deputy Speaker, this government understands that 
families need money to help care for children and give them 
opportunities. In fact we’ve come out and stated that we will 
not count this money as income for families on social 
assistance. But we also understand something else, Madam 
Speaker. We understand that you can’t have a plan of choice 
when there are no choices. You can’t buy something that isn’t 
available. 
 
When about 70 per cent of mothers of young children are 
working and there are only licensed child care spaces for 7 per 
cent of those children, there’s a service missing that most 
parents can’t buy. When there are over 11,000 four-year-olds in 
the province and our current pre-kindergarten is targeted at only 
1,600, there’s a service missing that most parents can’t buy. 
There are preschools in the province that are filling this gap to 
some extent, but in many communities, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it’s still a service parents can’t buy. 
 
Sometimes services are available, but parents don’t know about 
them. Sometimes the services aren’t connected, so you have a 
parent driving all over the place putting children in this program 
or that program. 
 
What Saskatchewan needs, Madam Deputy Speaker, is to 
develop more early learning and child care services so that 
families will truly have a choice. We need a system that works, 
and we have developed a plan to get us there. What we’re 
missing is the federal funds that the Canada-Saskatchewan 
funding agreement was to provide. We will take every 
opportunity to talk to the federal government and help them 
understand why it is so very important for Saskatchewan to 
move forward with a system of early learning and child care. 
And we want the people of Saskatchewan to know just what 
that system would look like. 
 
Today, Madam Deputy Speaker, I will share with this House 
the made-in-Saskatchewan plan for early learning and child 
care. This plan was based on two things. First of all, it was 
based on the needs and wishes of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Over the last two years we have talked with parents. We have 
talked with early childhood educators. These are people who 
run child care centres and work in them: teachers of 
kindergartens and pre-kindergartens and preschools. We have 
talked to people in communities all across the province: First 
Nations, Métis, francophones, urban, rural, northern, the 
disability community. Madam Deputy Speaker, our plan is 
based on those discussions. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Secondly the plan is based on research and expert advice. As a 
result it’s a plan that blends early learning and care together. 
The experts confirm what parents know instinctively, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that children learn best in a loving, caring 
environment. Our plan is based on a vision, a vision that states 
all Saskatchewan children enjoy a good start in life and are 
nurtured and supported by caring families and communities. 
And these are our goals that accompany the vision: children 
have the best possible early learning and child care experiences 
and are safe and secure, families have support and assistance 
from the people and communities around them to raise healthy 
children, and families have practical solutions to barriers. 

And so, Madam Deputy Speaker, here is the plan that was 
developed and would be under way if the federal funding were 
still available. We would introduce a new pre-kindergarten 
program and expand the existing one. The pre-kindergarten 
program we already have is targeted to vulnerable children. The 
educators who work in this program have told us that it is a very 
effective program and is making a huge difference in children’s 
lives. However the number of children who qualify for this 
program exceeds the number of spaces. We want to change that 
and would increase the number of spaces. 
 
We would also phase in a new voluntary pre-kindergarten 
program over the next five years. The new program would be 
available to all four-year-olds in the province. It would be 
regulated and linked to schools and would be available through 
child care centres, community preschools or schools, and 
classes would operate at least two half-days per week. In a 
classroom of 20, there would be two qualified pre-kindergarten 
teachers, one with a minimum designation of early childhood 
educator 2 and one with a minimum designation of early 
childhood educator 3. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, pre-kindergarten would be phased in 
as boards of education and communities decide together how 
and when to launch them locally. Developmental funding would 
be available to school divisions so they could begin working 
with their communities to build on existing services and 
establish new pre-kindergartens where needed. Parents would 
pay a small fee with the opportunity to access a subsidy based 
on their income level. Some of these pre-kindergartens would 
have been available by September of this year. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in our plan we would also develop an 
early learning guide. This guide would be for use in all 
pre-kindergartens and child care centres, and it would also be 
available to families. The guide would provide a standard 
curriculum, so children across the province would receive the 
same benefit. Educators and parents would be able to use the 
guide to lead children in play-based learning activities that 
would encourage development of age appropriate skills. 
 
Capital funding would be available, Madam Deputy Speaker, to 
help with the development of new and existing facilities for 
expansion of early learning and child care services, including 
schools and child care centres. The priorities for this funding 
would focus on ensuring health and safety standards are met 
and increasing spaces where most needed. 
 
We would expand and enhance the early childhood 
development sector in many ways. But first we would add 
1,720 more child care spaces. And this is in addition to the 
1,200 spaces that are already being added as part of the Child 
Care Saskatchewan. This past year, we’ve added 250 of the 
1,720 planned spaces. And those 250 spaces will remain, as will 
the 1,200 Child Care Saskatchewan spaces. 
 
But if the federal funding were available, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we could have increased child care spaces in 
Saskatchewan by 40 per cent between the years 2003 and 2010. 
We would also enhance grants for licensed family child care 
homes by introducing a new grant for licensed family child care 
homes to help them with the cost of buying nutritious food. In 
addition the start-up grant for these homes would increase from 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

$1,400 to $2,000. 
 
We would develop a strategy to attract and retrain early 
childhood educators. Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some 
wonderful professional people working in child care centres, 
people who really care about kids and who understand how to 
help them learn and develop. And the quality of a child’s early 
learning and child care experiences are directly connected to the 
training and the wages of educators. 
 
For this reason, we have already made three commitments to 
increase the wages of staff in child care centres — 3 per cent as 
of April 2005, another 6 per cent in November of 2005, and by 
9 per cent in April of 2006. The Saskatchewan government 
made these commitments in good faith, based on the funding 
that was coming from the federal government. And we will not 
break those commitments, even though the federal government 
may end their funding next year. They are too important to our 
children and to the people who work with them. 
 
But there are other commitments that we have made, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. We want to attract young people to early 
childhood education. And we know that there are people who 
have been working in the field with a minimum of education, 
people who do the best they can and who would do an even 
better job if they had more training opportunities. We would 
have worked with SIAST to add 100 new training seats this 
year, complete with bursaries to make the training more 
affordable. 
 
Enhancing, measuring, and reporting on quality is vital. It 
makes sure that we are actually doing the good for our children 
that we intend to. And we would continue to define quality with 
input from our early learning and child care partners. This 
would help ensure that all programs are built to respond to the 
family’s needs. 
 
Throughout the province, community preschools and 
playschools provide an important learning and developmental 
opportunity for three- to four-year-olds. We would work more 
closely with preschools, Madam Deputy Speaker, to provide 
better access to professional development and networking. 
Families would have more information about preschool in our 
province. 
 
We would also make services more affordable, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Many parents have told us that they can’t afford 
regulated, licensed, early learning and child care services. And 
while it’s good that subsidies are available for those with the 
very lowest incomes, those subsidies need to be available to 
more families. And low-income families need even more 
assistance. 
 
And based on this input, we would develop a new subsidy 
structure for licensed child care and pre-kindergarten. We made 
a step in this direction last spring by increasing child care 
subsidies by an average of $20 per child per month, and we will 
keep this commitment. 
 
Now federal funds were in place. The subsidies would have 
increased again in January of this year and that would be just 
the beginning. A complete review of the subsidy system was 
planned with the intent that we would significantly increase 

both the dollar value of child care subsidies and the number of 
families who qualify. Some families would also qualify for 
subsidy to pre-kindergarten. Administrative processes would 
also be reviewed and simplified wherever possible. 
 
We would improve access to services. Early learning and child 
care has to be inclusive with opportunities for all. We’ve had 
initial discussions with First Nations representatives, Métis 
organizations and our francophone community. And we also 
recognize that in rural and northern areas, people often live 
farther apart and child care needs can be seasonal based on a 
parent’s peak work times. 
 
Families of children with disabilities also have unique needs. 
We would like to see these children fully participating in early 
learning and child care programs. For example, that would 
mean a child in a pre-kindergarten or child care setting could 
have access to speech language supports so that he or she could 
get the best start possible. 
 
This is such an important area, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we 
have already taken vital steps. Kids who have a high-impact of 
disability, who were having to wait for child care spaces 
because of a shortage of funding, that wait list has been 
eliminated and we plan to keep it that way. 
 
And for all families, we would pilot parent resource centres. 
These centres would be places that families could go to access 
programs and services for young children to learn new skills 
and to build relationships with other families. Communities 
would develop these resource centres with different 
combinations of services depending on what is already 
available and what new services are needed. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a very good plan. And it was 
developed thoughtfully with input from many people. It 
recognizes that we have many types of families in 
Saskatchewan with different needs and preferences. It creates 
the base for a system of early learning and child care in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Without federal funding, our ability to make progress on early 
learning and child care will slow down significantly but it will 
not stop. We will look at available resources and set priorities 
so that we can move, at least some pieces of the plan forward. 
And while we will take what steps we can, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, our children need these services now. 
 
We will continue talking with the federal government about the 
need for a quality system of early learning and child care in 
Saskatchewan because we want to give our children the best 
possible start in life. 
 
With that, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would put forward the 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize that in today’s communities 
and workplaces, parental supports and assistance are of 
utmost importance in contributing to the caring and 
nurturing of children, and that high-quality early learning 
and child care plays a integral role in supporting and 
nurturing the social, emotional, and cognitive development 
of a child’s life; and further, 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

that this Assembly express dissatisfaction with the federal 
government’s announcement to withdraw that support to 
families and cancel early learning and child care 
agreements with the provinces, and not fulfil commitments 
made by the previous federal government, which were to 
provide $146 million over five years to Saskatchewan 
families. 

 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning, the motion before the Assembly. Would the 
Assembly take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Seconded by the member from 
Regina Rosemont. I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And if not to be considered to be currying favour of 
the House, the fine Madam Deputy Speaker, if I might say. 
 
You know I want to start today in my seconding of this motion 
to just say a few words about Ken Dryden. I have to admit to a 
little bit of feminine bias when I was surprised that a 
hockey-playing hunk would take up the charge for child care in 
Canada. And as I got to know Ken Dryden, I realized he was 
deeply passionate about this issue. 
 
And when I walked into my local library one day I bumped into 
a book on the shelves there written by Ken Dryden about 
children in the schools today. And I think if one tracks back one 
could understand why this particular individual was such a good 
ally in the national parliament for all of the community 
organizations, women, child care providers, early childhood 
development people who had been working hard for the past 25 
years to have the issue of child care be valued in our society and 
to care about the way we care for our children. And I will have 
deep respect for Mr. Dryden in the work he does because his 
resolve was very genuine and he pushed hard to have all of the 
provinces and territories realize that we needed to work together 
on a national child care program. 
 
And so we made a great deal of progress over that year in our 
federal-provincial-territorial meetings and constructing a 
national vision. And I’m very glad that my very able colleague 
has taken over the work in that area because there’s much more 
left to do unfortunately. We thought we were well on the road. 
 
But one thing that was interesting, as I attended those meetings 
nationally, was that there was no province that didn’t think that 
that early learning and child care was an important issue today. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And I think it’s great when a whole society says our children 
are important, as well as discussions about the economy and all 
the other things we talk about. At the end of the day who is it 
we look forward to see? At the end of the day it’s our children, 
our grandchildren. And this is really where the important work 
takes place, and the need for children to have quality care. 

Now I found in our national discussions there might have been 
differences in what people thought was needed to solve that 
need. But there was no question that people thought it was 
needed and that every province was looking so forward to 
having these additional resources dedicated to this particular 
area. 
 
In Saskatchewan today, we have the highest number of women 
with children working of anywhere in Canada, so we certainly 
have one of the highest needs to address this issue. And I don’t 
have statistics on this, Madam Deputy Speaker, but I do know 
that way more families today live without the supports of 
extended family. So people’s theories about who might look 
after your children tend to be a bit theoretical in the absence of 
those extended family networks. 
 
People work both because they want to and because they have 
to. And I think the whole discussion around choice in child care 
and early learning is whether in fact there is a choice. And I’m 
going to talk a little bit today about whether this national plan 
really leaves us with a choice in child care. 
 
We do have a lot of children around us today with kind of 
haphazard care arrangements. And I think the school system is 
seeing the results of some of that haphazard non-system that 
there is for looking after our children. I was actually a bit 
surprised — I guess I shouldn’t have been, given the 
discussions I was involved in — but I was a bit surprised to see 
the way that the school boards embraced the need for 
pre-kindergarten. 
 
They’re working with the kids that are coming into the school 
system and not having as successful an experience as they 
might because they haven’t had that early preparation. They 
haven’t had maybe the quality child care. Maybe mom is a 
single parent, has to go off to work, is just struggling to make 
ends meet, perhaps working two jobs, not having the time to 
play with her children, read to them, do all the other things that 
are an important part of developing good, healthy children who 
are ready for school. 
 
And I know that we see the school boards supporting this today. 
Some of them, and some jurisdictions, supporting resolutions 
on behalf of keeping the national child care strategy going. 
 
I had the pleasure of meeting Fraser Mustard a few times in 
this. And I don’t know if you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
but children, actually in their development, literacy has a strong 
role in the neural pathways that are developed in the brain. This 
is a physical fact as well as an educational fact. 
 
It’s not only that literacy is good for you; it’s that it actually 
affects the development of your brain. So if children don’t get 
that kind of attention from their parents, from their family, from 
the community, from good early learning and child care, then in 
fact we’re missing a developmental opportunity that that child 
will never have again. You never are zero to five years old 
again, no matter how much people who observe behaviour in 
the House sometimes might disagree with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — So I think that we know that just as education 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

is critically important to older children, it’s also important for 
early childhood development. 
 
So we ask the question, how will children get that good start? 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very good that we’ve 
come together in this legislature today to talk about this and 
made it a priority. It’s encouraging to me even that we have 
members of the opposition putting forward a motion of support 
for the fact that we need to make sure parents can afford early 
learning and child care. And I will be looking carefully for the 
wording of that motion. 
 
It’s encouraging to me that this whole topic has come to the 
fore in the way it has in the national election and will, I think, 
remain an issue for quite a while to come. 
 
Now I’m willing to . . . I know that during the whole year we 
discussed the shaping of this child care plan in Canada, when I 
had the joy of question period, that I was never asked a question 
on this by the members opposite. But that’s okay. We’re willing 
to take support at any time. It didn’t come then but it’s here 
now, and that’s great. 
 
And I just want to acknowledge all the work that took place 
with national and provincial organizations, with CBOs 
[community-based organization], with educators, with early 
childhood development specialists, with families and home 
child care providers. And I think we have some work to do 
there as well to make sure that home care providers are 
adequately supported with the resource and materials that they 
need to work with children so they’re not working in isolation, 
because they provide a very important part of the network as 
well. 
 
But today I’m urging this House to work to ensure that the 
federal government honours its promise of a national child care 
program, and the place to start is to honour the early learning 
and child care agreements that were signed by the provinces and 
that were supposed to go into their next phase of signing as 
soon as the plans were in place that the minister announced 
today. 
 
And so my view would be we’re ready to sign this agreement. 
And just in the same way the federal government honours 
programs and activities begun by the previous government, I 
think if they’re going to pick one to honour, this would 
certainly be one that we’ll all support here today. It lays the 
foundation for a national system. 
 
And you know, there was a time when we didn’t have a national 
education system, but we have one today because people 
understood the importance of it. And this is just another piece 
of that. This is the early part of that learning system that is so 
important. And to cancel these agreements now will set back 
the development of so many children. 
 
When you’re out in the community and you see the specialized 
needs — children from different language groups, the amazing 
cultural work that’s been done by the francophone community 
in integrating early childhood with the rest of an education 
continuum, the immigrants that come to Saskatchewan today 
where the children have to struggle with so many language 
issues; we have children with learning disabilities, children with 

physical disabilities — I have to say that these issues are not 
going to be dealt with with $100 a month subsidy to children 
under the age of six. 
 
I want to look at the dollars for a minute, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Because, you know, what does $100 buy? Well I know 
if someone offered me $100 today I wouldn’t turn it down. I 
think we can all think of a use for another $100. But I can tell 
you that it does not buy a child care system any more than it 
buys a school system. 
 
What does it really cost to have a child in quality child care? 
The average cost per child care space in Saskatchewan is about 
$5,000 per space, and that is made up half of money that comes 
from the public purse and half of money that comes from the 
child care, the families, fundraising, those kinds of things. An 
average subsidy in a low-income space is 1,500 a year. So right 
now we’re up to 6,500 per child per year to create a quality 
space with subsidy at the level it’s already at. And if we were to 
talk about improving the subsidy, as I think we’ll have that 
discussion today, then that would be an additional cost. 
 
And I found it very strange that if this $100 was really about 
child care, why wasn’t it added to the child benefit, which is 
already a structured program, to put money into the pockets of 
families to improve their ability to make decisions and have 
sufficient money to live? And the way this money is being 
delivered makes you wonder what its purpose is. It is kind of 
money in space. It’s not really attached to the adequacy 
envelope, and it’s not firmly attached to a child care envelope 
too because there’s no guarantee to that child that that $100 will 
actually contribute to their early childhood development. The 
same children that need early learning and care today will likely 
need it tomorrow. 
 
You know, when we look at our society today, we look at the 
children involved in crime, the children dropping out of school, 
the children having very poor experiences with their 
development, we have to say there’s something we have to do 
differently. And I think that thing that we have to do differently 
is support children in families, understanding that if the 
economy demands that people participate in the labour force, 
then that same economy should support people. I’m a little 
concerned . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. I’m a little concerned that about 
the . . . I think it’s important for workplaces to have child care, 
but personally and in our child care plan, we believe a more 
appropriate place is the school system. Because you also want 
those children to be around their brothers and sisters, the other 
people in the community. And as a parent who was a single 
parent and had to run one kid to one daycare home, run another 
kid to another place, often those folks . . . Certainly myself I 
was fortunate to have a car, but I had a girlfriend who gave up 
her child because she didn’t have a car and just finally just 
couldn’t do it any more. 
 
These programs belong as part of the continuum of early 
learning and child care. They belong in the community with 
SchoolPLUS, with the range of supports that a thoughtful and 
caring community provides to the people that support the 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

economy of this province. 
 
So I will say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I intend to support 
this motion today and I intend to continue working with the 
early learning and care coalition. And, you know, these folks 
they’ve got a website and if you want to sign a petition to keep 
national child care going in this country you can go to 
www.buildchildcare.ca and you can be counted as one of the 
people who care about child care in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, thank 
you for the opportunity to respond to this motion. 
 
Early childhood development, as the previous minister of 
Community Resources talked about, is an extremely important 
function in our society. It’s probably one of the most critical 
from the years of zero to five. I also have spent some time with 
Dr. Fraser Mustard and visited his facility, as well as expand 
and develop and meet with the people on the Hawaiian model to 
see how that that works. And we know that it works because 
there are models in this world that are working today in the 
betterment of children. We know that inclusive works for 
people with disabilities. 
 
We also know when the minister talks about this program of 
$100 a month and trivializes it, when this government only 
raised the food allowance to $10 a month for people in this 
province, when we have 44,000 children in this province living 
below the poverty line . . . Sorry, I wasn’t sure of your title, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know our first priority when it comes to evaluating any 
child care agreement with the federal government is whether 
it’s in the best interest of all Saskatchewan children and their 
families. The Saskatchewan Party believes that we need to 
support enhanced child care services and that early childhood 
and childhood development should be a priority in our 
province, with community-based organizations, cultural-based 
organizations also being a preferred vehicle for delivery of 
these services. 
 
We recognize that the current child care and early learning 
agreement signed between the province of Saskatchewan and 
the previous federal government has led to a modest increase in 
child care spaces in Saskatchewan and has gone to increase 
wages for licensed child care providers. The Saskatchewan 
Party supports these initiatives. 
 
The provincial government has also indicated that they support 
an expansion to pre-kindergarten programs in this province. 
And while we are still waiting for the government to reveal 
their plan for pre-kindergarten in this province, we agree in 
principle that early learning should and must be a priority, and 
that regardless that if the money to do that comes from the 
federal government or from a massive surplus that the NDP 
government has accumulated over the past year from oil and 

gas revenues, this is a good investment for the province of 
Saskatchewan’s children. 
 
But in recognizing and voicing our support for the current 
agreement between the province and the federal government, it 
is also important to note that many children are left behind by 
the deal signed last year by the NDP government. Does the 
member opposite know the agreement signed between the NDP 
government and the previous Liberal government did nothing to 
acknowledge the needs of tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 
children whose parents choose to care for them at home or have 
friends or relatives care for the children in their home? 
 
[15:15] 
 
Sadly the deal signed by the NDP does nothing for the children, 
for the child care needs of these parents. Nor does it address the 
needs of parents who many choose to use neighbourhood child 
care in their communities. And so when we consider this 
motion, we must also consider that these children are left 
behind, many of whom are part of more than 40,000 children in 
Saskatchewan who live in poverty or comprise the 50 per cent 
of food bank users who are children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amongst the children left behind by this 
government are those whose parents are no longer eligible for 
child care subsidies, or have seen their child care subsidies 
greatly diminish under this government because the income 
threshold under which they can qualify for full daycare 
subsidies has not been adjusted in over 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think members of the public would be shocked 
to know how low this threshold is. Currently the maximum 
amount for a family with one dependant can earn before taxes 
or deductions in order to qualify for a child care subsidy is 
$1,640 a month. When you consider that even the maximum 
subsidy only covers an average of two-thirds of the cost of child 
care and that this NDP government claws back 25 per cent of 
that subsidy for every $100 earned over that threshold, it is 
clear that most low-income families are finding themselves too 
rich for subsidized child care under the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier and his NDP government 
that brags about leaving no one behind justify the fact that a 
two-income working family, working full-time at minimum 
wage that earns $2,448 a month before taxes, is considered too 
rich for subsidized child care? How can the Minister of 
Learning and Community Resources talk about the importance 
of licensed child care in our province or the help it provides to 
low-income families who need child care to participate in the 
workforce or go to school, when they know full well that many 
of these families can’t even access that child care? 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again this government talks about the 
importance of children, but they continue to leave many behind. 
Supporting the deal is best for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes that to properly 
address the child care and early learning needs of children in 
this province, we should support all federal government 
programs, both current and future, that put the best interests of 
Saskatchewan children first. That is why in voicing our support 
for a continuation of the current five-year early learning and 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

child care agreement with the federal government, we think it is 
also important that this Assembly voice its support for the 
proposed new child care plan being proposed by the federal 
government that will reach tens of thousands of children left 
behind from the previous deal. 
 
As the members opposite know well, the federal government 
proposed child care allowance will reach every child in this 
province under the age of six. That’s 72,000 children whose 
parents will receive $1,200 a year to assist in their child care 
needs. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may not understand 
how $100 a month will assist in the cost of child care, but the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party on this side of the 
Assembly understand the impact that $100 a month will have 
for low-income families who are struggling under this NDP 
government. 
 
While licensed child care provider provides a child care option 
for parents, it is important to note that this government only 
created 250 new child care spaces with the $22 million received 
last year from the federal government. That brings the total 
number of licensed child care spaces in Saskatchewan to 8,600 
by the end of this year, a good start but a far cry from the 
72,000 children who will benefit from the federal government 
proposed child care plan. 
 
We believe that the current child care agreement between the 
Saskatchewan government and the federal government together 
with the new proposed child care allowance for children under 
six will benefit all Saskatchewan families. And that is why we 
urge members of this Assembly to voice their support both for 
the federal child care initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk to parents about their child care 
needs, it’s clear that each family has unique and specific child 
care needs, different ideas on how best to meet them. What this 
means is that parents want a choice and a voice in child care. 
When I look at the previous deal signed by the NDP 
government, the one major thing that is missing is parental 
choice and parental voice. The deal between the NDP and the 
previous federal government is a deal between governments 
that completely ignores the needs of stay-at-home parents or 
parents who may want to opt for the child care in their own 
homes. 
 
What’s ironic about the fact that this government would sign a 
child care deal that ignores the child care preferences of parents, 
it is that the Department of Community Resources conducted a 
survey on this very issue in the year 2001. If the government 
had bothered to visit their own website or read the survey they 
commissioned, they would have read the following facts: 60 per 
cent of the parents surveyed preferred child care that is provided 
in their home, whether that child care is provided by a spouse, a 
relative, or someone who comes to their home; 80 per cent of 
working parents surveyed felt that infants were best cared for in 
their home; and only 8 per cent of parents chose daycare as the 
best option. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, are the government’s own survey numbers. 
That’s what Saskatchewan parents say, and it’s one of the main 
reasons that the Saskatchewan Party believes that this Assembly 
should not be discriminating against parents who choose care at 
home or neighbourhood child care when it comes to signing 

child care deals with the federal government or undertaking 
future provincial initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes that we need to 
put the well-being of children first. We have argued over and 
over again in this Chamber for the need to increase the food 
allowance for social service recipients to fight child hunger in 
this province. We have also urged this government to make sure 
that the proper checks and balances are in place when children 
are referred to safe houses. It is that reason why we again 
demand that the Premier come down from his mountain of 
money and invest in our children. Let’s surely make sure that 
no children is left behind. 
 
That is why, in the interest of children in Saskatchewan, we 
propose the following amendment to the motion. I move that 
the second paragraph be deleted and the following be 
substituted: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the importance of quality 
child care, support an increase in the income threshold for 
eligibility to receive subsidized child care; and 
 
that this Assembly, recognizing that parents are the best 
judge of quality child care for their children, shall urge the 
government not to discriminate against parents who 
choose to stay at home with their children when 
negotiating agreements with the federal government or 
when implementing provincial child care initiatives; and 
 
that this Assembly urge the federal government to 
continue to fund the current child care agreement with the 
province of Saskatchewan in addition to its plan to 
implement a new child care allowance. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — We have an 
amendment to the main motion that has been moved by the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Northwest, and is seconded by the hon. 
member for Kelvington-Wadena. Will members take the 
amendment as read? I recognize the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Deputy Chair. I’m very delighted today to be part of this 
discussion about choices, choices when it comes to raising our 
children. 
 
When my children were little, and that was a few decades ago, I 
didn’t really have to make that decision. Child care wasn’t 
something that we discussed a lot in our lives. If I needed 
someone to look after some of my five children, there was 
usually a neighbour or a family member that was around to help 
me out. 
 
But later on, and when I became a grandmother, I realized there 
was a whole new world opening out there that had a lot of . . . 
that my children were faced with making decisions that I never 
had to make — something that they learned from their family 
life — that their children are the most important part of their 
life, and they had to decide where they were going to leave that 
child when they went to work. Most families are forced to have 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

two members working to provide an income but from the 
moment the woman is pregnant, they have to start thinking 
about where they are going to leave that child. 
 
The member from Regina Rosemont spoke a few minutes ago 
about her surprise when she first learned that Ken Dryden was 
going to be looking at an issue like this and when she learned 
that he really had a passion for children. 
 
And I have to tell you that I was really . . . I learned a lot from 
the member for Saskatoon Northwest when he became a part of 
our group, and he started talking about issues like Care & 
Share. And I learned that in his life before he came into politics, 
he dealt with a lot of children in need. And in fact right now the 
organization that he helps fund deals with 7,000 to 8,000 
children a year — they feed them. He was given Citizen of the 
Year for his work with children. And he also knows that in that 
community they donate about $200,000 a year, not from 
government but from parents and people who care about the 
young people in the constituency. 
 
There’s no special group of people that have a monopoly on 
who cares about children, but there are a group of people that 
decide that there should be choices when it comes to who looks 
after our children. And I think that’s the thing that most parents 
and grandparents are asking for today. 
 
It’s important to the Saskatchewan Party that there is no 
discrimination against parents who choose to stay home to care 
for their children or maybe even have the luxury of having their 
grandparents look after these children. Many of us would find it 
an honour when we have the opportunity to spend a few hours 
with them and long for the days when maybe we could spend 
more time. But yet too often when it comes to this government, 
the majority of parents’ voices are not heard. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
every family is unique, and no two parents look after their 
children the same way. 
 
I know that regardless of where we are in Saskatchewan it’s 
very difficult to get 24-hour care for our children, and I know 
that because I have a daughter who’s a nurse. And when her 
kids were little, it was very difficult to find somebody to look 
after that young person. It wouldn’t matter how many daycare 
places there were, you’d have to be pretty unique and pretty 
lucky to be able to find a place that would look after my 
granddaughter. And that’s when I had the opportunity, and her 
sisters and brothers took time to look after them. And that was 
an important part of our lives. And we didn’t give up anything; 
we gained because we had the chance to look after family 
members. 
 
And in rural Saskatchewan we often, very, very often don’t 
have the luxury of having a daycare. There isn’t that choice. 
Again we rely on somebody who is in the community, 
somebody we trust, somebody who makes similar parenting 
decisions to us. And maybe we’re fortunate. Maybe we are 
fortunate in some way. It takes a lot to have this person look 
after the people that are so very important to us. 
 
And I also have had the opportunity in the last number of years 
when I’ve given the real honour of talking to a lot of First 
Nations people and dealing with their home lives to realize that 
looking after their children is a huge concern for those members 

as well. Daycare subsidies aren’t often in place for them. And a 
lot of young mothers who need daycare spaces or somebody to 
look after the child they love are still going to school. And 
those, I do understand why the government has decided to 
combine daycare and early learning and a K to 12 [kindergarten 
to grade 12] education because I agree. I think that’s something 
that works very well together. But we still have to decide . . . 
We have to realize that the choices of where our children and 
grandchildren stay shouldn’t be lying with government. We still 
believe that parents have the right to make these choices, and 
they are the best people to make the choices. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I had the opportunity just lately to talk about daycare funding to 
a group in Prince Albert who look after a number of young 
people, and one of their concerns is the core funding. The core 
funding isn’t available right now to help them over seasons like 
the summer season where many parents, especially young 
parents, may decide to take their kids home for the summer. 
And in order to continue the funding, there would be empty 
spaces. And it doesn’t work for them. But at the same time 
there isn’t a realization that there has to change. What we have 
as programs today isn’t working for everybody. 
 
So I listened with interest when the minister spoke about some 
of the work they had done, and I didn’t hear her talk about the 
idea of core funding for daycares; a realization that even if the 
place isn’t full, the lights still had to be kept on, and the 
building may still have to be heated. 
 
There has to be decisions on KidsFirst and the Head Start 
program. How are we going to combine those programs? Those 
decisions are huge, and they impact a lot of people. Those are 
choices that are made right now by government, and we don’t 
always see the parents involved in it. 
 
We support a continuation of the existing agreement with the 
federal government. And the amendment that was put forward 
by my colleague would ensure that the Assembly recognizes the 
majority of Saskatchewan parents are not discriminated against 
when it comes to future or federal-provincial initiatives. 
 
I believe that if this Assembly truly supports quality child care, 
we have to realize that parents are not only the best source of 
quality daycare, they’re really in the best position to determine 
the form of child care that is best for their child. We can’t have 
someone in government, regardless who the government is, 
make that decision. We believe that parents not only have the 
right and the responsibility but the loving care and 
understanding to make sure they have that choice. 
 
The minister stated earlier that children learn best in a loving, 
caring environment. We agree with that. And where can you 
better identify a loving, caring environment than in the home? 
We know that often this will mean a licensed daycare will be 
chosen by parents, and we support the decision of parents who 
decide that is where their children should be. But we also know 
right across Saskatchewan, especially in areas like rural 
Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan, licensed child care is 
often not available. And parents don’t have any choice but to 
find another form of care. 
 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

It simply is not fair to parents to discriminate against them 
when negotiating a deal with the federal government or 
designing a new provincial program. We have to realize that 
everybody in this province cares about their children, and we 
can’t design a program that’s going to work very well for some 
city areas or specific groups of people. It has to work for 
everybody. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Northwest has already noted that the 
NDP’s own survey of parents indicate that the majority, by far 
the majority of working parents prefer to have child care in their 
own home. It simply is not right that these parents are being 
ignored by this government when child care deals are 
negotiated with the federal government. 
 
Too many children in Saskatchewan are already left behind, 
including far too many of our Aboriginal children. There are 
44,000 children living in poverty under this NDP government, 
and far too many of these children and youth are waiting for 
treatment beds because this government has cut back treatment 
services over the past decade. 
 
Last year when this government decided to give an extra $10 a 
month to people who are receiving social services, they were 
very, very proud of themselves. It was like the biggest gift that 
ever happened. And yet just a few minutes ago I heard one of 
the members boo-hooing about the $100 a month that they 
would get from daycare. Now it doesn’t make any sense to me, 
and it seems like there’s different rules when it comes to federal 
money or provincial money. 
 
People with young children have a right to decide how to spend 
the money. That’s why I’m very pleased to second the 
amendment put forward by the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. This amendment speaks to the need for all of us in 
this Assembly to put the welfare of children ahead of politics, to 
support the federal government’s investment in early learning 
and child care, to ensure that parents are not discriminated 
against, and to increase income eligibility threshold for 
subsidized child care to ensure that low-income families can 
access subsidized child care. 
 
I support the amendment put forward by my colleague from 
Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly, we have before us then the government motion that I 
want to read, so I want to ensure there’s clarity with respect to 
the motion and the amendment. The motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly recognize that in today’s communities 
and workplace, parental supports and assistance are of 
utmost importance in contributing to the caring and 
nurturing of children, and that high-quality early learning 
and child care plays an integral role in supporting and 
nurturing the social, emotional, and cognitive development 
of a child’s life; and further 
 
that this Assembly expresses dissatisfaction with the 
federal government’s announcement to withdraw that 
support to families and cancel early learning and child care 

agreements with provinces, and not fulfill commitments 
made by the previous federal government which were to 
provide $146 million over five years to our Saskatchewan 
families. 

 
And then we have the motion put forward by the hon. member 
for Saskatoon Northwest, seconded by the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. And the amendment reads: 
 

That the second paragraph of the government motion be 
deleted and the following be substituted: 

 
That this Assembly, recognizing the importance of quality 
child care, support an increase in the income threshold for 
eligibility to receive subsidized child care; and that this 
Assembly, recognizing that parents are the best judge of 
quality child care for their children, shall urge the 
government not to discriminate against parents who 
choose to stay at home with their children when 
negotiating agreements with the federal government or 
when implementing provincial child care initiatives; and 
that this Assembly urge the federal government to 
continue to fund the current child care agreement with the 
province of Saskatchewan in addition to its plan to 
implement a new child care allowance. 

 
Now debate will continue simultaneously on both the motion 
and the amendment. Is the Assembly ready for the question on 
the amendment? I recognize the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased to be able to enter into this 
debate this afternoon. I think this is a debate that has needed to 
occur in this Legislative Assembly for some time. And in fact, 
there are some members of this Legislative Assembly that have 
been working towards a national child daycare policy and early 
learning and care policy for over 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member from Regina Rosemont talked 
about her work that has been undertaken with the previous 
federal government over the last couple of years to get to a 
national child daycare agreement and the work of literally 
hundreds and hundreds of organizations and literally tens of 
thousands of citizens to get to the point where every provincial 
government in this country entered into an agreement with the 
previous federal government, she is absolutely correct. And 
there is no question that women in this country and 
organizations in this country are now busy getting together to 
lobby the new federal government to change their mind and not 
do in the agreements that were agreed to by every province and 
territory in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition have submitted an 
amendment to the resolution, and I want to say to the members 
that I think it’s agreed on our side that we need to improve child 
daycare subsidies in this province. We have no disagreement 
with you on that particular element of your argument. 
 
And if you listened to the Minister of Learning you would have 
heard her say that as part of our agreement with the federal 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

government we were going to rework our entire child daycare 
subsidy program in this province in order to ensure that more 
families were eligible for the subsidy, that the subsidy was 
larger, and that the subsidy was deeper in terms of addressing 
middle-income families who did not have access to any type of 
subsidy. So we agree with you on that notion. 
 
Madam Speaker, as part of the work, the policy work that has 
been done by the government in the last year with the former 
minister of Learning, the policy and planning committee of 
cabinet, the Treasury Board of cabinet, various policy 
committees of the government, we’ve spent an incredible 
amount of time on this subject trying to figure out how we 
linked early learning and care to our school system, to our 
preschools, to our family child daycare centres that are run by, 
for the most part, women in our community to ensure that we 
could create a system of early learning and care. And we have a 
plan that for the first time in this province will create an actual 
system and linkage of early learning and care. And what’s so 
problematic about the federal government’s decision is that we 
had a five-year plan to get us to a system, and people have been 
calling for a system for over 30 years. 
 
Now what I also want to say to the members opposite is that we 
absolutely agree that parents need to have choice. And if you 
look at the work that has been done by the department in terms 
of the polling that’s been done, but also work that’s been done 
by Statistics Canada, if you were to ask any young mom in this 
province . . . And by the way, we have the highest labour force 
attachment of women with children under the age of six of any 
jurisdiction in Canada. And if you were to ask those young 
mothers and young fathers, where do you want your children to 
be cared for? They will, a vast majority of them, will answer, 
we want our children to be cared by me or the grandparents or 
an aunt or a family member in my home. 
 
But if you follow that logic and find out where children are 
actually cared for, the vast majority of children are not cared for 
in their own home. And they’re not cared for in a child daycare 
centre. There are various arrangements that parents have to put 
together in order to support their children. 
 
So once again when we were doing our policy work around 
this, it was not about choosing one way of caring for children 
over another — not at all. But we were faced with the reality of 
many young families in this province where the vast majority of 
those families have to have access to a workplace in order to 
make a go of it, in order to afford a home, to afford the cost of 
living in this province. The vast majority of young people who 
have children under the age of six are attached to the labour 
market or attached to the labour force. 
 
So when the members opposite say that parents are the best 
judge, and you say that we need to take that into consideration, 
what I want to say to you is that we have taken that into 
consideration in terms of our early learning and care policy. But 
the reality is that the vast majority — and I am not sure the 
member opposite was listening — the vast majority of young 
parents say, we want to look after our own children in our own 
home or have our families. But if you follow that and find out 
where they’re really being cared for, they’re not being cared for 
by a family member, and they’re not being cared for by people 
in their own home, they’re being cared for outside of their 

home. 
 
So when we were thinking about this policy, one of the things 
that we’ve started in the province is pre-kindergartens. And I 
have to tell you that when you look at the development of the 
pre-Ks [pre-kindergarten] since 1995, we have over 100 of them 
in our province and they are tremendous. And if you ask early 
learning people in the school system and the kindergarten 
system, they will tell you that this province has a highly 
developed pre-kindergarten program for vulnerable children. 
 
But we need to extend that to everybody. And parents obviously 
would have a choice whether or not they wanted to have their 
children, their four-year-olds, in a pre-kindergarten program. 
But our plan was to extend our pre-kindergarten program all 
across the province. And our plan was to eventually get to a 
linkage between early learning and care in the schools with 
family daycare homes pre-schools, because there’s all kinds of 
bits and pieces to the system. And we would have a system that 
would support children, would support early learning and care 
providers, would support grandparents and would obviously 
support children. And that was our vision, that children would 
be raised in a loving and caring environment and obviously 
parents would have choice. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now we have an opportunity here as a Legislative Assembly 
. . . And I’m really pleased that the female members of the 
Legislative Assembly have spoken to this issue, because I think 
that we have some understanding of the kinds of difficulties it is 
that we have as young parents trying to juggle work, care, and 
learning. And one of the things that we try . . . when we thought 
about the system that we were wanting to create was that 
eventually we would get to early learning and care in a school. 
So that you would have early learning and care centres; where 
you would have the infant centre, the child daycare centre for 
toddlers, the pre-K, the kindergarten, and then up to grade 8. 
 
And there would be supports for the pre-schools, the child 
family day homes and parents living at home . . . or working at 
home with their children so that they too could participate in the 
pre-kindergarten program if that was their choice. And we 
understand from the work that was done with parents, 
particularly at-home parents, there are a lot of parents that want 
to have the support, in terms of early learning, of the 
pre-kindergartens and the child daycare centre. 
 
The member opposite from Kelvington also talked about rural 
child daycare and remote or northern child daycare. And we 
know there has to be flexibility because a child daycare centre 
in northern Saskatchewan, when you might have seasonal work, 
you might be trapping, doesn’t necessarily make sense. And in 
our plan was flexibility around how you might approach early 
learning and care, particularly the care part in rural 
Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to just note, when the 
members opposite have talked about the federal government’s 
commitment in the last federal election for $100 per child 
allowance for each child — and I just want to make this point 
because I think it’s really important — that this is money that’s 
going to be taxable. And if you think about when we were . . . I 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

think, obviously no one is going to turn down the $100. But 
what people need to understand is the biggest losers in this 
situation will be those modest-income families earning between 
30 and $40,000 a year. That if you are a high-income earner and 
you earn over $75,000 a year and you’ve got one person, or 
$100,000 a year and you have one parent at home, you will get 
the maximum advantage of the $1,200. But if you are a dual 
income earner and you’re earning between 30 and $40,000 a 
year, you will be the biggest loser. And that is the group of 
people that we particularly want to target as we redesign our 
child daycare subsidy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this Assembly go on 
record as indicating to the federal government that we are 
disappointed. I mean we have spent decades working to get to a 
national child daycare program and early learning and care 
program in this country. Women who are now grandmothers, 
women who are now making their way to retirement, have been 
at this issue since the ’60s. And they were so delighted that for 
the first time in this country’s history we had the beginning of a 
national child daycare program in this country. 
 
And I can’t say enough to our federal colleagues in the new 
House of Commons that please pay attention to what the vision 
was for a national early learning and care program in this 
country. It was not about saying to parents who are at home 
with their children, you don’t count. That wasn’t it at all. But 
what it was doing was looking at the reality of where young 
parents are at in this country, where there is a huge labour force 
attachment because of the nature of the economy, and the need 
to have dual income earners or the reality that the family has 
changed, where there are lots of single parent women or single 
parent dads that are trying to make a living. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I want to leave time for some of my 
other colleagues to address this issue in our Assembly. But I 
want to say very clearly that we have a plan. It is a plan that 
addresses the many challenges that we’ve been working on for 
the last 30 years. It addresses the challenges that have been 
raised by the member from Northwest, where he talks about 
subsidies. We’re going to redo the subsidies in the province to 
get at the very issues he talked about. It addresses the issue 
raised by the member from Kelvington where there will be 
flexibility for rural and northern and First Nations. We’re 
working with First Nations and Métis communities on the child 
daycare program and early learning and care program. 
 
And most of all, Madam Minister, what it did was it allowed for 
a universal pre-kindergarten program where parents would 
make the choice whether or not they wanted to put their 
children in pre-kindergarten. But it would be available for 
everybody, Madam Speaker. 
 
So it’s $146 million over a five-year period. We really want the 
federal government to honour the commitment, the written 
commitment that they made with every province and territory in 
this country. And we think that it begins to address some of the 
very real early learning and care issues that children in this 
country are facing; whether they live in the province of 
Saskatchewan or whether they live in Alberta or Manitoba or 
the territories. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to be able to enter into 
the debate on this motion. And perhaps I could enter into the 
debate from the viewpoint of a grandparent who has 
grandchildren. And my wife and myself are very integrally 
involved in our grandchildren’s lives and we see the effects of 
early learning programs and see the challenges that our 
grandchildren’s parents face accessing quality daycare and 
those sorts of things. 
 
The speakers before have said we need a whole range of options 
available to parents to look after their children. The world has 
certainly changed from the days when we were raising our own 
family and particularly raising a family in rural Saskatchewan 
where the mothers didn’t work or the fathers didn’t work off the 
farm. Quite often, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, those 
people that lived in our small communities operating a business 
or working at a business, quite often one of the parents were at 
home looking after the children. The demands for a daycare and 
babysitting services, as the term is quite often used, the pressure 
wasn’t there or not to the extent it is today. 
 
But in today’s world young families, parents of young children, 
face many pressures that those of us in our generation did not 
face. And therefore they require, in my opinion, more services 
so that the children are looked after in a safe and proper fashion 
and so that they have access to all those things that many 
families do provide to their young children, the stimulus, the 
early training, the sitting down and reading, and those sorts of 
things. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, we have a number of 
single-parent families in today’s society, I think more so than 
what we had in our generation. And these young families, these 
young single parents have their plates full. They work to 
provide a living for themselves and their children. Quite often 
they are also taking some additional education so that they can 
improve their job prospects and so on and so their lives are very 
full. And their children sometimes, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
through no fault of their own sometimes do not receive the 
attention and the proper nurturing and stimulus at an early age 
that other families are able to offer their children. And therefore 
I think it’s important that we make sure as legislators, not only 
on a provincial level but on a federal level, provide the 
resources so that those things can happen. 
 
And, Madam Deputy Speaker, we in our family have seen the 
results of early learning and pre-K, as our granddaughter calls 
it. We have one of our granddaughters in pre-K in the Carlyle 
area. And this young granddaughter is . . . well I as a grandpa, 
and I have to admit I’m bragging a little bit here, but I think 
she’s as smart as a whip. But she’s a very active young girl who 
when she’s at grandma and grandpa’s place keeps us busy at all 
times. And we’re amazed every time she comes to visit at the 
things she has learned and the knowledge that she has. 
 
And frankly her parents are busy and they don’t have the ability 
and the time to perhaps guide her in the way that she needs to 
be guided. And so we’ve noticed some significant 
developments in her life since she’s been attending pre-K. And 
to give you an example of that, Madam Deputy Speaker, at 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

Christmastime grandma asked Alyx, did you learn any songs at 
pre-K? And she says, yes, Grandma, I did. Well would you sing 
this song for me? And she says, Grandma, we have to stand up. 
So grandma stands up with her and they stand up straight and 
she sings Oh Canada from beginning to end without missing a 
word or missing a beat. 
 
And these are things, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I know if 
she hadn’t been in pre-K she wouldn’t have learned. And her 
energies need to be channelled in positive directions. And those 
are some of the positive results that we as grandparents see, and 
I think other people also see those things. 
 
But also, Madam Deputy Speaker, many families are able to 
look after their children with a bit of additional help. And so 
this new federal government’s plan of additional $100 per 
month for children under six years of age is of significant 
importance to them and will allow perhaps one of the family 
members to stay home or at the very least work part-time so 
that the children don’t have to go to — the commonly used term 
is — the babysitter’s and so on. So we need to have the whole 
range of plans, Madam Deputy Speaker, that will allow for 
child care in whatever fashion is needed that suits the family’s 
needs. 
 
And it’s somewhat ironic. Today is our third day of special 
debates in this House since we’ve resumed the spring sitting. 
On the first day of sitting we had the emergency debate on 
agriculture. Yesterday we had a debate on the shortage of health 
care workers. Today we have the debate on child care and early 
learning. 
 
And this leads me to think that we have to put all these things in 
a broader context and look at the broad picture, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, because as speakers before me have said, we cannot 
just necessarily look at issues in isolation because there is an 
interconnection between agriculture and health care and 
education. 
 
The provincial government does not have unlimited funds and 
neither does the federal government. And so therefore we need 
to make sure that we do a number of things correctly — that 
government does run effectively and efficiently; that we are 
getting maximum value for the dollars being spent; and that we 
have a plan in place to generate those tax dollars without unduly 
burdening the citizens of our province and our country. 
 
And those are things we need to look at in context because if we 
use the tax dollars effectively and efficiently in one area, that 
leaves dollars to be used in other areas such as child care and 
early childhood learning, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And these programs do not only affect the parents of the young 
children and the grandparents and the extended family, but it 
affects all of us. If young children are not channelled in the 
right direction at an early age and receive the services that they 
require, whether they be speech therapy or other programs for 
learning difficulties, or if their energies are not channelled in 
the correct direction and they get left behind in our education 
system, we will find — and I think statistics show — that 
eventually a number of these children will end up in our justice 
system and in our health system and in our social services 
systems, Madam Deputy Speaker. 

And if we can have programs in place that will prevent those 
children from falling through the cracks, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I think we need to do our utmost in ensuring that we 
have effective and efficient and the correct programs in place 
for our families and for our young children, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too am pleased 
to be able to speak in support of the government motion. As a 
female member of the House who is not removed from the 
situation by a few decades but rather is someone who actually 
has a daughter in the care of a child care service, this is a topic 
of great reality in my daily life. As a matter of fact that is where 
my young daughter is at this very moment. 
 
Other members have stood in this House and told you about the 
policy background on the early learning and child care 
agreement. Other members have told you about interprovincial 
relations and transfer payments and equalization. 
Intergovernmental transfers and multilateral, intersectoral 
agreements make my constituents’ eyes glaze over for the most 
part. It’s sort of like what happens with most people when a 
computer programmer starts talking about what they write, how 
they write up a computer program, or how it works. Most 
people, they just want it to work. 
 
My constituents don’t have the time to spend learning the 
internal workings of intergovernmental, intersectoral 
agreements on multilateral cost sharing. On a side note, I 
suspect many would rather walk on hot coals. They just want it 
to work. They want to hand the job off to us. 
 
They want quality child care for their children. They want 
quality child care that meets their needs and time demands. 
They want to have that child care to be reasonable enough in 
terms of cost that they can afford to use the child care and still 
work for a reasonable wage. It has to be accessible, accessible 
by regular people not just those wealthy enough to have those 
options. They want their children to be safe and happy. 
 
Madam Speaker, I want to talk about child care. I want to talk 
about children. And I want to talk about parents and caregiving 
and about the future. I want to talk about what the early learning 
and child care agreement means to my constituents and to their 
vision of Saskatchewan. I want to address what the early 
learning and child care agreement would pave the way for in 
terms of a society my constituents would like their children and 
their grandchildren to grow up in. 
 
Child care is expensive, not in terms of the value we place on 
our children who are priceless, but in terms of the proportion of 
personal income that child care costs a family. If a parent stays 
home it costs a full wage. If a child is in child care it can cost a 
significant proportion of family income, especially if there is 
more than one child in care. Two children in care can easily 
cost over $1,000 per month. That’s significant dollars in 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

anyone’s books. It’s more than the mortgage payments that 
most of my constituents pay. 
 
Now think about a low-income family or a single parent, not 
even one earning a decent wage. That kind of cost structure is 
absolutely crippling. And remember, Madam Speaker, not 
everyone has an extended family structure to fall back on. 
Finding adequate child care is also an issue. By adequate I 
mean safe, secure, and most of all positive for the child. 
 
Most people use what I call the piano teacher model in finding 
child care. They check word of mouth, they look in the paper 
and in the phone book, they look on the church bulletin boards 
and on community association bulletin boards. They listen for 
what they can find and they check a few places and a few 
people out. In many cases they have the nagging feeling that 
they haven’t been able to do the perfect search they would like 
because there is no structure to find child care providers. It’s a 
hit-and-miss process. 
 
Licensed spots are hard to get and often more expensive. 
Unlicensed child care is often cheaper but lacks adequate 
quality assurance. The provider may be unknown to the parents 
when they are making their choice. There is not an adequate 
screening and oversight process for non-family, unlicensed 
caregivers. Choosing a caregiver often takes on a leap of faith 
and, Madam Speaker, parents don’t like taking leaps of faith 
when it involves the lives of their children. 
 
People don’t always want to or may not be able to rely on the 
charity of their parents and aunts and uncles. There also may be 
issues of family members’ health in a family care provision. 
Madam Speaker, I experienced that very anxiety first-hand. No 
extended family structure, a mother who was reliant upon me 
for her assistance in her battle with breast cancer — and 
ultimately succumbed to it — and having a young child to be 
responsible for. I was practically doing cartwheels just last year 
when my daughter’s school implemented a 
before-and-after-school child care program. For me this meant 
quality, accessible, and a safe environment for my daughter, 
Morgan, and peace of mind especially for my husband and I, 
Jeff. 
 
When we discuss policy and transfers and programs and 
agreements, we always have to keep our heads and our eyes 
focused on the people that really matter — the children 
ultimately and their parents. 
 
Let’s review: safety, security, cost, quality. What other issues 
arise for parents? Availability and flexibility. Not everyone 
works a 9-to-5 job or even consistent hours from week to week. 
So traditional daycare models don’t cut it either. 
 
Our policy, our policies — they must reflect real need. They 
can’t reflect a rigid ideological view of how the world should 
work. They have to reflect how the world really works. We 
can’t build a model around the so-called traditional family. You 
know, June Cleaver, Leave It To Beaver type thing because the 
stay-at-home mom model doesn’t work. 
 
We can’t build around a 9-to-5 model either. We can’t build 
around a nuclear family because there are so many single 
parents. A single approach won’t work. Our policy and our 

approach must reflect the wide variety of needs. Madam 
Speaker, I also would like to make the point that like health care 
and like our education system, the profit motive does not serve 
child care well. 
 
I know the members opposite agree with their federal 
counterparts. They think that setting up a child care system is 
government interference in the choices of parents. They think 
that everything should be left to the wide open with no system 
and no oversight and no licensing. Think about what would 
happen to our education system if it were solely a for-profit 
structure, if it were a hodgepodge of licensed and unlicensed 
providers, if there were no global system of screening and 
listing, no standards. My word, Madam Speaker, we require 
mandatory classes and inspections for restaurants, and I think 
we can require such for a third party, that is, non-family child 
care providers. If we can require health and safety regulations 
and building codes, we can sure build a system that would try to 
ensure the safety of our children. 
 
The members were on their feet asking about the safety for 
at-risk youth in safe houses. They ask about the safety of foster 
children. They need to wrap their heads around the need for 
safety of all children. And they need to understand that the free 
market won’t do that with . . . [inaudible] . . . when it comes to 
child care. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, I want to make sure that the members 
opposite do not take my words out of context. Just like our 
educational system and in fact to a higher degree, we need to 
build flexibility into any system as we as a society create. A 
system does not mean one size fits all. 
 
And I’d like to provide examples of this by quoting from the 
agreement in principle between the Government of Canada and 
the Government of Saskatchewan entitled, Moving Forward on 
Early Learning and Child Care. So: 
 

At their February 2005 meeting, the Ministers Responsible 
for Social Services recognized the urgent need to 
accelerate development of quality early learning and child 
care across the country. To address that need, Quality, 
Universally Inclusive, Accessible and Developmental 
[which is the acronym] (QUAD) principles were 
developed for early learning and child care. 

 
And I’d like to just give examples of how this is not meant to be 
a one-size-fits-all system. It is to be a system of choices in 
terms of individual situations. Let’s just look at, for instance, 
universally inclusive. The points are to: 
 

Develop and strengthen programming and supports for 
children’s cultural, linguistic and/or special needs. 
 

This recognizes our Aboriginal cultures, our special needs 
children, and all sorts of other issues in terms of immigrant 
languages, etc. And the next point: 
 

Support the development of education, supports and 
resources for early childhood educators and child care 
providers which recognize children’s cultural, linguistic, 
and/or special needs. 

 



March 16, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

Then if we look at accessibility. The points are: 
 

Develop innovative approaches to service provision in 
rural and underserved areas. 
 

Surely to goodness this is something that the opposition would 
endorse and approve of and encourage. 
 

Enable flexible approaches that address a range of family 
and employment circumstances. 
 

Which addresses the issue of various working situations, 
flexible hours, irregular hours, salaries, etc. 
 

Enhance operational funds and/or fee subsidies; and 
Increase early learning and child care opportunities. 

 
Those are just a few examples that I wanted to point out. Just 
like with home-schooling, Madam Speaker, there are options. 
Just like with special schools, there are options. With child care, 
there can be many options. But we can’t use the model 
espoused by members opposite and their federal cousins, the 
Conservatives, and just leave the people of Saskatchewan to 
their own devices. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are asking for a systematic 
approach to child care that provides us for as many 
circumstances as possible — a system that they can trust and a 
system that they can ultimately rely on; a system that 
recognizes the value of stay-at-home parents, family care, and 
third-party care; a system that also reflects parental and societal 
concern for all children; a system that recognizes at risk youth. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want us to begin building our 
structure on the basis of need, on targeting our initial efforts 
toward those who need help the most. They want to appropriate 
measures for all families, and we are attempting to address as 
many needs as possible. The people of Saskatchewan recognize 
that our common values demand that we shelter those least able 
to care for themselves: the children, especially at risk children. 
That was a major building block of the early learning and child 
care agreement we used to have with the federal government. 
 
The beginning of our plan, Madam Speaker, would see 
extending pre-kindergarten services to all four-year-olds in the 
province, adding hundreds of new licensed child care spaces, 
expanding subsidies, and increased professional development 
opportunities for early childhood educators. 
 
I would also like to note the announcements that the province 
has made to date about early learning and child care that will be 
honoured. These include wage increases for staff in child care 
centres, existing grants for child care centres in homes, the child 
care wait-list that has been eliminated for children with a 
significant impact of disability, the subsidy increase of $20 per 
child per month on average announced April 4, 2005. Child 
Care Saskatchewan’s commitment to add 1,200 child care 
spaces from 2003 to 2007 is on track, and 250 new child care 
spaces announced April 4, 2005 will be in place by March 31, 
2006. 
 
That’s targets and we’re meeting them. That’s absolutely right. 
In closing, Madam Deputy Speaker, our government has spent a 

lot of time working with a variety of people in Saskatchewan, 
and we are confident that we understand the early learning and 
child care needs of Saskatchewan families. 
 
We believe the province needs a made-in-Saskatchewan system 
of early learning and child care, and we want to work with the 
federal government to realize our vision. I will therefore also 
support the government motion on this issue. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I’ll call the question on the amendment. The 
amendment before us, would the members take as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Those in favour of the 
amendment, please say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Those opposed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recorded vote has been called. Call 
in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 16:14 until 16:22.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask all those in favour of the 
amendment to please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 24] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kirsch 
Brkich Merriman Morgan 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed to the amendment, 
please stand. 
 

[Nays — 28] 
 
Calvert Lautermilch Van Mulligen 
Hagel Serby Atkinson 
Cline Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Deputy Clerk: — Madam Deputy Speaker, those in favour of 
the amendment, 24; those opposed, 28. 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2006 

The Deputy Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. I would 
ask those in favour of the main motion to please stand. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Those opposed, say no. I declare the 
motion carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Chair. By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 
the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, 
the federal Minister of Human Resources and Social 
Development, and the leaders of the federal opposition 
parties. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion has been placed before 
the Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Transmittal of Tributes 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I wish to move, 
by leave of the Assembly . . . Did the Chair wish to revert to the 
previous procedure? No. Then I’ll proceed. 
 
Madam Chair, by leave of the Assembly, I would move that the 
oral tributes made this day with respect to the passing of 
Senator Allan Bird be transmitted to the bereaved family by Mr. 
Speaker. And that is seconded by the hon. member for 
Cumberland. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The motion of transmittal is before 
the Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Madam Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that the Assembly 
do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:27.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................617 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................617 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................617 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................617 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................617 
  Kerpan .......................................................................................................................................................................................617 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................617 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................618 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................618 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................618 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................619 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................619 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................619 
  The Deputy Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................619 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................627 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Holy Cross Crusaders Senior Boys’ Basketball Team Wins City Championship 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................620 
 Oilsands Quest Inc. 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................620 
 Saskatchewan Party Nominations 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................620 
 Regina to Host Country Music Week and Canadian Country Music Awards 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................620 
 Saskatchewan Centennial Baby Award 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................621 
 IPSCO Retiree Honoured 
  Harper .......................................................................................................................................................................................621 
 Congratulations to Winter Olympians 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................621 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Plans for Population Growth 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................622 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................622 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................623 
 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................623 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................624 
 Eligibility for Subsidized Child Care Spaces 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................625 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................625 
 Written Questions 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................626 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................626 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 30 — The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................627 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................627 
 Bill No. 32 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2006/ 
  Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................627 
 Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................627 
 Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment 
  Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au profit des administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (no 2) 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................628 
 



 

 Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment  
  Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................628 
 Bill No. 38 — The Settlement of International Investment Disputes Act/ 
  Loi sur le règlement des différends internationaux relatifs aux investissements 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................628 
 Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................628 
 Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................629 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Remembering Senator Allan Bird 
  Beatty .........................................................................................................................................................................................629 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................629 
MOTIONS 
 Deputy Chair of Committees 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................630 
 Transmittal of Tributes 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................644 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Early Learning and Child Care 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................630 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................633 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................635 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................636 
  Atkinson.....................................................................................................................................................................................638 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................640 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................641 
 Recorded Division (amendment) .................................................................................................................................................643 
  Higgins (Transmittal Motion) ..................................................................................................................................................644 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


