






















































Hansard: November 22, 2006


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIV NO. 17A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Hon. Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Martensville 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 525 
 November 22, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present again today and this petition I am going to 
present is regarding the drug Avastin. And I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition I present today is signed by the good folks from the 
community of Moosomin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents of Cypress Hills regarding 
the deplorable condition of Highway 18. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that Highway 18 from 
Claydon to Robsart is repaved at the earliest possible time 
to ensure the safety of drivers in the area and so that 
economic development opportunities are not lost. 
 
As is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Frontier, Eastend, and Claydon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
petitions to present on behalf of a constituent from Carnduff. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
As and in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the great community, Mr. Speaker, 
of Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise again 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about Highway 
49. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 49 in order to address safety concerns and 
to facilitate economic growth and tourism in Kelvington, 
Lintlaw, Preeceville, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Yorkton and 
Okla, and I think everybody from Lintlaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to do with the funding for the drug Avastin. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Crooked Lake; Kelowna, BC[British Columbia]; and Indian 
Head. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the lack of provincial 
government funding for the cancer drug Avastin. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Lemberg, Wolseley, Glenavon, and 
Montmartre. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 
several pages of a petition of citizens concerned of the safety of 
the Bruno access road on the very narrow Highway No. 5. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade the Bruno access road off 
of Highway No. 5. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from Bruno. I so 
present. 
 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who have grave concerns over the condition of Highway 18. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 18 so it can return to being a safe 
and economical route for Saskatchewan families and 
business. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, Macoun, 
Swift Current, and Bienfait. I so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present another petition from the citizens of Biggar. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
once again rise in this House and present a petition on behalf of 
frustrated parents across Saskatchewan who for the past seven 
years have been lobbying this government for a dedicated 
children’s hospital within a hospital in Saskatoon. The prayer of 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources this year to build a provincial 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners today come from the provincial constituencies 
of Saskatoon Eastview, Saskatoon Greystone, and Saskatoon 
Silver Springs. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to present a petition signed by citizens of 

Saskatchewan that are very concerned about the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] two-tier health care system. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures of this petition are from Wolseley; 
Calgary, Alberta; Robson, BC; and Lemberg. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from citizens 
calling the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade Highway 
20 to primary weight status: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Highway 20 be upgraded 
to primary weight status to ensure the economic viability 
in the surrounding areas. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Jansen, Nokomis, Drake, Watson, Humboldt, and Lanigan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition that I’d like to present on behalf of citizens that are 
very concerned about the gravel highways in this province, 
particularly those highways that were returned to gravel. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and maintain Highway 22 
so it can return to being a safe and economical route for 
Earl Grey and area families and businesses. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Earl Grey, Southey, and Bulyea. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 
House today to present a petition regarding the often promised 
but never delivered provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
I will read the prayer for relief: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

financial resources in this year’s budget to build a 
provincial children’s hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, 
Vanscoy, and Warman. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today and 
present a petition to urge the government to repair Highway 36: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to invest the needed money to repair 
and maintain Highway 36. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Coronach and Regina. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the petitions received at 
the last sitting have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 15(7) 
are hereby read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy: does 
SaskEnergy have a partnership agreement with 
Weatherford Canada Partnership, and if so, what is the 
agreement for? 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: were percolation tests done on 
groundwater in the rural municipality of Corman Park in 
the year 2005 and 2006? And if so, what were the test 
results? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SaskWater: has 
SaskWater paid out any funds to cover legal expenses for 

former minister of SaskWater, Carol Teichrob in the year 
2000? 

 
And I have a similar question for 2005, similar question for 
2004, and a similar question for 2003. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment, the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, two distinguished guests who are seated in your 
gallery. And I’ll ask them to stand. His Excellency, Mr. Lu 
Shumin, ambassador of the People’s Republic of China to 
Canada, and Mr. Liu Wutong who is the second secretary to the 
ambassador. Accompanying them is Deborah Saum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and China have enjoyed 
long-standing commercial, academic, and intergovernmental 
relationships, relationships which we greatly value. Just to put it 
in perspective, in Saskatchewan about 5 per cent of our 
international trade goes directly to China. It’s about 
three-quarters of $1 billion. So these relationships we have with 
China are very important. 
 
Today marks the first occasion that Ambassador Lu comes as 
ambassador. He has been in our province many years before, 
and he’s renewing his sense of what Saskatchewan is. I know 
that I had a chance to meet with him this morning and some of 
the other ministers have as well. I know that we all value the 
relationship that we have with China. I know that the Premier 
will be having a chance to meet with him as well. But I ask all 
members to welcome them to Saskatchewan and welcome them 
to the friendship that we have here for them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition it’s a pleasure, it’s an honour to join with the 
minister opposite in welcoming His Excellency, Ambassador 
Shumin, and Mr. Wutong, the second secretary, here to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
On behalf of the opposition, we certainly want to reinforce 
some of the remarks of the minister opposite about the 
importance of the relationship not only between Canada and 
China but between, specifically between our province of 
Saskatchewan and China. 
 
Increasingly, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that Saskatchewan is 
well positioned with respect to the global economy and some of 
the economic powerhouses we see develop around the world — 
in China and in India, soon in Brazil, perhaps in Russia. We are 
in a position, Mr. Speaker, a positive one because we have what 
the world wants. We in many respects have what China will 
want in terms of an export and trade relationship. 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

And what we want then, what we desire, is that relationship and 
that friendship. And so we join with the minister and the 
government in welcoming our special guests to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Massey Place, the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And having 
just returned from China, I certainly want to join with others in 
welcoming the ambassador and his assistant to the legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to introduce to you and through 
you to the Legislative Assembly some special guests who are 
members of the Saskatchewan Geographic Names Board who 
are sitting in your gallery. I would like to introduce the Chair of 
the board, Mr. Gib Macaulay; the secretary to the board, Mr. 
Art Marbach; and someone who’s no stranger to the Assembly, 
Keith Goulet, the former MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Cumberland who is also a member of the 
Geographic Names Board. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen are here today for an 
announcement that is being made concerning the adoption of a 
new commemorative naming program for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Later on in the House I’ll look forward to 
presenting a ministerial statement outlining this important new 
program, and I’m happy that our guests could be here for this 
announcement. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome these 
guests to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition 
Saskatchewan Party, we would like to welcome these 
gentlemen to their legislature and want to commend them on 
the work and the tasks they undertake. 
 
As a province, we’ve had a long history of interesting place 
names — Arm River, Wood River. That’s just the ones on this 
side of the House, not to mention a few . . . and we look 
forward to hearing more about them when the minister makes 
his statement later on. And we want to welcome them to their 
legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Athabasca, the Minister of Community Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure and honour to introduce a number of 
students from northern Saskatchewan who travelled many, 
many miles to be here, and they’re in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And as the member for Athabasca, again it is may 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my fellow 
members of the Assembly 16 grade nine students from Minahik 
Waskahigan School, which is Pinehouse. And of course they’re 
from the great community of Pinehouse Lake and . . . 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And I told them, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very honoured that 
they’re here today and that this Assembly is theirs and that they 
have nothing to fear here. These are educated northerners that 
are going to do a fantastic amount for their community and for 
the province. 
 
And to also welcome the students is important, but to also 
recognize Ron and Jacquie Skage. They have been working 
with the school in the Pinehouse for a number of years. I don’t 
want to give the years because that will give an idea of what 
their age is, but they’ve certainly committed. 
 
And it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, how connected we are in this 
world. The Minister of Learning — who of course would know 
that there’s a brand new school being built, has been built in 
Pinehouse — she had her cousin teach in Pinehouse many, 
many years ago. And that cousin was Bill Green. I think it was 
about 20 years ago Mr. Green was teaching in Pinehouse, and 
she was alluding to that. 
 
But certainly I want to tell the people of Pinehouse, welcome to 
your Assembly, and to ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome this very, very special group. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery I 
would like to introduce a gentleman to you and through you to 
the rest of the Assembly, Mr. John Schmeiser, a Saskatchewan 
native son who has seen fit to stop at the legislature today on his 
way through the province. 
 
John is the executive vice-president for the Canada West 
Equipment Dealers Association based in Calgary. And that 
association represents 400 equipment dealers in the four 
western Canadian provinces. That’s an association I’m 
reasonably familiar with because of my previous life as a 
salesman. 
 
But I’d also like to acknowledge the role that John played in an 
invitation that was extended to me back in early summer to 
attend the North American Equipment Dealers Association 
annual meeting for leaders. And I had an opportunity to speak 
to this gathering in St. Louis. I appreciate the invitation that was 
extended to me through John’s office, and I’d like to offer my 
appreciation to him directly and ask all the members here to 
welcome John to his Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland, the Minister of Healthy Living Services. 
 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my great privilege to introduce some fine guests in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. They are individuals that have worked very hard 
over the last number of years to protect the health of people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And if they could give a brief wave . . . June Blau is the 
president of the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco 
Reduction; Lynn Greaves, the vice-president of the 
Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco Reduction; Rhae Ann 
Bromley, communications director, Heart and Stroke 
Foundation of Saskatchewan; Paul Van Loon, health educator 
of The Lung Association of Saskatchewan; and Donna 
Pasiechnik, from the tobacco control coordinator for Canadian 
Cancer Society, the Saskatchewan branch. And if I’m not 
mistaken we also have Keith Karasin, yes, from the CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the Canadian Cancer Society, 
Saskatchewan branch as well. 
 
And these people, Mr. Speaker, are all part of organizations that 
have been active participants in tobacco control in 
Saskatchewan for a number of years. And I’d ask all members 
to welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I also notice there’s three 
guests sitting behind them. Geoff Leo’s mother is here, as well 
as Geoff Leo’s spouse and their daughter. And unfortunately 
Geoff had to step out and probably go to work, but I can say 
that Geoff is one of the finest and best-dressed reporters that we 
have here in the Assembly, and I’d ask all hon. members to 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to join with the member opposite in welcoming to the 
people gallery that he had mentioned, whether it’s the cancer 
society or heart and stroke, all those members. Quite often 
when we see somebody in the gallery if they’re a former 
member, we’ll say they’re no stranger to this Assembly. Well 
they’re not former members, but I believe they’re no strangers 
to this Assembly. We’ve seen them in gallery many, many 
times, and they do great work to promote good health in our 
province. So I’d like to on behalf of the official opposition, 
welcome them and thank them for the work they do. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to introduce three guests seated in your gallery. 
With us today from Saskatoon, we have Derek Tallon, Leland 
Kreklewich, and Cole Scholz. These three gentlemen are 
students at the University of Saskatchewan. They’re also 
members of the Saskatchewan Party Youth Association. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re part of a larger contingent from Saskatoon 

that have come down today to meet with their counterparts here 
at the University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did say that they’re part of a larger contingent. 
Unfortunately the other members couldn’t be here today 
because they’re having a . . . so successful of a run at signing up 
new members on campus. So I’d ask all members to welcome 
them today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Recognizing the Need for Affordable Housing 
 

Hon. Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today is National Affordable Housing Day and November 20 
to 25 is Affordable Housing Week right here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for affordable housing is ongoing, and 
this government has developed and continues to develop strong 
partnerships among all three levels of government, the public 
and private sectors, non-profit organizations, First Nations and 
Métis organizations, and others to help meet that need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about organizations like Habitat for 
Humanity, the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association], Ehrlo Community Services, the Salvation Army, 
Regina Rescue Mission, and initiatives like the Pasqua urban 
housing project all of which are fine examples of the diverse 
partners working together to provide stable and affordable 
home environments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, progress is being made. In 2004 we introduced 
HomeFirst, a five-year, $200 million action plan to bring safe 
and affordable housing and home ownership within reach for 
thousands of low-income families. And this year among many 
other initiatives, we’ve increased the maximum income limits 
that determine eligibility for affordable housing programs and 
the centenary affordable housing program, which means many 
more people will qualify. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our collective commitment to meet affordable 
housing needs in Saskatchewan communities has never been 
stronger. Along with our partners, we work hand in hand to 
strengthen communities and improve the quality of life for all 
Saskatchewan people. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

True Spirit of Giving 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to commend four young ladies 
for all that they do throughout the year to raise money for 
Telemiracle. These young girls have the true spirit of giving, 
and they are willing to give many hours of their time and their 
energy to try to make life a little easier for others that are less 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

fortunate than they. They have the compassion that helps make 
Telemiracle a huge success each year, and they are fine 
examples of why we are all so proud to be from Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will be the second year that these four young 
friends from Saskatoon have joined together to plan and carry 
out a number of fundraising activities. They hold a penny drive 
and a bottle drive. They host a movie night. They get donations 
from different companies and hold raffles. They use their own 
artistic talents and create crafts and pictures and then hold an art 
sale to sell their items. Finally, Mr. Speaker, they host a turkey 
supper. These young girls are so organized that the dates for 
this year’s Telemiracle supper has been set and will be held on 
March 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the four young ladies that are so deserving of our 
commendation and best wishes for all their efforts. They’re 
even more amazing you consider their ages. Mr. Speaker, they 
are Rebecca Gera, grade 8; Sho-shauna Peters, grade 7; 
Rebecca Turn, grade 7; and Brittany Serveright, grade 7. 
 
To see such determination and self motivation for the benefit of 
others truly demonstrates how very special Saskatchewan’s 
young people can be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

Melfort Wishmaker Parade 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, everyday people join together 
to perform amazing feats, and today I am pleased to 
acknowledge the efforts of a group of outstanding people from 
communities in the Melfort area who went above and beyond in 
their efforts in their efforts to coordinate and host the Melfort 
Wishmaker Parade. This is a parade that raises funds for the 
Children’s Wish Foundation of Canada. The foundation is 
dedicated to working within the community to fulfill heartfelt 
wishes to children diagnosed with high-risk, life threatening 
illnesses. 
 
The coordinator of this event, Amy Tremblay, who tragically 
lost her young daughter to cancer, has worked tirelessly to 
ensure its success. This is the second year of the Wishmaker 
Parade in Melfort, and I am thrilled to say that in 2005, 145 
walkers raised $28,500 and in 2006, 239 walkers raised $25,000 
for a total of $52,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Melfort raised more funds in the past two years 
combined for the Wishmaker Parade than any other community 
in Saskatchewan, including Saskatoon and Regina. Mr. 
Speaker, Melfort Wishmaker Parade has had the largest number 
of participants in the province for the past two years, and the 
local area businesses from Melfort and St. Brieux have 
contributed $9,000 to the funds raised. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, please join me in 
congratulating Amy Tremblay and all of those who participated 
in this walk for their outstanding success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Office of the Treaty Commissioner Recognized for 
Excellence in Education 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s Office 
of the Treaty Commissioner has been selected by the Canadian 
Race Relations Foundation to receive the foundation’s biennial 
Award of Excellence for Education in the Public and Private 
Sector. 
 
In presenting the award, the foundation’s specifically 
recognized three main components of the OTC’s [Office of the 
Treaty Commissioner] public education program: the speaker’s 
bureau, aimed at the general public and the corporate world; the 
learning centre, aimed at providing a treaty learning 
environment for the general public; and the 
teaching-treaties-in-the-classroom component, aimed at 
students in the formal education system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was minister of Learning at the time the 
teaching-treaties-in-the-classroom program was introduced. 
And I am extremely proud that since then, through the good 
work of teachers, administrators, and elders this program has 
placed a resource kit of treaty-related learning materials in 
every school for K to 12 in the province and trained more than 
one-third of Saskatchewan teachers in how to use it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this award reinforces recognition the OTC 
received previously from the United Nations for the 
effectiveness of its public education programs in combating 
racism. Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Treaty Commissioner, 
Judge David Arnot, and members of the OTC on the work that 
they have done that has earned them this prestigious award. To 
quote Judge Arnot: 
 

. . . racism exists in our province. As a community we 
have a long way to go. Yet the Canadian Race Relations 
Foundations has honoured the people of Saskatchewan 
with a national award that suggests progress is being 
made. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Cadets Earn Duke of Edinburgh’s Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to honour two young cadets from my 
constituency in becoming recipients of the Duke of Edinburgh 
Award. In a ceremony this past weekend at Government House, 
Lieutenant Governor Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart presented the 
Duke of Edinburgh Silver Award to Sergeant Kristine 
Kostyniuk of Imperial. Last month at a presentation on a local 
level, Corporal Kolby Kostyniuk, also of Imperial, received the 
Bronze Award. 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

Both Kristine and Kolby are members of the 553 Sherlock 
Squadron Air Cadets and also brother and sister. This is the first 
time in squadron’s 19-year history that a member has received 
this prestigious award. 
 
The Duke of Edinburgh’s Award is an individual challenge 
involving four different areas of endeavour — service, 
expedition, exploration skills, and physical fitness. Each 
participant must take part in all sections and show effort and 
improvement in each order to qualify for an award at the 
bronze, silver, or gold levels. 
 
In addition to receiving this prestigious award, Kristine, also 
one of 15 cadets from Saskatchewan this year, who was 
awarded her gliding licence and wings at the regional gliding 
school in Gimli, Manitoba. As well as Kolby is one of the only 
five cadets for Saskatchewan who was awarded his technical 
course qualification badge in aircraft servicing at Army Cadet 
Summer Training Centre, Blackdown, at CFB [Canadian Forces 
Base] in Borden, Ontario. 
 
I would ask all members to please join me in congratulating 
Kristine and Kolby on their awards and achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan’s Economy 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
Assembly we are focusing our energies on making life better 
for Saskatchewan families, on building a stronger economy 
where everyone in Saskatchewan benefits, on making 
Saskatchewan the best place in Canada for young people to live, 
work, and build their futures. Ours is a bold vision, Mr. 
Speaker, and a positive one especially in comparison to the 
negativity of the members opposite. 
 
And how is Saskatchewan doing, Mr. Speaker? The latest 
numbers say it all. There are more people working in 
Saskatchewan than ever before. Full-time jobs are up almost 
23,000. Youth employment is up over 8,000. And there are 
almost 22,000 more jobs in the province this October than the 
year before. 
 
Manufacturing shipments are up. Urban housing starts are up. 
International exports are up. Retail sales are up. Natural gas and 
oil production are up. Value of building permits are up, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And thanks, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to the ongoing, sound 
fiscal management practices such as our decision to cash fund 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, the province’s credit rating keeps 
going up as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, good news for Saskatchewan 
is bad news for the Saskatchewan Party. And pretty much 
everything is going up here in Saskatchewan except their 
chances of winning the next election. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Foam Lake’s Fundraising Achievements 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, 2006 was an extremely hard year 
for the town of Foam Lake. Two major fires took a bite out of 
the downtown core. Yet in spite of adversity, the town 
continues to have a strong sense of community. 
 
The well-known Breasts of Friends group have continued their 
cookbook fundraising. With a net profit of $20,000 from the 
sales of their second book, they’ve remodelled two rooms in the 
palliative care suite in the Jubilee Home in Foam Lake. One 
room is for the patient and the other for the family room. 
 
The patient’s room is equipped with the latest in palliative care 
equipment for the comfort of the patient, and the family’s room 
is located in the next room and is equipped with a complete 
kitchenette unit for the convenience of family members while 
they remain with their loved ones. This was all done in loving 
memory of four young people who have lost their lives to 
cancer. They were Lisa Streelasky, Jonathon Sereda, David 
Stinka and Chad Gray. 
 
September 9th was national Terry Fox Run. Between the two 
Foam Lake schools and the town, they brought in a total of 
more than $8,000. Students and townspeople did all the work, 
collecting the pledges and doing the run. For the last eight years 
Anne Reynolds was called the heart and soul of the Terry Fox 
Run in these schools. She was presented a Terry Fox T-shirt on 
behalf of the Foam Lake Masonic Lodge with gratitude for the 
countless hours she toiled in making this run a success. This 
year’s run was dedicated to the memory of Chad Gray who 
passed away at the age of 28 due to cancer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that, despite hardships, the town 
of Foam Lake stands tall and continues to pour out community 
spirit with a lot of hard work and dedication. Foam Lake’s 
greatest asset is the positive attitude of their people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Combatting Population Decline 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one thing 
is clear and the people of the province know it, and that’s this 
NDP government — specifically this Premier — have been 
driving people out of this province for years. 
 
Now the province’s bureau of statistics, the province’s own 
bureau of statistics has published some numbers on 
out-migration. And they show the problem is getting worse 
instead of better. Since the Premier took office, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has lost over 37,000 people in net out-migration 
— 37,000 people in five years since he became the Premier of 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

Saskatchewan. That’s practically the population of Moose Jaw 
or the population of Prince Albert. 
 
How could that be happening, Mr. Speaker, especially with all 
the potential in this province? How could this NDP government 
be overseeing the driving out of 37,000 Saskatchewan people in 
five years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I recently 
attended an event sponsored by the Saskatchewan Young 
Professionals and Entrepreneurs where they released a paper 
about how to really build Saskatchewan. And one of the things 
they say, Mr. Speaker, is: 
 

. . . we would do well to hold up, as examples, those who 
have either migrated to Saskatchewan instead of away 
from Saskatchewan and those who have left and have 
since returned. It is vital to accentuate the positive and 
eliminate the negative [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, is going to listen to the 
young people of this province who recognize, Mr. Speaker, that 
jobs are up. In the last quarter the population was up, and it’s 
turning around, Mr. Speaker, and the economy is up. What we 
need to do is follow their advice — accentuate the positive, 
eliminate the negative over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the worst part of the government’s 
own statistics with respect to population is that about two years 
ago is roughly the time that oil prices really began to ramp up, 
and there was an increased economic activity in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Yet the last two years, the last two years are the 
worst years for people leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan lost over 9,500 people to out-migration two years 
ago; 9,000 more last year — over 18,000 people in the middle 
of a boom, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely incredible. Only in NDP 
Saskatchewan could that be happening. 
 
Thirty-seven thousand since the Premier, since the Premier took 
office — and I wish he’d answer these questions — 18,000 in 
the last two years. If he’s asked the Minister of Industry to bail 
him out on this, I’d be interested in an answer as to how their 
great economic plan for the province has managed to lose 
37,000 people in the middle of a boom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have the Young 
Professionals and Entrepreneurs telling us to be positive if we 
want to build Saskatchewan. And you know, even the Leader of 

the Opposition, speaking recently to the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce, had this to say in announcing a so-called plan. He 
said this, Mr. Speaker, “We should promote the benefits of 
Saskatchewan to young people.” That’s what he said, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what does he do and what do he and his colleagues do 
every day, Mr. Speaker? They’re just negative about 
Saskatchewan day after day, Mr. Speaker. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, people are starting to benefit, to see the benefits of the 
province and they’re starting to move back. And lots of them 
have been quoted in the media, Mr. Speaker. And here’s a 
young couple that moved back from Calgary and this is what 
they had to say: “Instead of scraping by and having my whole 
cheque going to rent, we are living comfortably and now I own 
a house.” 
 
And that’s the kind of life you can have in this wonderful 
province and they should promote that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform the 
minister opposite — and I know he will welcome this; I know 
the Premier will — that this party, this group of women and 
men on this side of the House are working hard to do the most 
positive thing we could possibly do for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that’s get rid of that NDP government on the 
other side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And I would point this out as well, I would point 
this out as well to the minister. The same letter that his seatmate 
quotes from where they say that we don’t promote the province, 
that I don’t in my responses, Mr. Speaker, in that same letter 
what do I say? I said to this young lady who wrote about 
opportunities in Saskatchewan, “The province of Saskatchewan 
has so much potential and it’s very promising to hear ambitious 
youth such as yourself showing an interest.” The mistake I 
made was referring her to that government because that would 
discourage anybody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does the minister have any thoughts on the question: 37,000 
people in five years and in the last two years, the last two years, 
in a boom, we’ve lost over 18,000 people. How could that be, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What we need, Mr. Speaker, is for the 
Leader of the Opposition to be consistent. And he is not 
consistent and he has no plan, Mr. Speaker. And I want to tell 
the Leader of the Opposition this. He doesn’t have to listen to 
me and undoubtedly he won’t, Mr. Speaker. But I want to quote 
Roger Thomas, the senior vice-president of Nexen. And what 
does he say about Saskatchewan? He says, “It’s a great place to 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

do business.” That’s what he says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to refer to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that New Holland 
is shutting down a plant in the United States — and what are 
they doing, Mr. Speaker? They’re expanding in Saskatchewan. 
And the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs was with me at 
that event, Mr. Speaker, where New Holland said this was a 
great place to do business. 
 
And I want to point out to that leader of that party, Mr. Speaker, 
that drilling for oil and gas in Alberta will go down 12 per cent 
this year, it’ll go down 28 per cent in BC, and in Saskatchewan, 
it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the minister wants to 
use the example of Nexen. That was a previously Saskatchewan 
headquartered company. It was a Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. Yes. Yes. And it was . . . And it was privatized . . . 
And it was privatized . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the Minister of Finance is 
interested in the rest of this. The company was privatized. There 
was legislation on the books that required its head office to stay 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And who changed the 
legislation, Mr. Speaker? It was the NDP government opposite. 
They changed the legislation and then guess what happened, 
Mr. Speaker? The NDP deputy premier got a $300,000 job with 
that company in Calgary, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the kind of 
decision making, that’s the kind of absolute mess that they’ve 
made of the economy of the province, that we would lose, that 
we would lose 18,000 people in two years. 
 
To the Premier: he let Nexen go, quickly followed by his main 
competitor, Dwain Lingenfelter. When will he stop letting 
18,000 young people leave this province every two years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
. . . Order please. The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we could listen to the 
negativity of the Leader of the Opposition or we could listen to 
a city councillor from the city of Swift Current I recently saw in 
Saskatoon — I think the Leader of the Opposition knows him 
well — who told me that there was a shortage of industrial land 
in the city of Swift Current, which that member represents, Mr. 
Speaker. Or we could look at the Leader-Post of October 27 
which says this, Mr. Speaker, it says, “Firms scramble for 
industrial real estate.” It says, Mr. Speaker, “. . . serviced lots 

are selling like hotcakes.” 
 
So we have a Leader of the Opposition that says nothing is 
happening in the economy, and we have a member of the Swift 
Current City Council telling me they’re short of industrial land. 
And we have the Leader-Post saying, “. . . serviced lots are 
selling like hotcakes.” Because, despite what he says, things are 
going well in the province of Saskatchewan and the people 
know it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Wait Times for Cancer Care 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister of Health rejected figures in this week’s 
Globe and Mail on wait times for cancer treatment. The 
newspaper said Saskatchewan patients are waiting 11.9 weeks 
for radiation treatment for breast cancer. The minister said those 
figures were wrong. He dismissed them as unreliable. Eleven 
point nine weeks is over 80 days. That’s roughly the same time 
that was cited by the Health Quality Council’s report last month 
on breast cancer treatment. The minister is now saying the 
Health Quality Council’s numbers are wrong? Which one is it, 
Mr. Speaker? Is the Health Quality Council’s numbers correct, 
or is that minister’s numbers correct? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
provinces collectively in December 2005 met to discuss wait 
time guidelines, Mr. Speaker. And at that time they agreed on a 
two-year process by which the benchmarks would be set and 
reports on how to achieve those benchmarks would be provided 
by each provincial government. Mr. Speaker, December 2005, 
less than a year ago, that meeting took place and those 
four-week benchmarks were set in place. Mr. Speaker, the 
provinces have until December 2007 to report on matching and 
meeting those benchmarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is currently 
working with the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to develop our 
process of determining a consistent-with-other-provinces 
guideline, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council’s 
report is very clear. It states that 25 per cent of women start 
treatment within 85 days or less; 25 per cent wait 160 days or 
more. The report says that variations that are that large mean 
that there’s extreme inconsistencies in treatment in this 
province. The report says there’s much room for improvement. 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

Why is the minister now telling the media that wait times are 
below 42 days, which contradicts the Health Quality Council? 
I’ll put my money on the Health Quality Council every time. 
Will he address the issue of what the Health Quality Council 
says are the realistic wait times? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly I support the work of the Health Quality Council and 
said on numerous occasions in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
about how much we value the work that the Health Quality 
Council does for the people of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the work that The Globe and Mail presented yesterday firmly 
indicates, Mr. Speaker, that there are discrepancies between the 
provinces as to how wait times are calculated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working collectively to ensure that we 
come up with a formula that allows every province to be 
compared apples to apples, not apples to oranges, Mr. Speaker. 
In the case of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we now have a 
formula that other provinces are looking at as the way to 
determine and calculate wait times. We are continuing to work 
with the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. But, Mr. Speaker, let it 
be said . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — That minute sure slips by in a hurry. Betty 
Lou Palko of Hudson Bay, who we’ve talked about before, had 
a biopsy to confirm that she had cancer October 16. She had 
surgery the following week. Now she’s being told that she’ll 
have to wait at least three months to start treatment. Some time 
is needed for healing after the operation. However, her real life 
experience seems to contradict the minister when he says the 
wait times that he has quoted in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could somebody have to . . . how come 
anyone would have to wait three months for treatment in this 
province when the Health Quality Council says that’s far too 
long? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, Mr. Speaker, as I’d indicated 
when the Health Quality Council report came out, I indicated to 
the member opposite, to the media, and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we welcomed the report of the Health 
Quality Council, and more importantly the Health Quality 
Council had shared their data with the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency in advance. Mr. Speaker, they had already begun 
working on issues relating to reducing those wait times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now are close to being — because we have 
recruited, fully staffed, within the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency, Mr. Speaker — we have just brought online in October 
a brand new linear accelerator which is doing additional testing 
for the cancer agency and for patients. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have now got in place, working towards helping us meet our 
guidelines under the national accord, the wait times task force, 

Mr. Speaker, that is helping us to bring better efficiency 
through to the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gayle Posehn was 
watching TV last night and saw the article on this very issue. 
She was so outraged that she phoned the minister’s office this 
morning. Mrs. Posehn was told that she would have to wait 60 
days before the cancer clinic would even call her to set the date 
for radiation and chemotherapy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s saying those numbers are wrong. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council is stating those 
numbers would probably be pretty close to being correct. The 
two ladies that I have just cited today would say those numbers 
are correct. When will he quit downplaying the extremely long 
wait for treatment in this province? In BC the wait time is 11 
days, in Alberta it’s 21 days, and in Manitoba it’s 14 days. In 
Saskatchewan the mean time is 91 days. Mr. Speaker, women in 
our province should not have to wait three times as long for 
treatment as women in other provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
as I indicated yesterday to the media and as I indicated to the 
member earlier today, the way in which those numbers have 
been calculated across Canada are apples to oranges, Mr. 
Speaker. The start times and the end times are not the same in 
each province and as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, these 
numbers are . . . We cannot compare one province to another 
using those numbers. 
 
That having been said, Mr. Speaker, we are aware that our wait 
times are too long and, Mr. Speaker, we have been working on 
this with the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and with the 
oncologists in this province to ensure that we can do better. And 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, this year alone, as members opposite are 
aware, the budget that we’re currently in provides $73 million 
to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency — that’s a sixteen and a 
half per cent or a $10 million increase over last year. Mr. 
Speaker, the bulk of that is to reduce wait times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Government Funding for Community Facilities 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last week the NDP government 
announced a $100 million building communities fund. It’s to be 
used for capital projects such as rinks, museums, and art 
galleries. On Monday night in committee, the Leader of the 
Opposition and I asked for the program criteria so we could talk 
about it to our constituencies. But the minister’s answers were 
vague and unclear. In fact, he really didn’t have answers at all. 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

Surely this government would have some idea on how it’s 
going to spend the money and hand it out before they announce 
the funds. For the sake of all the members in the House and for 
our constituents, can the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation please outline the criteria for this fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the building communities 
program will come into existence soon and the criteria will be 
announced when the program is announced. They’re still being 
developed, Mr. Speaker. And when they are, everyone will 
know clearly what they are. 
 
They’re intended to address, Mr. Speaker, a very important 
infrastructure concern that Saskatchewan has in concert with 
every other province across the nation. A quick assessment of 
just the swimming pools, arenas, and rinks, Mr. Speaker, would 
point to here in Saskatchewan a need, if you were to refurbish 
or replace those which were in need of that, a $750 million 
challenge just for that, just in Saskatchewan alone. 
 
Consequently, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has joined with 
other provinces across the nation, unanimously asking the 
federal government to come together in preparation for our 
150th anniversary of Canada, in the same way that Canada did 
as we came to the centennial of this great nation, to come 
together with a program. And I would ask the Leader of the 
Opposition whether he would support that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning’s 
StarPhoenix editorial states under the headline, and I quote, 
“‘Hagel’s fund’ public paid electioneering”: 
 

In turning loose the perennially jolly Hagel to play Santa 
in a business suit, the targets will be venues with the 
potential to provide maximum political payback. 

 
There’s no criteria. The minister has no answers. And this 
government isn’t being accountable. And one has to ask: is this 
government just running around the province handing out 
cheques willy-nilly for a pre-election campaign to buy votes? 
 
If this is truly an arm’s-length program — and it’s supposed to 
be — will the minister promise the House today that he won’t 
be the one with the cheque at the end of his arm when it comes 
time for doling out money and photo ops? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there was a time, there 
was a time in the history of Saskatchewan when the Leader of 

the Saskatchewan Party worked in one of the offices on the 
third floor of this building in which cheques were handed out 
willy-nilly. I’m sure that’s where the idea comes from. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, willy-nilly is dead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a project that needs to be done here in Saskatchewan 
that has been ignored for too long. When we’re concerned about 
quality of life in the province of Saskatchewan, surely sport, 
recreation, and culture facilities are part of that picture. And as 
we have had opportunities to address infrastructure over recent 
years, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately communities have always felt 
the priorities of roads, sewers, and bridges. And I understand 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a chance for Saskatchewan to take the next 
step, to provide for Saskatchewan people facilities to address 
the quality of life in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think we should review this 
situation. We have $100 million in a new fund. We are on the 
eve of an election. We’re not one word from this government 
on criteria or on accountability. Does that sound familiar to 
anyone? They say, those that don’t pay attention to history, 
those that don’t pay attention to history are bound to repeat 
mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. I invite the 
member to put her question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is 
this: is this the NDP version of Fair Share Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — How can we possibly trust this NDP 
government, that it won’t be using taxpayers’ money to prop up 
their sinking political fortunes across this province on the eve of 
an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture 
. . . Order please. Order. The Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Fair Share 
Saskatchewan. I’m sure the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
had a great deal to do with the design of that disastrous 
program. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. Does the hon. member suggest 
that as we are at this stage in our term of office, that somehow 
the government should cease to function? Well clearly not, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a need to be addressed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are two sides to this legislature — one 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

side that is concerned about Saskatchewan people and one side 
that’s concerned about the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we are 
concerned about families being able to share the benefit of life 
in Saskatchewan and that this will be a place for young people 
to build a future. Mr. Speaker, that’s where we’re going. If we 
have to drag them kicking and screaming, then I guess that’s 
what we’re going to have to do. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes . . . Order, please. 
Order, order. I would ask members for order, please. And the 
Chair recognizes the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think the minister wants me to 
remind him that Fair Share Saskatchewan did not help Devine 
and it’s not going to help the NDP government either. Mr. 
Speaker, in 1967 we built rinks and halls . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, order. Order, order. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1967 we did build 
rinks and halls over this province. But under this NDP leader, 
Saskatchewan continues to lose people — 37,000 people in this 
province since he became leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a huge need for infrastructures and we 
need it in rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan. But we 
want to make sure it’s going to be fair for everybody and it’s 
not just to buy votes in a seat where this government thinks they 
have a chance of winning. 
 
Will you promise this legislature it’ll be fairly shared right 
across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in question 
period I asked if there were any over there who were candidates 
for the Devine government or to try and be a part of the Devine 
government. We got one, we got one here today. Yesterday the 
only one who dared to put up his hand, Mr. Speaker, was the 
youngest one who’s being booted out so that they can try and 
bring back one of the old guard. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let us be very, very clear. This 
is not government done the way when the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party worked on the third floor of this building. 
Those days are dead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are interested in moving forward. And part of 
that picture is the quality of life that young people will know. 
Young people will hear it and will come to Saskatchewan as 
part of building their proud futures in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s where we’re going. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 

New Commemorative Naming Program 
for Geographic Features 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
again recognize the members of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would ask Assembly to come 
to order. Order please. The Minister of Industry and Resources, 
and I’d like you to start over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would again call 
attention of the Assembly to the presence of the members of the 
Saskatchewan Geographic Names Board who are with us today, 
namely the Chair, Gib Macaulay; member, Keith Goulet; and 
secretary to the board, Art Marbach. Other members who are 
not in attendance today but who could be recognized are Doug 
Chisholm, Eva Weisner, Stewart Raby, J. W. Brennan, Arok 
Wolvengrey. 
 
And I’m pleased to announce today that the Saskatchewan 
Geographic Names Board has approved the adoption of a new 
commemorative naming program for the province of 
Saskatchewan. The new program will supplement the existing 
geographic names program that recognizes armed forces 
personnel and merchant sailors who lost their lives during the 
Second World Warand the Korean War. 
 
The new commemorative naming program will honour 
individuals who have lost their lives and those that have made 
significant contributions to the province of Saskatchewan. 
Natural geographic features including lakes, rivers, points, and 
bays predominantly in Saskatchewan’s North will be named in 
their honour. 
 
Candidates for selection will fall under the following three 
categories. Firstly, Armed Forces including Canadian army, 
navy, regular, and reserve forces and peacekeepers while on 
active duty on United Nations sanctioned missions. Secondly, 
police officers and emergency response personnel including but 
not restricted to federal, provincial, and municipal police forces, 
Professional Fire Fighters Association, and emergency medical 
technicians while on active duty. And thirdly, Saskatchewan 
people of prominence who have passed away, including 
Saskatchewan people who have made important contributions 
to the province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Geographic Names Board falls under the 
responsibility of the Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and exists under The Geographic Names Board 
Act to handle and recommend requests for naming of 
geographic features within Saskatchewan. 
 
To date, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Geographic Names 
Board, which was originally established in 1947, has named 
3,913 northern lakes, peninsulas, bays, rivers, and islands after 
those who sacrificed their lives for Canada. As with the original 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

program, families of those honoured in the commemorative 
naming program will be contacted and receive a 
commemorative scroll as well as research about the named 
geographic feature. 
 
The new commemorative naming program is a natural 
extension to the original geographic names program. In recent 
years the board has received numerous requests to expand the 
scope of the original program. This new commemorative 
naming program addresses that need. 
 
Thanks again to the members of the Saskatchewan Geographic 
Names Board for their work in developing a fitting recognition 
to Saskatchewan’s heroes. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to join with the 
government members and welcome these gentlemen and thank 
them for their continuing work and to appreciate and recognize 
the changes that our province is going through. 
 
I note Doug Chisholm, one of the members who is not here 
today, is a well-known northern photographer. I’m familiar with 
his work, and I’m pleased to see that these people are 
participating in this process. 
 
It’s been in the past, Mr. Speaker, part of our culture to have 
unique and interesting and novel names. To name a few — 
Elbow, Eyebrow, Climax, Moose Jaw, Arm River, Wood River, 
Carrot River, Thunder Creek, Swift Current, Last Mountain, 
Touchwood, and Big Muddy. And those are only just to name a 
few. 
 
As time passes, Mr. Speaker, and we enter the second century 
of our province, we have a large group of individuals who need 
to be recognized. These are people who have made significant 
contributions to our province, and some have made very 
substantial sacrifices and some who in military endeavours have 
made the ultimate sacrifice. And it’s appropriate that our 
province recognize the contribution of these individuals, and 
it’s very appropriate that those individuals now have their 
names immortalized by having points of interest named after 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude just by pointing out that I 
understand that current protocol indicates that it’s inappropriate 
to use names of current sitting members for naming purposes. 
However we understand that come next spring a new name 
might be available, and that name would be Calvert creek. Mr. 
Speaker, thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I would just . . . Order. Order 
please. I would just . . . Order. Order. I would just remind 
members that either directly or indirectly they should not be 
using names of members sitting in the House. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I seek leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier is requesting leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank all 
members. Joining us during question period in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, is Señor Enrique Lobo. Señor Lobo is with the 
Mexican embassy in the agricultural office. Minister Lobo and I 
and several others were just an hour or little more ago burning 
the brand at Agribition. 
 
Señor Lobo and the other international visitors are here at 
Agribition, this tremendous trade show that happens once a year 
in our province. And this year we are celebrating the 
international visitors. So I would ask all members to welcome 
the minister to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Asking for leave also to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of 
the official opposition, we too would like to extend our 
greetings to Señor Lobo — I hope I have pronounced the name 
correctly — a minister from Mexico who is here visiting our 
great farm exhibition, Agribition. 
 
We’re proud of the Agribition and we’re so glad to see visitors 
come from around the world, particularly distinguished visitors 
like our guest from Mexico. We hope you enjoy our warm 
hospitality and take back our greetings to your fine country. 
And thank you for attending the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling responses to written questions 59 to 70 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to all questions 59 to 70 inclusive 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant 

la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Currently Saskatchewan has a nine-member Court of Appeal. 
This is a larger Appeal court than is needed in this province. An 
amendment will reduce the size of the court to seven judges, 
effective as vacancies occur. 
 
The former chief justice of the court suggested these changes 
and in speeches to lawyers’ organizations indicated the 
reduction in the size of the court would be appropriate in light 
of the workload of the court. The appropriate time to reduce the 
size of the court is this autumn so that the legislation is passed 
before or at the time that some of the more senior judges decide 
to retire. The government is confident that reducing the size of 
the court will not impact timely access to the court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Court of Appeal Act, 2000. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 37, The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to speak briefly on Bill No. 37, An Act to amend The 
Court of Appeal Act, 2000. Mr. Speaker, clearly the intention of 
this Bill is very straightforward. It reduces a number of judges 
on the Court of Appeal from nine judges to seven judges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not too sure if this is the NDP’s way of 
dealing with the labour shortage or indeed the population drop 
is such that we no longer need as many Appeal Court judges in 
this province because of our diminishing requirements or 
specifically what the intent of the legislation is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think, in my experience, that the Court of Appeal 
has required that there are sufficient judges in order to hear the 
cases brought forward to it. And I would hope that this isn’t the 
short-sighted move by this government, and we will end up in 
the very near future having to increase the number of seats in 
the Court of Appeal. 
 
I’m sure that our Justice critic will want to consult with the 
judiciary and the legal profession to see if this action is 
appropriate to the number of judges that this province needs, 
and in order for that to happen, at this time I’d move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 

that debate on second reading of Bill 37 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act currently 
protects 1.4 million hectares of natural uplands and wetlands in 
the province’s agricultural areas. This habitat provides food, 
water, and shelter to more than 400 species of wildlife. The 
intent, Mr. Speaker, of the Act is to conserve wildlife habitat 
while allowing traditional and compatible uses to continue. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Much of the land under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is 
leased to cattle producers who use it for grazing or hay. Mr. 
Speaker, agricultural producers who lease this land have proven 
to be good stewards. As a result, wildlife is benefiting. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we are recommending that 275 hectares of 
land be removed from the Act. The 275 hectares are made up of 
parcels of Crown land that lessees have expressed an interest in 
buying or in some cases trading land they currently own for 
land protected under the Act. Upon approval Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food will sell the land to the lessees at fair 
market value or trade it for an equivalent parcel. Some of the 
land the lessees want to buy or trade has existing important 
natural values located on the land. We will continue to protect 
those values through conservation easements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also proposing to add another 1,246 
hectares of suitable Crown land under The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act to compensate for these withdrawals. This 
reflects the no net-loss policy of the province and will ensure 
important habitat values are protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2). 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 38, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a second time. The Chair 
recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise this afternoon and to speak on Bill No. 38, An Act to 
Amend the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s comments he mentioned that this 
was a trade-off of important wildlife protected acres or hectares 
that have played a very important role in preserving the natural 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

habitat in our province, and I think that is very definitely an 
important thing to have this balance. And in order to maintain 
the balance in harmony with proper use of these parcels of land, 
the minister has acknowledged that by and large this land is 
used for ranging cattle in the southwest part of the province. 
And I think that over the years, the ranchers and cattlemen in 
that part of the province have been very good stewards of this 
land that the government has established as Crown land for the 
protection of the habitat and the natural wildlife that’s on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition very much supports the 
concept that if land is taken out of the wildlife protection 
protocol, that other land is placed into it so that we’re not losing 
protected acres of land or hectares of land that are being used to 
protect wildlife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well as that, I think it’s important that if 
ranchers have made an important case for their desire to 
purchase some of these lands and so therefore it’s being taken 
out of the habitat protection, that that is also an important 
consideration so that these farms remain and these ranches 
remain viable and appropriate to continue to do the business of 
raising livestock and protecting the other habitat that’s under 
their lease arrangements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Environment critic for the 
official opposition is going to want to speak to some of the 
ranchers in that area to make sure that this balance of removing 
land from protection and establishing new land for protection is 
appropriate and is going to fit in in a harmonious way with the 
needs of the ranching community in the Southwest. In order for 
that to be facilitated, I would at this time move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 38 be now adjourned. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 
Bill No. 39 — The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs 

Recovery Act 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Healthy 
Living Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to give second reading of The Tobacco Damages and 
Health Care Costs Recovery Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us for this important day are a few of the 
people who have been instrumental in the success of the 
tobacco control strategy in Saskatchewan: June Blau, president 
of the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco Reduction ; Lynn 
Greaves, vice-president of the Saskatchewan Coalition for 
Tobacco Reduction; Rhae Ann Bromley, communications 
director, Heart and Stroke Foundation of Saskatchewan; Paul 
van Loon, health educator, Lung Association of Saskatchewan; 
Donna Pasiechnik, tobacco control coordinator for the Canadian 
Cancer Society, Saskatchewan branch; Keith Karasin, executive 
director of the Canadian Cancer Society, Saskatchewan branch. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, we know that tobacco use is 
the leading preventable cause of diseases and premature death 
in Canada. We also know that the financial and human cost of 
tobacco-related disease is enormous. This legislation enables 
Saskatchewan to initiate litigation against the tobacco industry 
to recover the health care costs of tobacco-related disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation, which follows similar statutes 
adopted by British Columbia, Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, 
New Brunswick, and Manitoba continues our efforts to protect 
the health of Saskatchewan people and raise further awareness 
of tobacco-related illness. This legislation changes the basis for 
lawsuits against the tobacco industry. It enables the province to 
pursue an aggregate lawsuit for health care costs of individuals 
treated for tobacco-related illness and disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a leader in the war against 
tobacco. We’ve taken decisive steps and shown leadership in 
tobacco control initiatives like our smoke-free public places 
legislation and ban on the promotion and display of tobacco 
products where children have access. We want our young 
people to be empowered and to make healthy choices and to 
grow up tobacco-free. And we want to hold the tobacco 
industry accountable for the ravaging human and financial cost 
that tobacco has on our society. 
 
Based on Health Canada reports on the effects of tobacco use 
nationwide, we estimate that every year in Saskatchewan more 
than 1,000 people die from tobacco use. We estimate the health 
care costs associated with tobacco use at about $145 million a 
year. Mr. Speaker, this legislation enables us to hold the 
tobacco industry, not taxpayers, accountable for the costs of 
treating smoking-caused illness. This legislation and the 
litigation it enables will also expose the practices of tobacco 
manufacturers and raise more awareness about the hazards of 
tobacco use. 
 
With this legislation, we’re sending a message to the tobacco 
industry that they need to take responsibility for the damage 
tobacco leaves in its wake. With that, Mr. Speaker, I move 
second reading of this Bill. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Healthy Living 
Services has moved second reading. I recognize the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise today and to speak on an Act, 
Bill No. 39, to recover damages and health care costs from 
manufacturers of tobacco. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the official opposition has had a 
long-standing practice of co-operating in every way possible 
with the government in dealing with the tobacco-related 
diseases that are facing Saskatchewan people. Certainly in the 
past we have very much supported the initiatives that would 
destabilize and denormalize the use of tobacco in our province. 
And if there is any disappointment that I think we all share in 
this House, that there’s still far too many people using tobacco 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

and tobacco products. And there’s far too many young people 
that are still starting to use these products even though the 
information is so overwhelming and compelling of the serious 
damages that will happen to people if they engage in the use of 
tobacco products. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, many years ago, when most of us in 
this House were young people, the knowledge wasn’t so clear 
cut and so definitive in terms of the harmful side effects of the 
tobacco industry. And in my opinion, in many instances the 
tobacco industry has benefited inappropriately from the sale of 
tobacco and have been able to walk away from any 
responsibility for the diseases that clearly science has identified 
as clearly related to the side effects of tobacco consumption. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I think this legislation, at least in the 
initial wording of it, seems to do the job in terms of allowing 
the government to enter into direct lawsuits either, I suspect, 
individually or with other provinces if that’s appropriate. It 
would seem to me, in a very quick reading of this, it gives the 
government the flexibility it needs in order to enter into various 
types of suits that could indeed try to recover from the tobacco 
industry some of the health care costs that our provinces have 
incurred over the years and continue to incur as a result of 
tobacco-related diseases. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I hope that if this is what the 
legislation indeed covers off . . . and I know our health critic is 
going to want to speak to the members of the coalition that has 
been promoting this type of action in order to denormalize and 
destabilize the use of tobacco to make sure everything has been 
included. And I think as well, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s 
probably appropriate for us to speak to people in the legal 
profession as well to make sure from a legal standpoint that 
there has nothing been overlooked in permitting the province 
the maximum flexibility in order to pursue these manufacturers 
of tobacco. 
 
And finally, Madam Deputy Speaker, if all of these things can 
be met — that indeed it shows that we have given ourselves the 
capacity to pursue legal suit for the recovery of these costs — I 
trust that the government will indeed embark on that kind of a 
venue in a timely way, and we won’t just simply threaten and 
postpone or pretend that this is an action that we need and then 
not take concrete action either alone or in concert with other 
provinces in Canada. 
 
Tobacco use needs to be denormalized. It needs to be 
destabilized. And the manufacturers of tobacco have to get a 
clear message in our country that we do not think that they 
should get a free ride and that they should be held accountable 
for the tremendous ravages of the diseases related to tobacco on 
our citizens. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re very positive with the intent 
of this legislation. And for the reasons that I laid out, in terms of 
consulting with the people that are indeed involved and have 
been involved in the destabilization of tobacco and the legal 
community, in order to allow those consultations to take place, 
at this stage I would adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Melfort has moved 
to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 34 — The 
Labour Market Commission Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to be able to stand in the House again today and 
comment on this particular piece of legislation. It seems like 
just a day or two ago that I was doing this very thing when the 
legislation was being proposed through ministerial statement. 
And much of what I said then I think I could probably repeat 
today with the same kind of sense of importance and urgency. 
The fact of the matter is, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I greet 
this piece of legislation with a mixture of optimism and real 
concern. 
 
And I guess the optimism is largely around the role of this 
commission and the good work that is envisioned for this 
particular commission and the objectives of the commission as 
outlined in the legislation. The real concern, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, comes as a result of the news we heard today. 
 
During question period earlier today, we learned that by 
statistical analysis, by the province’s own statistical branch, that 
this province has lost 18,000 people in the last two years — 
18,000 people have been lost to the province of Saskatchewan, 
to the economy of Saskatchewan in the last two years. 
Out-migration has taken that number of people out of our 
population numbers. And over the last five or six years that 
number swells to something in the neighbourhood of 35, 36, 
37,000 people. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, as I understand it by what the 
government has said, there are something in the neighbourhood 
of 12 to 15,000 jobs in this province currently available going 
unfilled — that there are just not the individuals, not the bodies, 
not the skilled people here to fill those jobs. Well when you 
compare that with the news we heard today about 18,000 
having left the province in the last two years alone, that means 
we could have filled every one of those vacancies that exist in 
this province, if those people had felt that their opportunity and 
their future was here. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there has got to be a reason why that 
number of people would leave the province in this short period 
of time. There has to be an underlying cause. And while this 
Labour Market Commission is going to be tasked with the job 
of researching labour market trends and establishing linkages 
with the regional and sectorial planning bodies and so forth, the 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

fact of the matter is, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we would not 
have the crisis in labour today if this government hadn’t 
overseen, or presided over, the out-migration of 18,000 people 
in the last two years. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s no wonder that 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate is so low. When you have a 
job vacancy number in the range of 12 to 15,000 and you have 
that many people leaving the province, there’s work available 
for everybody. And it’s going to be a real challenge not just for 
this government but for the commission that this particular 
piece of legislation speaks to, to address that shortage. 
 
I do find a weakness in this particular piece of legislation in that 
while it strikes the commission and establishes a mandate — 
and I mentioned two of the objectives of the commission 
already — but while it has done that, there does not appear to 
be in the piece of legislation any obligation on the part of the 
minister to whom this commission will report. There’s no 
obligation on the part of the minister to accept the reports or to 
act on the information that the commission will have derived as 
a result of its efforts. So I think that might be something that we 
want to be mindful of as we look at this piece of legislation 
going forward. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this particular Bill referred to as An 
Act respecting the establishment of the Saskatchewan Labour 
Market Commission outlines, as I indicated, several priorities of 
undertaking. And we talked about providing advice to the 
minister on provincial, regional, or sectorial labour market 
issues to establish linkages to regional and sectorial planning 
bodies, and to examine sectorial labour market plans. 
 
There’s a third priority area of study for this particular 
commission, and that is to research and provide analysis of 
provincial, regional, and sectorial labour market issues, to foster 
co-operation among unions, among business, First Nations and 
Métis organizations, including the training institutions of this 
province and the provincial government to develop the labour 
market strategy. And finally to communicate and consult with 
both labour, business, and government, First Nations and Métis 
organizations and so on. And then to do anything else 
prescribed in regulations. We don’t know what that might be at 
this point yet, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to acknowledge the fact that there has been a 
considerable amount of good work that has gone into the 
creation of this particular piece of legislation, most of the credit 
for which goes to the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and 
the provincial chamber of commerce. 
 
They had representatives who came together and said, look 
we’ve got a labour issue in this province. It’s problematic right 
now. There is going to be a growing need for skilled labour in 
this province as the economy develops and as it expands into a 
variety of different areas, as we look to expanding the 
development of our natural resources and maybe refining some 
of that activity here. The innovative agenda that is going to 
come to bear on some of that activity is going to create a 
demand for more and more skilled people in our economy. So 
they took the initiative to come together and to hammer out 

what this particular commission might look like. 
 
In fact, Madam Deputy Speaker, it replaces the former Labour 
Force Development Board in a couple of different ways. It 
replaces it in terms of mandate and it replaces it in terms of 
structure. And as I understand it at this point, it’s anticipated 
that this particular commission will have somewhere in the 
range of 21 people serving on its board. It will be able to strike 
subcommittees that will look at specific issues and it will be a 
little more focused . . . excuse me, Madam Deputy Speaker, a 
more focused approach to developing a labour force strategy for 
the province. 
 
If there’s a downside, I assume that it might be that while 
several institutions are named as players in this particular 
commission, not all institutions are going to be involved. I 
believe the universities in the province have been omitted from 
this, and I think that might create some level of concern at that 
particular level of capacity in the province. But nevertheless, I 
don’t think that those are major issues and that they are issues 
that will cause any impediment to the particular piece of 
legislation that’s before us. 
 
So I do want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that although 
there are some questions about how this commission . . . how 
the commission’s work will be regarded and responded to by 
the government, I think the idea is appropriate and is probably 
worth pursuing. And as a matter of fact, because of the 
importance of this subject matter to the future of this province, I 
would suggest, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the House take 
this opportunity to move this piece of legislation forward to 
committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment, Bill No. 34, The Labour Market Commission Act, 
that the Bill now be read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 
referred? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Madam Deputy Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 34, the Saskatchewan labour market commission Act 
be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister for 
Advanced Education and Employment that Bill No. 34, The 
Labour Market Commission Act be referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

Bill No. 35 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 35 — The 
Infrastructure Fund Act be now read a second time.] 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood 
River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today and talk a little bit about The Infrastructure 
Fund Act. Apparently the purpose of this Bill is to create the 
Saskatchewan Infrastructure Fund and it states that money will 
be transferred from the GRF [General Revenue Fund] into this 
fund, but also money can be transferred from this fund back 
into the GRF. The point of this fund as outlined in the Bill is to 
build community infrastructure to improve capacity for social 
and economic development in Saskatchewan and 
community-related recreational centres. 
 
Now it’s very interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker, that $100 
million is set aside so quickly for infrastructure when we’re 
approaching an election. It’s also interesting to note what kind 
of consultation has been done with municipalities, urban and 
rural, with reference to the establishment of this fund. And I 
would submit that there’s been no consultation done on this Act 
at all. It’s quickly throwing together a Bill to create incentives 
prior to an election. 
 
And I can just imagine, I can just imagine people sitting around 
a room over there saying, I think we’re in political trouble. How 
can we, how can we get a little bit of our vote back? Well let’s 
throw $100 million at it and see how it bounces. Well what’s 
the criteria going to be? Well it just doesn’t matter what the 
criteria is. We’ll just tell the people of the province we have 
$100 million for you, trust us. Well I don’t quite buy that. 
 
So we probably look at the minister of youth, culture, recreation 
and he’s probably saying, hmm, have I got a plan. They want a 
new arena complex in Moose Jaw. This could be my way to try 
and win an election. Well it looks like there’s problems in 
North Battleford maybe too because they’re building an arena I 
understand. Now there’s enough money in the 100 million to 
cover off these two arenas. And would that be described by 
people of this province as nothing more than electioneering? 
We will take $100 million and maybe we can buy some votes in 
North Battleford. Maybe we can buy some in Moose Jaw. So 
I’m wondering if those two ministers figure that they’re in 
political trouble and that’s why they wanted to established this 
fund. 
 
It’s very, very interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker, that no 
criteria would be established before the money is thrown out to 
the public. And I have to really look at a statement made by the 
minister in committee when he was asked about the criteria. 
And he said, “Projects would be dealt with each on the basis of 
their own merit and there could be the possibility of projects 
that are already under way.” 
 
On the basis of their own merit. Who is the determining people 
about what the merit of a project is? Like my colleague from 
Cypress Hills . . . How about the arena in Shaunavon? Who’s 
going to determine if that merits consideration? How can 

anybody possibly say, well they will be considered, when 
there’s no criteria for the project? 
 
The way this come out right now is if the project happens to be 
in Moose Jaw and the project happens to be in North Battleford, 
that’s the criteria. Well we might find another couple of places. 
Let’s see. Where could we possibly . . . We might have to put 
something into Regina South because I think that minister’s in 
trouble too, so maybe we’d better put some money into Regina 
South. 
 
Well there’s lots of other places where there’s trouble on the 
political front for the NDP government, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And I don’t know where all this $100 million is going 
to go. And I don’t believe that they even know where it’s going 
to go. 
 
All we have to do is look at some of the past projects. The 
Community Initiatives Fund was one. That was kind of set up 
after the NDP government failed to honour the 10 per cent of 
VLT [video lottery terminal] revenues for the communities. 
They said in true socialist fashion, we know better than the 
people of the communities, so we’re going to take this money 
into a central fund called the Community Initiatives Fund and 
we’ll dole it out to those that meet the criteria. Well 
unfortunately, Madam Deputy Speaker, I know in my area 
people applied for funds out of this. Well I’m sorry, you don’t 
meet the criteria. 
 
So I’m very, very worried about how they’re going to establish 
criteria for this fund because if you happen to be from an area 
where we’re not going to be able to get votes, I’m sorry, you 
don’t qualify. 
 
Now we also know . . . And I remember the minister of the day 
when questioned in estimates said . . . There are an awful lot of 
people and communities that have projects that they’ve asked 
for money from the Community Initiatives Fund, and they were 
denied. And the minister stated, and I can’t give you the exact 
quote, but the minister stated in estimates that everybody who 
qualified for money from the fund were given funds. 
 
There’s a key word in there, Madam Deputy Speaker — those 
who qualified. Well who sets the criteria again? It’s a group of 
men and women sit around a table and look at where we can get 
votes. That’s going to be the criteria. 
 
So in that particular year, Madam Deputy Speaker, there was 
something in the neighbourhood of $7 million taken from the 
Community Initiatives Fund and guess where it was put? Back 
into General Revenue Fund. Doesn’t that sound a little bit like 
this project right now where it says in the Bill that money can 
be transferred from the GRF to this fund, but it can also be 
transferred from this fund back to the GRF? 
 
So if you read between the lines on this, it’s those that qualify, 
those that qualify. If you’re from Regina South you can qualify 
for it. But oh by the way, the rest of you don’t qualify so we can 
slough this back into General Revenue Fund if we so desire. So 
we’re only interested in putting money into where we can 
attempt to buy votes. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, look at where the $100 million . . . 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

let’s just look at $100 million and the possibilities. My 
colleague from Saskatoon Silver Springs today in a petition 
talked about the children’s hospital in Saskatoon, or lack 
thereof. Seven years. Now how many children’s hospital would 
$100 million provide? We’re only looking for one. But how 
many could it provide? And so now, now we’ve got $100 
million as a slush election fund and yet no children’s hospital. 
 
I’m wondering, I’m wondering if the group of men and women 
that sat around the table and said, let’s throw $100 million out 
there that we can use, I wonder if they considered something 
like revenue sharing — $100 million in revenue sharing. Well I 
can see from the socialist perspective that doesn’t work because 
we’d be sharing money with the municipalities and gosh, they 
might be able to do with it what they want. We won’t have 
control over it. 
 
So this is that whole attitude again. We have to have central 
control. We have to have central control over everything and we 
will decide. We as the NDP government will decide whether 
we’re going to get votes in that area or not, and that’s going to 
be the determining factor who’s going to get money. 
 
How about $100 million in education portion of property tax 
relief? Wouldn’t that have gone a long way to help the people 
in the province on a tax relief basis? No, probably not because 
how many votes are they going to get generally in the province? 
When you’re down in the polls, now they’ve got a ton of money 
into specific areas. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the NDP government talks about 
transparency. Well this one is very, very transparent. Everybody 
in this province can see through what this government is doing 
with this $100 million infrastructure fund. And they also . . . 
And the member from Athabasca always talks about, we 
welcome scrutiny. Well I can assure you, I can assure 
everybody that this will be under the scrutiny of people from 
this province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it was very interesting in today’s 
StarPhoenix how transparent this is. Here is the article from, the 
editorial from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. And we heard some 
of it before. But this is how transparent this fund is. And the 
headline is, and I quote: “‘Hagel’s fund’ public paid 
electioneering.” 
 
And there’s some very, very good quotes in here. Election 
coming, “. . . watch for the spigot on the public treasury to open 
wider.” 

 
It’s referred to as “Hagel’s nifty fund”, and I’m quoting: “. . . 
what’s lacking in . . . government spending decisions is any 
indication that there’s long-term vision.” 
 
No long-term vision. And it’s really great. And we heard about 
it in question period. 
 

In turning loose the perennially jolly Hagel to play Santa 
in a business suit, the targets will be venues with the 
potential to provide maximum political payback. 
 

That’s how transparent this whole fund is. 
 
And a quote again, Madam Deputy Speaker, from the article. 
And to me, it rings very, very true. And I quote: “. . . Premier 
Calvert and his government are rushing to buy votes by 
spending every nickel and then some.” 

 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I know there’s other people that wish 
to speak to this Bill. But I would like to, I would like to . . . I 
would just like to close my remarks by reiterating to members 
opposite that you can take $100 million, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and you can attempt to buy votes, but you can’t buy 
imagination. You can take $100 million in an infrastructure 
fund and try and buy some votes. But I would suggest, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, there’s no amount of money that will buy any 
credibility for those men and women on that side. And, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, you can attempt to buy votes around this 
province, but I would tell you that there’s no amount of money 
that can buy integrity for those men and women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
very pleased to be able to enter the debate on The Infrastructure 
Fund Act. And as my colleague before me said, it should be 
probably more appropriately named the election slush fund Act. 
But at any rate it appears the minister isn’t partied out from 
going around the province through the centennial year and 
having numerous photo ops. He seems to think that he needs 
another $100 million worth of photo ops as he goes around the 
province. Only this time, Madam Deputy Speaker, he’s going to 
choose strategic communities — and don’t think he won’t. That 
is what this is going to be about. It’s going to be choosing 
strategic communities in which to spend this $100 million. 
 
There’s a number of issues that I would like to bring up while I 
speak to this Bill, because I think The Infrastructure Fund Act 
flies in the face of a lot of other things that this government’s 
been doing. 
 
I know yesterday I brought up the issue of the Community 
Initiatives Fund that was given to the community of Bradwell. 
And there was a criteria for that fund. The minister doesn’t 
seem to be sure what the criteria is going to be for this new 
fund, for this new election readiness fund, but there was a 
criteria for the community initiatives grant. And Bradwell filled 
out their application and I’ve gone through the criteria that they 
needed to follow. It was on the website at one time. That 
criteria has changed now of course. But I went through it and 
nowhere in the listing of ineligible projects and costs, nowhere 
in that list, Madam Deputy Speaker, does it say anything about 
in-kind contributions of either materials or labour. It is not 
considered an ineligible expense. 
 
And I looked at Bradwell’s application and Bradwell’s 
application was very clear. It stated it very clearly that part of 
their expenses in their application was going to be in-kind 
contributions of labour and in-kind contributions of materials. 
And that’s common especially, Madam Deputy Speaker, in 
rural Saskatchewan. Because everybody in the small 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

communities pull together and they donate what they can, be it 
their time, be it their equipment, be it materials that they have 
— quite often on their farms. They will donate it to a project 
that is for the betterment of the community. 
 
And yet the minister wants to claw back part of these funds, 
even though it went through the process. So what process is 
going to be in place for the new fund? Is it going to be as poorly 
organized as the process was in place for the Community 
Initiatives Fund? Is it going to be as incompetently run as 
obviously the process was for the other fund that was run 
through his department? 
 
I look at, again, the government’s material on the community 
initiatives grant and I see, how will the applications be 
evaluated, Madam Deputy Speaker, and it said the proposal will 
be assessed for eligibility. Point two is, once the proposal is 
deemed eligible, the proposal will be evaluated against 
established criteria. So it’s looked through not once, but twice. 
They decide in the first go-over of the application of whether or 
not it will qualify. Then they go over it again to make sure that 
it meets the established criteria. 
 
Bradwell did that. It passed both processes. They received their 
funding. They built their project and then the department wants 
their money back. So is that how poorly this new grant money 
is going to be available? 
 
And we really have to question that because in your small 
communities, I think it’s very, very important that they know 
precisely what’s eligible and what isn’t. Once they receive the 
funds, it is a significant hardship in the smaller communities to 
have to return those funds. If you’ve got an NDP government 
clawing that money back, it’s extremely hard for your small 
communities to come up with those funds to pay it back. 
 
It’s also interesting in that particular project, and it’ll be 
interesting to see what criteria will be on this new election 
readiness grant, what the criteria will be. Because in your 
smaller communities, especially in rural Saskatchewan — but 
it’s not unique to rural Saskatchewan, it’s also important to 
urban — is volunteers, volunteer material, volunteer time. And 
I know that the member from Regina Wascana Plains has spoke 
to that in this Assembly on October 30. And I would like to 
quote from what the member had to say. She said: 
 

. . . the Premier approached me three and a half years ago 
to engage with the voluntary sector and work 
collaboratively to establish a Saskatchewan context with 
the Canadian volunteerism initiative. During the 
International Year of the Volunteer, Ed Broadbent was 
commissioned to do a report on volunteerism in Canada, 
and in that report he identified that a healthy voluntary 
sector is extremely important to a civil society and is also 
an economic engine to the economy. 
 

And I agree. I absolutely agree. Later on the member said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, community-based and voluntary 
organizations are the backbone of the high quality of life 
Saskatchewan families enjoy. Saskatchewan people 
volunteer more than any other jurisdiction in Canada and 
that’s by no accident. Through the voluntary sector 

initiative, we have worked hard to achieve and maintain 
[the] . . . distinction . . . [that] we’re going to continue 
working hard to strengthen our position as a national 
leader in voluntary participation. 
 

And I agree with that as well. I believe that volunteers are 
extremely, extremely important. But in the case of Bradwell, 
that is the funding that was pulled. It was the funding that was 
allocated to cover the volunteers. The administrator for the 
community of Bradwell wrote me a letter, and I think he 
worded it far better than even I could in that letter. 
 
He had received a letter from the minister’s department, Mr. 
Brown, and Mr. Brown stated that the funding, a certain amount 
of funding would have to be returned, that they were clawing it 
back. And the reason that he gave was because they do not 
recognize volunteers’ in-kind contributions. 
 
Mr. Thurmeier wrote in his letter to me and I would like to 
quote: 
 

Obviously Mr. Brown and others responsible for this 
program have never traveled Saskatchewan or they would 
understand that volunteer labour and “in kind” support are 
the most vital, critical and important part of any 
recreational, cultural and heritage project and their costs. 
In fact most small communities would not have any 
facilities without this crucial support. 
 
As anyone from a small Saskatchewan community or 
having any understanding of rural Saskatchewan, knows, 
we do not have the money to contract out every project. 
We must rely on Saskatchewan’s outstanding community 
spirit and volunteerism. 
 

And how do the NDP value that strong community spirit? How 
do the NDP value the volunteerism that makes these community 
projects happen? They don’t. They don’t. They say they are 
worth nothing. They say that they are worth nothing, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and that is a disgrace. 

 
It is fine to have all the words saying that we love our 
volunteers. It’s fine to give them awards. But let’s put some 
action behind all of it because volunteers are absolutely crucial. 
It is fine to talk about recreation and culture and all of that 
happening around the province. It is extremely important. But a 
major way to support all of that in rural Saskatchewan is to 
support the volunteers who, quite frankly, will make it happen. 
Without them, it will not. It simply, simply will not. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleague spoke earlier on . . . You 
know, we are wondering on this side of the House where the 
money is going to be allocated. We think it’s very important. 
We will be scrutinizing that very closely. There is speculation 
not just in this House. There’s speculation in the general public 
that this is going to be strategically placed and awarded to 
communities where it will be of a political advantage to the 
NDP. And it’s a lot of money. But I really must wonder like 
where did the NDP go so badly off track? Where are their 
priorities? 
 
I live in a community that has now been waiting for 
infrastructure money for over 10 years for a hospital. Over 10 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

years Humboldt has waited for this government to commit 
funding to their hospital and actually make the project happen. 
And every year it’s a photo op. It’s an opportunity. It’s 
promised. It’s promised. It’s promised again. And it has never 
ever truly happened. The money that’s needed has never been 
sent to Humboldt. The project ground has never been broken. 
 
So when you look at this, when Humboldt and the community 
of Humboldt and the surrounding communities that are 
supporting the Humboldt hospital project look at this $100 
million allocated to rinks and museums and recreational 
facilities, they’re going to question, are they going to have to 
wait 10 years? 
 
If a community is promised money from this grant for a rink, 
for a museum, for some other facility, if they’re promised that 
money, are they going to have to wait 10 years before they 
actually get the grant money? And I would say no. They’re 
going to get it right away. All of a sudden that money is going 
to be available right away. And yet for something as critical as a 
new hospital, the community of Humboldt has waited year after 
year after year after year. Where are the priorities? 
 
[15:30] 
 
I absolutely agree that culture, recreation, all of that is essential 
for rural Saskatchewan, for all of Saskatchewan. It is extremely 
important. But health care is number one. It is the number one 
issue. And the NDP know that as well as we do on this side of 
the House. The well-being of the people of Saskatchewan has to 
be number one. 
 
Why would a hospital project have a 10-year wait and a skating 
rink can get their money right away? What happens with the 
10-year wait? Well with the 10-year wait, the cost for that 
project escalated astronomically. It tripled in what it was going 
to cost. And it didn’t just cost the NDP more money. It’s 
costing the communities more money. And it’s extremely hard 
to raise that kind of money in the small communities that don’t 
have a huge tax base. 
 
So I think the people from Humboldt and the surrounding areas, 
the surrounding municipalities and small towns that are helping 
to fund the Humboldt hospital are going to be very, very 
interested to know where this $100 million is going to go and 
how it’s going to be allocated. And they’re going to be 
watching very, very closely how strategically it will be awarded 
to the communities that will be to the best political advantage 
for the NDP. 
 
My colleague mentioned as well an article that was in The 
StarPhoenix, and I don’t think he quoted near enough into the 
record. I think there is a lot of things that is stated in that 
StarPhoenix article that should go in the record because it is a 
reflection of what the peoples of Saskatchewan are thinking 
when they hear this announcement. And it is a reflection of how 
closely the people of Saskatchewan will be watching the 
allocation of this fund and watching this minister going out and 
shaking hands with his big smile and awarding money to just 
certain communities when other communities are waiting for 
funding for hospitals. 
 
I didn’t even mention . . . and I should, Madam Deputy 

Speaker. I’ve received two letters in the last two weeks — one 
from the village of Muenster, another one from the town of 
Lanigan — both of which are saying that the regional library 
system is struggling because of cutbacks in their funding. One 
is in the Parkland Regional Library system. The other 
community is in the Wheatland Regional Library system. 
 
Both library systems are struggling to provide the services that 
they have been providing, let alone expand the services. And 
yet this is the NDP government that’s saying literacy and 
museums and culture and all of that is a priority. 
 
But we underfund . . . We’ve got the Finance minister chirping 
away, accusing me of not liking literacy. How absolutely 
ridiculous can you get? How absolutely ridiculous can the 
Finance minister get? You can’t say you support literacy and 
underfund the library system. You can’t say that and then 
underfund it. I know that it’s a hardship that the federal 
government have cut fundings. I understand that. But so has the 
provincial government. Where is the provincial government’s 
responsibility in cutting funding to the regional libraries? 
 
So I think the Finance minister should check that out when he 
goes to do his budget for March in 2007. And I think if it’s so 
important, and he’s saying it is, that he better not only replace 
the funding that’s been removed from the regional library 
system but he could also increase it at least, at the very least, by 
the rate of inflation. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, The StarPhoenix article that I was 
talking about before the Finance minister interrupted to add his 
thoughts on this debate, so I would like to read that into the 
record. And it states: 
 

. . . the government’s creation of an “infrastructure fund” 
whose sole purpose is to have Culture and Recreation 
Minister Glenn Hagel criss-cross the province before next 
year’s election and drop a whopping $60 million [only it’s 
100 million, Madam Deputy Speaker] into feel-good 
community projects. 
 
To tap the rainy day fund, the Calvert government at least 
will have to go through the motions of projecting and 
justifying budgetary pressures that require it essentially to 
transfer money from one pocket to claim the books are 
balanced. 
 
Hagel’s nifty fund, however, requires no such bother since 
it’s being sold as bringing to fruition the “Building 
Communities” program announced in the Centennial year 
throne speech, and will be used to provide capital funds 
for everything from museums to art galleries to sports 
complexes. 
 

Further down in the article, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would 
like to quote again: 
 

While sports facilities, museums and art galleries do need 
public support, what’s lacking in recent government 
spending decisions is any indication that there’s a long 
term vision that extends beyond the next election. In 
turning loose the perennially jolly Hagel to play Santa in a 
business suit, the targets will be venues with the potential 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

to provide maximum political payback. 
 
The long-term paybacks that can accrue to the province by 
investing in such things as medical research with the 
potential to reduce the costliest of social programs simply 
don’t fit within this political mindset. 
 

And lastly, Madam Deputy Speaker, and again I quote: 
 

. . . rather than take a thoughtful approach to public policy 
that makes the best use of an economic boom everyone 
knows can’t last for ever, Premier Calvert and his 
government are rushing to buy votes by spending every 
nickel and then some. 

 
And we agree. With that I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Humboldt has 
moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 36 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 
 
Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I rise to address the Bill, Bill No. 36, An Act 
to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
I couldn’t help but . . . When I’m sitting here listening to talk 
about income tax situation in Saskatchewan, the finance 
situation in Saskatchewan, and hearing the Minister of Finance 
talking, it would be an interesting debate to have the former 
Finance minister, the member from Regina Douglas Park, 
debate the current Finance minister. I think we would have 
some interesting debates that would take place there because 
certainly they’re coming at things from very, very different, 
very different ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The current Finance minister, he would have, he would have the 
polling results in one hand and his financial ideas in the other. 
Because, Madam Deputy Speaker, this is the way things are 
done these days in the NDP government — a desperate 
government who’s trying desperately to hang on to power, 
trying to come up with new ideas, building initiative funds, $1 
billion slush funds, whatever they can get their hands on to try 
to buy votes. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to 
you it hasn’t worked before in this province, and it’s not going 
to work this time. 
 
This time we see some tax measures, Madam Deputy Speaker, 

in this Bill, some tax cuts. But of course in typical NDP fashion 
they try to sneak in a tax increase as well. Well let’s just talk 
about the context of these tax situations, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And I think we have to be honest and we have to give 
credit where credit is due, credit to people who come up with 
these ideas. The NDP government is trying very hard to slap 
themselves on the back, to take credit for this. But let’s give 
credit where credit is due. 
 
Let’s give credit to the groups that chose to make presentations 
to the Vicq commission. Let’s give credit to the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce, Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business, the Regina Chamber of Commerce, the Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce, the North Saskatoon Business 
Association, even the unions and other groups that took the time 
to make those presentations. They’re the ones that deserve 
credit. Because at that very time the people were making those 
presentations, this government and the members opposite were 
arguing definitely against it. They didn’t have the polling 
results that they know now. They didn’t know how much 
trouble they were in so they came nowhere near implementing 
the information or the Bill that we have before us, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at the Vicq commission and what they had to say. On 
page 36 of the Vicq commission it talks about, and I know 
members will be interested in this, a marginal effective tax rate 
that Saskatchewan taxpayers paid — the METR, the M-E-T-R. 
Jack Vicq talked about it being the highest in Saskatchewan. 
Now we’re familiar with hearing that term time and time again 
in Canada, Saskatchewan having the highest tax rates in the 
country for 15 straight years under this NDP government. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr. Vicq went further. He talked 
about Saskatchewan having the highest marginal effective tax 
rate in all of North America. And if I remember correctly, he 
even said maybe in the entire world with a couple of 
exceptions. That Saskatchewan would have that dubious 
distinction under this NDP government 15 of the last 16 years, 
it’s no wonder that we learned today in question period that 
18,000 people left this province in the last two years, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s something that we can’t be proud of. We must strive to do 
better on. It’s just something that I’m really sad, and I know 
that it upsets the Finance Minister. I can hear him chirping from 
his seat. It’s something that certainly is something that we have 
to be working towards and all that. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, we talk about lowering the 
corporate income tax rate. It’s something that members on this 
side of the House have talked about. It’s something that the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business has lobbied for 
year after year after year. Finally — it’s about time — the 
government is making some moves in that direction. 
 
But again, are we leading the way? No, we’re following leaders 
in other provinces. The small-business tax rate for example in 
Manitoba is already at 4 per cent. In Alberta — we don’t like to 
make the comparisons to Alberta or certainly the government 
doesn’t like to — they’re at 3 per cent. What did Saskatchewan 
companies have to face for the last 15 years from this 
government? A small-business tax rate on income between 300 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

and $400,000 of 17 per cent compared to 3 per cent in Alberta 
and 4 per cent in Manitoba. They’re six times, five times that 
what they pay in other provinces. 
 
It’s no wonder that people are leaving Saskatchewan, that we 
have population numbers that are very embarrassing for the 
government. They don’t like to talk about them. But we have to 
call a spade a spade, and we have to look at that, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And it goes back to being honest, and it goes 
back to being truthful, and it goes back to putting in your 
electoral platform what you intend to do. 
 
And I challenge members opposite to pull from their files their 
advertisements that they used in the last election. They talked 
about how could we possibly afford social programs, health 
care, education, at the same time as providing competitive tax 
rates for Saskatchewan people. They said it couldn’t be done, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. They campaigned on that. They 
advertised on that. They ran a commercial that basically said 
that. Not one word from them now about that, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s something that the 
Saskatchewan people will remember. They will remember what 
they heard from this government last time. You know they said 
we couldn’t afford it. All at the same time this government has 
never raised the basic allowance for people on social assistance 
in their whole term of office until last year, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. This government presides over the longest waiting 
lists in the country. 
 
And they said we couldn’t have competitive tax rates. Madam 
Deputy Speaker, the reason why? They said that the greedy 
corporations in Saskatchewan would benefit from this, and 
somehow it would just . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, 
greedy corporate hucksters is something we’ve heard and we’ve 
seen, we’ve actually seen in letters from this Premier to the 
business community. It’s something that Saskatchewan people 
. . . that won’t forget. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, let’s look at what Saskatchewan 
businesses would really want to do with the tax savings that 
they would receive if the government had decided to do this 
early in their term. 
 
Number one, invest in new equipment, machinery, and 
technology — that’s what they would do if they had 
competitive tax rates. What would that do, Madam Deputy 
Speaker? It would ensure more jobs were created in 
Saskatchewan. It would enable Saskatchewan young people to 
stay in this province. Instead we wouldn’t have the statistic that 
we have today of 18,000 people. 
 
What’s the second thing that they would do with tax savings, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if they were lucky enough to have 
them in this province under an NDP government for 15 years? 
Increase employee wages. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s 
exactly what the government says that needs to be done right 
now. If they took the advice of the chamber of commerce, of the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Chartered Accountants, if they didn’t 
ignore them for 15 years, they would have implemented those 
tax reductions at a time where we would see benefits from it 
now. I would suggest we wouldn’t have the out-migration that 

we do especially of our young people if they put their socialist 
ideology to the side and actually implemented this some 5, 10, 
15 years ago. 
 
What’s the third most important thing that they would do? 
Expand my business. That’s what Saskatchewan business 
owners said that they would do, expand their business. And 
what happens when you expand your business? You hire 
people. You give jobs to young people, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. And that leads to the next thing that they would do: 
hire more employees. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, this isn’t information that’s just 
pulled out of a hat somewhere. This is a survey of 
Saskatchewan residents across Saskatchewan conducted by the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business. They’re 
celebrating their 35 years in existence in this province. Some 
over 5,000 businesses are members of that organization, free to 
be members, free to contribute their money to it. And I took 
part in a ceremony on Friday where the Premier and the Leader 
of the Opposition spoke about the benefits that this group has. 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, I suggest that the members 
opposite listen very closely. 
 
Yes, Madam Deputy Speaker, another thing that companies 
would do — and I know this is particularly troubling for 
members opposite — that businesses would convert tax savings 
into profit. It’s a word that the members opposite don’t like to 
hear very much, but it’s something that’s very important in the 
business community in this province. You need some profits. 
You need to be able to take those profits and invest them back 
in your business or to take some as wages for individuals who 
have entrepreneurship at heart and have started those 
businesses. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and again this is a very important list 
on what Saskatchewan companies would do with the tax 
savings they would’ve received if this government chose to 
listen to these organizations. 
 
Invest in employee training, something else that’s very much 
needed. You know the government likes to pat themselves on 
the back in what they do, but having companies identify what 
training’s needed would be something new. 
 
And it goes on and on, you know. Increase in charitable 
donations, lower prices, invest in research and development — 
all things that could’ve been done if this government . . . Maybe 
if they got the polling information 15 years ago that they’ve got 
now, they would’ve acted sooner. I don’t know, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, but we’re happy in the sense that finally they’ve seen 
the light. It’s the conversion on the road to Damascus that the 
Leader of the Opposition talks about. Finally they’re seeing the 
way to do it. But I would say it’s too little too late. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, of course the NDP in their usual 
way, they couldn’t just implement the tax measures that make 
Saskatchewan more competitive. What did they have to do? 
They had to slide in a tax increase. Now of course the Finance 
minister thought he was being very cute by of course not giving 
the opposition any information about this at all, sending it over 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

after he began speaking in the House. And he thinks he slid one 
by us, that we didn’t catch this tax increase. Well wrong, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. People of Saskatchewan caught this 
tax increase. They know what this government is up to, and 
they will judge this government accordingly. 
 
They slid in a tax increase, a 2 per cent drop in the dividend tax 
credit. Two per cent drop in the dividend tax credit means it’s a 
tax increase. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, in my response I didn’t have a 
chance to even read the information because the minister of 
course was being cute in his usual way and not providing me 
with the information that he needs it. Maybe cute’s not the right 
word. Members say there might be another word to describe 
being cute, but I would say that he was trying to have some fun 
with me to make sure I didn’t have all the information 
necessary. 
 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, the fact remains that this 
government just couldn’t bring themselves to implement a 
growth agenda in this province. They couldn’t keep on track of 
providing fair and competitive tax measures. They had to go 
and increase taxes, increase of 2 per cent on taxable dividends 
received by private companies. Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s the 
same old thing — give with one hand; take away with the other. 
They’re giving a half per cent decrease on the small-business 
tax rate, which is the right thing to do, but they can’t . . . Maybe 
it’s just to satisfy the two elements in their caucus, but they 
have to put a tax increase in there as well. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, they’ve tried to slide through 
this tax increase, but it didn’t work. Saskatchewan people 
picked up on it. The opposition picked up on it, and they will 
have to answer for this. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s just like the PST [provincial sales 
tax] where they go and they talk about reducing taxes before an 
election, and what did they do after the last election? They 
hiked the PST. It’s the first thing they did, and I would suggest 
it’s the only financial measure that they did for the first three 
years of this administration — they hiked the PST. Well now 
here they are dropping the PST by 2 per cent. They didn’t know 
what they were going to do. They had a meeting on Monday 
night. On the back of a napkin, they decided. They had a little 
vote. And they decided, well 1 per cent would just put us back 
where we started; we’d better go to 2 per cent. 
 
That might be quite a napkin, Madam Deputy Speaker, because 
on the back of that is probably the building initiatives fund. Not 
the criteria because they haven’t come up with that, it’s just the 
building initiative fund, the mini slush fund. We’ve got the 
major slush fund, and we’ve got the mini slush fund, but they 
were both there, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I could go on and on about this Bill. It’s things that need 
to be looked at in Saskatchewan. And, you know, I was very 
disappointed to see that this amendment in the Bill closes off 
the now defunct child benefit program which has been 
superseded by the national child benefit program. Now this 
government goes on and on and on criticizing the federal 
government about the national child benefit program, but here 
they are closing off the Saskatchewan child benefit program. 

And I know a large part of it was wrapped into the national 
program, but this government’s sitting on $1 billion, $1 billion 
dollar slush fund. I would suggest they could have, they could 
have done something with this. They could have kept this alive. 
They could have provided money for it. You know members 
opposite would say, oh no, we can’t do it. We have to look to 
the federal government for leadership. We have to look to the 
federal government to do anything. Madam Deputy Speaker, I 
would suggest that the government could have done something, 
could have used a little bit of that billion dollar slush fund to do 
that. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re going to let this Bill go to 
committee because Saskatchewan people will decide. 
Saskatchewan people will have the opportunity to decide what 
to do. This Minister of Finance, he rose in this Assembly and he 
presented a budget. And members opposite, they clapped and 
they roared and they talked about how great this budget was. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan people, they didn’t have an opportunity 
to vote on that budget. Members opposite here did. We sure did. 
But members in Weyburn-Big Muddy had an opportunity to 
vote on that budget, and what did they do, Madam Deputy 
Speaker? Madam Deputy Speaker, the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy is sitting in this legislature on this House 
today, and I would say it’s directly responsible to his hard work 
and to the work of the Minister of Finance for presenting a 
budget that Saskatchewan people could not, could not believe 
in, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan people will get a 
chance to hold a referendum. It’ll be a referendum on these tax 
Bills that are coming forward. It may be a referendum on the 
next budget, the billion dollar budget that will be spent by this 
Finance minister. But I would suggest to you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it will be the same result. The same result that we saw 
in Weyburn-Big Muddy is the same result we will see across 
this province. The same result we will see in Regina South, in 
Moose Jaw North, in Moose Jaw Wakamow. We will see the 
same result in Athabasca, in Saskatchewan Rivers, in 
Greystone, Madam Deputy Speaker, in Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
In every constituency across this province, Saskatchewan 
people will have a chance . . . Yes, even in Saskatoon Silver 
Springs they will have a chance to vote on this budget, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And I would suggest that they better make 
room for Saskatchewan Party members on that side of the 
House. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 36, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I move that Bill No. 36, The Income Tax Amendment 
Act, 2006 be referred to the Standing Committee on the 
Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Finance that Bill No. 36, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 
2006 be referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Bill stands referred to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 32 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2006 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s 
certainly a . . . I’ve been looking forward to enter into the 
debate on this Bill. This is the Bill that this government finally 
and reluctantly put forward to deal with the long-standing issue 
of underfunding to pensions for former civil servants, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s something that a group of retired civil servants have asked 
for for many years, and the provisions in this Bill only partially 
fulfill what those retirees have asked for. It’s something that 
they’ve been working on for many, many years, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I know this was one of the first issues that was brought 
to my attention shortly after my election to this House back in 
1999. 
 
And I’ve had a constituent who has worked tirelessly on this 
issue and finally, through the co-operation of the members on 
this side of the House and the association of retirees, we were 
able to embarrass this government into taking action, Madam 
Deputy Speaker — action that they took reluctantly. But they 
were forced into doing . . . at least partially addressing this, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government and those people on that side of the House 
pretend to be the protectors of the working men and women of 
this province. They like to stand in their places and tell 
everyone that will listen to them that they are protecting the 
rights of the working men and women in this province. And 
particularly they pretend to be the protectors of the civil 
servants that provide the valuable services to the people of this 
province. 
 
But yet, Madam Deputy Speaker, when those civil servants 
retire, basically what they’ve done is they’ve ignored them. 
They’ve ignored them for many, many years and refused to 
address this issue. Now the Minister of Finance chirps from his 

seat that he did this great thing. But if it hadn’t have been for 
the fact that the retirees in the spring session filled these 
galleries and we asked embarrassing questions of him, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this issue would still wouldn’t be addressed, 
that any increases in their pensions would be at the whim of this 
government, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we should look at the record of this government and that 
Minister of Finance. In the press release the Minister of Finance 
proudly proclaims that this issue has been addressed in an ad 
hoc manner for us since 1965 and that there was only 8 years 
where there was no increase given to this group of retirees. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, for the information of those 
people that may be viewing these proceedings and for the 
members of this House, two of those years came in this century. 
In the year 2000 the retirees under this plan received a zero per 
cent increase in their pension. And also the same in 2004, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. They did receive a reasonable 
adjustment to their pensions in 2003. Just a mere coincidence 
that that would coincide with the last provincial election? And 
then what did those people get from this government after the 
2003 election? A big fat zero as far as an increase, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is the regard that these people have for those retired civil 
servants that have worked tirelessly for this province and the 
people of this province. It’s absolutely shameful, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, as to the way they have been treated. Yet they 
stand in their place and they proclaim to anyone who will listen, 
to the world, that we are the protectors of the working people of 
this province. It’s a great example of say one thing and do 
another, as we see it so often in this province from those 
members on that side of this House, from this NDP 
government, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, as I said, this issue and this Bill is the 
result of actions taken by the association of retirees that are 
under these defined benefit plans. They came to this House, 
they filled the galleries. My colleague, the Finance critic, the 
member from Saskatoon Silver Springs, asked the questions on 
their behalf. And then what happened after that? 
 
[16:00] 
 
And I believe the only reason why we have this Bill today is 
because those retirees, they surrounded the Premier and forced 
him to deal with the issue in front of the cameras, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And at that time the Premier agreed that he 
would meet with them at a future date along with his Finance 
minister. And I understand, Madam Deputy Speaker, that that 
meeting took place on July 13 with representatives of the 
retirees, the Finance minister, and I believe that meeting took 
place in the Premier’s office . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . or 
in the building. The Finance minister hollers that it was some 
other room in this building. 
 
But nonetheless I’m not sure . . . You know, as a result of this 
meeting, I really wonder whether the Finance minister was 
there. Because the Finance minister’s recollection of that 
meeting differs substantially from the other people’s 
recollection of what took place at that meeting. But nonetheless 
the meeting took place on July 13 and apparently the Finance 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

minister was there along with the Premier and, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I would like to quote from a letter that was sent to the 
Premier on November 14 by a Mr. Alf Zimmerman, president 
of the Saskatchewan Retirees Association. 
 
And before I quote from the letter I should just state that in this 
letter to the Premier Mr. Zimmerman points out that the 
indexing of the pension was not the only issue that needs to be 
dealt with. The Finance minister, he stands up and says, well we 
did much better than Alberta and we did much better than 
Manitoba and look how great we are. We’re looking after our 
people. But what he fails to tell everyone is that there are a 
number of other issues that need to be dealt with which the 
other provinces in fact have dealt with. Things like medical, 
dental, and health benefits. Addressing the lost benefits that 
took place since 1965, Madam Deputy Speaker. Improvements 
to spouses’ allowances and standardization of death benefits. 
None of those issues were addressed. The only thing that this 
minister did is said, well we’ll give you 70 per cent of CPI 
[consumer price index], we’ll do some . . . and we’re so much 
better than everyone else. 
 
Well in fact when you look at the total package of what this 
government is offering versus what’s been offered in the other 
provinces, Manitoba and Alberta, perhaps the indexing in 
Manitoba and Alberta is slightly lower but they have addressed 
these other issues. So when you put the whole package together 
the retirees in our two neighbouring provinces on either side are 
much better off than our people here in Saskatchewan, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the 
minister chirps from his seat. He should stand up and address 
these issues. He should meet with . . . once again with the 
retirees and address these issues. 
 
Getting back to the letter, Madam Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Zimmerman writes in his letter, he says — and now I’m quoting 
— he says: 
 

Mr. Premier, our recollection of discussions at that 
meeting include your direction to Finance Minister 
Thomson and his staff “to develop a package, satisfactory 
to both sides, and bring forward the necessary legislation 
to be dealt with at the Fall sitting of the Saskatchewan 
Legislature.” 
 

Mr. Zimmerman goes on to say, 
 

Mr. Premier, our interpretation of those [directions and 
your] discussions and your directive to Minister Thomson 
was that there would be some consultation respecting the 
resolution of our concerns and the required provisions of 
the enabling legislation. To this date your directive for 
consultation has not taken place. 
 

And this letter was written on November 14, the date that that 
minister, or shortly after the date this minister tabled the 
legislation. So the understanding of the representatives of the 
retirees at the July 13 meeting is that there would be 
consultation. 
 
Well the only consultation that was done was a telephone call 
from the Minister of Finance to Mr. Zimmerman the day that 
the legislation was announced. There was absolutely no 

consultation, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So here once again we have a government that . . . an NDP 
government that says we consult with the people. They consult 
with the people like they consulted with the people of northern 
Saskatchewan when they introduced their new fire management 
strategies. There was no consultation. 
 
Particularly, that minister failed to consult at the direction of his 
Premier. I wonder how that’s working over there, Madam 
Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m guessing that 
there are more problems behind the scenes than we see in 
public, Madam Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker. We keep changing 
slots here. Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said earlier, we have a 
government here that pretends that they’re the protectors of the 
working men and women of this province, particularly the civil 
servants. If someone should dare make a remark that may 
reflect poorly or be perceived to reflect poorly on the working 
men and women, they jump to their feet and say, that’s not 
correct. You can’t do that. 
 
Yet what do these people do? Once they’re done . . . Once the 
public servants have provided their service to the province of 
this . . to the people of this province, they say, we don’t really 
need you any more so just go away. We’ll give you some 
money, but we’re not going to deal with the issues and force 
them to take action like filling the galleries and corralling the 
Premier in the rotunda before we get some action on this Bill, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we need . . . Because that 
government didn’t consult with the various groups that are 
affected by this legislation, we certainly need to do that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And we will be taking our time to do that. So, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move now that we adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Last Mountain-Touchwood has moved adjournment of debate 
on Bill No. 32, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 9 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well it’s a 
pleasure to stand today and speak to Bill No. 9, the Human 
Rights Code amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, as the minister 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

outlined, this Bill deals with the removal of mandatory 
retirement exemptions in the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Code. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very interesting the timing of 
this, of this Bill. I go back to a time in 2004, the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, the member from Swift Current, asked the 
official opposition, the Saskatchewan Party — both caucus 
members and the members of the party — to go out, hold public 
meetings, have private meetings, go out to the people of 
Saskatchewan and ask for policy ideas for the good of the 
province, for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I was at one of these 
public policy meetings that was held in North Battleford. And 
we were sitting there and there must have been 100, 150 people 
in the room. And there’s a gentleman, stood up and said he was 
60 . . . he had turned 65 years old and he was working for Crop 
Insurance, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, and he was forced to 
retire from the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. He liked the job, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. He enjoyed it. That was something that he 
really wanted to continue to do but he had to retire from that 
job. Mr. Speaker, it was . . . at that meeting it was obvious that 
this is something that had to change for the good of the 
province, for the good of the people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the party took this information 
incorporated in Saskatchewan Party policy . . . and I believe it’s 
one of the 100 ideas that was put forward in conjunction with 
the centennial of the province as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
This gentleman’s idea went to the party policy convention, was 
then adopted by the party, and is part of Saskatchewan Party 
policy. 
 
And we see today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the NDP 
government has stolen another very good idea from the 
Saskatchewan Party. And it’s interesting that the NDP 
government have been doing this consistently for quite some 
time, taking good ideas from the Saskatchewan Party, 
incorporate into their Bills and laws that are, that are being 
introduced. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this gentleman, you know, 
really speaks to why this law needs to be changed. And 
certainly Saskatchewan Party, naturally we support it because it 
was our idea to begin with. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 2004, and when this gentleman 
stood up in this policy meeting in North Battleford, we have 
seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a tremendous shortage of labour in 
the province. With the oil boom and the economic activity 
going on in Alberta, it’s drawn many young people from 
Saskatchewan to work in Alberta and it’s left a shortage of 
labour in Saskatchewan. And this is certainly one of the 
methods that will be important into filling that gap in the labour 
shortage in Saskatchewan. 
 
Of course not everyone that’s turned 65 may want to work, but 
it’s their option. It’s something that’ll be their decision. As we 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in the private sector have 
never had any restrictions on that. If you own your own 
business you can work as long as you want. But within the 
labour laws of Saskatchewan, of course until this Bill is passed, 
people that turn 65 have to retire. 
 

As we know, there’s been a considerable change in the quality 
of life and the life expectancy of people in the western world. 
And that’s no different in Canada and in Saskatchewan. Now 65 
years old is not old at all. Forty, fifty years ago it certainly was. 
But we see now that people that are in their 60s and their 70s 
are able and willing to work at their jobs, at the profession that 
they’ve been working at. And they enjoy doing that. And they 
will be allowed now, once this Bill is enacted, to continue to 
work on into the workforce after they’re 65. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we . . . As I just mentioned, people are 
living longer. They’re not only living longer but they are living 
healthier longer as well. So this is certainly a win-win situation 
for the people of Saskatchewan, for the economy of 
Saskatchewan in this time of labour shortages. And as we know 
now because people are living longer, there’s also an added 
demand on pensions, both the Canada Pension and private 
pensions, Saskatchewan Pension Plan. So people knowing that 
they are going to live, now it’s quite possible that what . . . not 
only possible. People are living now not only into their 80s and 
90s and over 100, so their pensions are going to have to be in 
place in order to address their financial needs once they do go 
into retirement years, Mr. Speaker. So certainly it is important 
that people are allowed to work longer and earn more income 
later in life. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we know, a number of people, 
mainly women in the past, have stayed home out of the 
workforce as they raised their children. And so that’s kept them 
out of the workforce and of course also not paying into a 
pension plan like Canada Pension or the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan or private pension plans, because they were at home 
raising the children. So this allows those people to work longer 
to put in more years and put in more money into pension plans 
so that they can live good, comfortable lives in their retirement 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we also know that immigrants that come to this country 
come at various ages, so they also have the ability to earn 
money longer so they can have a more comfortable life in their 
retirement years as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now this Bill, as I understand it, will change and change the 
laws dealing with pensions, the collective agreements, and of 
course directly to the Human Rights Code. Now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there is some outstanding issues, I understand. As it 
said in the news release, the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission began recommending elimination of the restrictive 
definition of age 10 years ago. 
 
And I understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is a court case 
under way and that court case will have to be dealt with before 
this comes into force, I understand, and so certainly we don’t 
want anything to hold this up. As it says in the news release: 
 

“As the amendments will not come into force until one 
year after Royal Assent, the Commission will await the 
decision of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal in 
the mandatory retirement case of Louise Carlson versus 
[the] Saskatoon Public Library Board and the Canadian 
Union of Public Employees for guidance on protections 
against age discrimination in the intervening period,” Ms. 
Scott added. 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

So that’s interesting to keep note of that as well. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other aspect of allowing people to work after 
they’re 65 is really a . . . There needs to be some kind of a 
safety mechanism, if you like, to not have people that are 
working that may not be up to the job. And I understand in this 
Bill that there is some requirements concerning certain 
industries like construction and mining, oil field and so on that 
there is a process that will look into that type of situation. 
 
And so we certainly don’t want people to be put in a situation 
where they’re a danger to themselves and a danger to other 
employees at the work because of any physical or mental 
concerns that they may have. And they may not realize that they 
have these. I mean that’s the fact of life, that as we have certain 
disabilities through illness or sickness and the aging process, 
people are just not maybe just as quick on the job or on their 
feet as they once were. And so there has to be certainly this 
process in place so that the safety of workers and the 
individuals themselves are looked after in those particular 
industries. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Human Rights Commission applauds 
the proposed amendments to end mandatory retirement. And as 
we know, other provinces have done this. I believe British 
Columbia has already brought in this law. So it’s not something 
new to the province. So hopefully any concerns that may have 
developed in British Columbia . . . There may have been 
problems and hopefully they’ve been addressed there. So 
hopefully this government has been in contact with British 
Columbia and seen if there’s any problems that may develop 
that can be looked after before this law is brought into place. 
 
It’s interesting. Just as an example, my father, he’s going to be 
turning 80 years old this spring. And certainly he never did 
intend on retiring. And even though he’s grown older and he’s 
slowing up somewhat, he’s still actively involved in the cattle 
business. And he goes out and he checks the cattle and he 
delivers salt to the cattle and also cuts ice in the dugouts. 
 
So it’s certainly something people that have been doing, 
especially in the agriculture sector have been doing as long as 
they’re able to because it’s a way of life. And certainly it’s . . . I 
believe, and I think there’s a lot of evidence to suggest people 
that are growing older, the more active they remain, the 
healthier they’ll be, the happier they’ll be, and more productive 
they will be. And so I certainly think that situation applies to 
people that are working in other jobs in the economy. If they 
have a need to get up every morning and go to a job, even if it’s 
a part-time job — it doesn’t have to still remain a full-time job 
that they once had — but come in on a part-time basis to work 
at jobs. And I believe that our citizens of the province will be 
happier and healthier and live even longer, healthier years into 
the future. 
 
So certainly in the Saskatchewan Party, as I mentioned, we 
certainly believe that this is a Bill that should be introduced. It’s 
been part of our Saskatchewan Party policy that came out of our 
public policy meetings that we held. This gentleman in North 
Battleford was the one that was his idea that he brought 
forward. We certainly picked up on that and believe in this Bill, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I just wanted to go back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the words that 
the minister stated in Hansard and he said that and I quote, 
“This change also responds to the concerns of those who have 
taken time . . . [off] work to raise their children,” as I 
mentioned, and which have had “fewer years in the workforce 
and . . . [of course] less opportunity to accrue pension . . . ”. 

 
I think that’s very important that that is an important aspect of 
this Bill that we feel that is important so that people have that 
opportunity to work longer in the workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the Saskatchewan Party certainly 
supports this Bill and I know other members of the 
Saskatchewan Party want to speak to this Bill and so I at this 
time would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Biggar has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 9. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is agreed, that’s 
carried. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 3 — The Fuel 
Tax Accountability Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 
a very important Bill. Although I have to say that the 
government bringing forward a piece of legislation that 
mandates taxes be spent on the actual thing they’re collected for 
is a surprise to me. 
 
After 15 years in this Assembly, this is the first time this 
government has ever mandated that the taxes they collect 
actually get spent on the purpose they collected them for. So I 
think this is actually a very positive step forward that the 
Minister of Finance would finally recognize that taxes collected 
for a purpose be spent on that purpose. And this tax deals with 
the fuel tax that is collected from the people of Saskatchewan, 
and now this NDP government is proposing that that fuel tax 
actually be spent on the highways. 
 
What a novel idea. What a novel idea. It’s such a good idea, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party had it in its 
platform previously, and that the minister is recognizing again 
another good Saskatchewan Party idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — But after 15 years of this government 
collecting the fuel taxes that I’ve been in this House . . . the 15 
years that I’ve been in this House, and the government 
collecting that fuel tax, they have never yet managed to spend 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

the amount that they have collected on the roads, the byways, 
and the highways of this province. Haven’t happened yet. 
 
So I’m wondering when the minister presents this Bill, when 
the government presents this Bill, when the Premier presents 
this Bill, is he somehow questioning the commitment of the 
Minister of Highways in actually spending the money collected 
on the highways and roads that they have to put it in 
legislation? You know, the government has always said, we are 
putting money into the highways; we are spending the proper 
amount. And yet now with this piece of legislation, they’re 
saying you will spend all the money collected from the fuel 
taxes on the highways. 
 
I even look at this year’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
government is proposing to spend $344 million on highways 
and infrastructure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — That’s a significant amount of money. 
Unfortunately even in 2006-2007 budget, it doesn’t match what 
the government was collecting. They were proposing to collect 
$371 million and spend 344 million. But that’s a little short, 
short about $30 million. Now I’m sure the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . That’s right. About the amount of money that 
the current Minister of Highways misplaced when he was 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] minister, Mr. Speaker. He says he keeps it in a shoe 
box. It must be some shoe that’s all I can say. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister is spending $344 million out 
of the 371 they collect in fuel taxes. But what he fails to 
mention in talking about this is the approximately 80 to $85 
million that the federal government sends Saskatchewan for 
highways and infrastructure, and that’s included in that 344 
million. So they’re taking credit for the federal expenditures on 
highway and infrastructure in this province. 
 
Now I should say that while the NDP government is under 
spending the money they collect on highways and roads in this 
province, the federal government is doing exactly the same 
thing. Yes,` they are even worse. They collect . . . As a 
percentage they put even less in than the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we could get both the NDP government 
and the federal government to spend their entire amount of 
money collected for fuel taxes, maybe in 10 to 15 years we 
could finally get the highways back into the condition they were 
prior to this NDP government. 
 
There is also some more money that this government collects, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from vehicles that the minister has failed 
to put into this piece of legislation. And that’s the motor vehicle 
fees that are collected through SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] on your licence. And the minister says, and why 
would we put that money in? Because that money is collected 
from motor vehicles just like the fuel tax is. They are both 
utilized in the same mode of transportation so it would be 
appropriate to put both of those amounts of money into 
highways, roads, and byways, both rural and urban. 
 
Now I can see that the minister has a very quizzical look on his 

face because he has never considered all of the money that has 
come. Yes, and he is busy . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 
well figuring perhaps. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to 
describe his total actions but he is still quizzical about where 
this money is. And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
people of Saskatchewan are just as quizzical about where this 
money is, what it’s being spent on, and why it isn’t being spent 
on highways. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this government in passing this 
legislation that all of the money from fuel taxes should be spent 
on highways and roads is a good thing, and I think it’s time this 
government was held accountable for not having done so in the 
past. 
 
And I look forward to seeing next spring’s budget to see 
whether or not the minister is including all of Saskatchewan’s 
fuel tax, giving credit to the government, the federal 
government for the portion they pass on to Saskatchewan. So 
you’ll have that total. So now we’re looking at . . . Let’s take 
the ’06 numbers. We would end up with approximately $450 
million to be spent on highways and infrastructure. That will 
start to make a small dent in repairing the damage caused by 
this government to our roads. 
 
Perhaps we will cease to see roads, highways like No. 8. Instead 
of being repaired, this government’s been turning them back to 
gravel. This was one of the original highways in Saskatchewan. 
You can tell by the number. No. 8, it’s one of the first ones. 
And this government is turning it back to gravel, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a true shame that they’re allowing our heritage to be so 
destroyed. 
 
And how is this happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why are 
highways like No. 8 in such terrible shape? No. 9 is starting to 
go to pieces. No. 18, No. 13, No. 47 and 48 in my area, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are in terrible shape, not to mention those 
higher number roads like 318 and 361. Those, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are . . . You can’t even call them numbered highways. 
Numbered goat trails perhaps, but not numbered highways. 
 
And the fact is the current Minister of Finance came down into 
our constituency here a while back and drove down No. 8 
Highway . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You see, he says a bad 
highway it is, and ripped his muffler off. He tells me the other 
day that he’s no longer driving that car — he’s now driving a 
car that the Premier once drove — so I’m not sure what kind of 
shape it’s in. 
 
But I would certainly invite the Minister of Finance and the 
Minister of Highways to take a drive down No. 47, cross on No. 
48, down No. 8, so they can get an appreciation of the highways 
in southeast Saskatchewan. And once he gets down on No. 8, 
over the bad stretch there, he can head west to come back to 
Regina on 361. And I would suspect that when he gets done that 
tour, his next visit with his automobile or van — whatever he 
may be driving — will be to the repair shop, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
One of the areas that this government collects a significant 
amount of tax on is aviation fuel. They collect it from every 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

person, every business that uses an aircraft in this province, 
including the major airports in Regina and Saskatoon. And yet 
when I look in the highways budget to where they’re allocating 
funds, only one and a half million dollars is being allocated 
back to aviation and there is a much greater amount of money 
collected, taxes on fuel, than that relatively insignificant 
amount. And I suspect and I don’t know this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I’m sure that when we get the opportunity in 
committee to question the minister on this, we can find out how 
much money and where it’s being spent on aviation. 
 
I know that in my own constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the community of Carlyle, they have a reasonably good airport. 
They had a reasonably good airport that was built in the late 
1970s, early 1980s in large part with federal dollars. And that 
airport has now deteriorated significantly and unfortunately 
they have been following the Minister of Highways’ example 
and have turned a portion of that hard surface into gravel which, 
if you know anything about propeller-driven airplanes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, gravel and propellers don’t mix well. So it’s 
important. If you’re going to have a dirt strip of some kind, 
you’re better off with grass than you are with gravel. And so 
that’s an area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where this government 
should be committing some of its aviation fuel tax dollars in 
providing and repairing airports and runways across this 
province. 
 
I know that northern Saskatchewan needs airports and some of 
the money I am sure has been spent in that area. But southern 
Saskatchewan, the larger communities out in the rural areas 
need that support as well and that has been very, very sadly 
lacking from this government for decades, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a lot of money here that we’re 
talking about and there is a need for this government to be 
appropriating it in the proper manner. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that this government 
is doing is it’s allowing for a report to be presented on how the 
government is making out when it comes to the amount of 
money being spent on highways and infrastructure versus the 
amount of money that they’ve actually collected through the 
Department of Finance. Well now a report is very interesting, 
but what’s the purpose of the report? The Bill says that the 
government is to spend all of the money collected for fuel taxes 
on highways and infrastructure, but there doesn’t seem to be 
any penalty in there if they fail to do so. So what is the 
deviation here that the report is going to be looking at? If they 
collect $400 million in fuel taxes and spend $200 million, and a 
year and a half later they put out a report that they only spent 
200 versus 400, what difference does it make? 
 
So can the government then save up their money over a 
four-year period? As when Roy Romanow was the premier, 
they were going to have a balanced budget over four years. 
Well is that going to be the situation in this case where the 
government is going to say, oh no, we’re going to put all the 
money into highways that we collect, but we’re going to do it 
over four years. And that fourth year, just before the election, 
we’re going to dump all the money into the budget. 
 
It’s not going to get the highways fixed properly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if that’s the kind of an attitude that this government 
. . . And we’ve seen it happen in too many other areas, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s why I am suspicious of this government’s 
motives and methods of operation. 
 
The other thing the government talks about is a plan, that they 
will present a plan. Well from what I can read in here, their plan 
is for the next fiscal year — a one-year plan. Well you lay that 
out in the budget. I suppose that’s the extent that this 
government is now capable of planning ahead because they lack 
the confidence to move ahead quickly because they don’t 
believe they’re actually going to be the government next time 
around. 
 
If they believed that they were actually going to be the 
government they would be presenting more than a one-year 
plan. They would be looking at a plan say, for four to five years 
on road construction. It would be a rolling plan. So as this year 
is completed and dropped off, four or five years later you would 
add that one on, and so people would be able to think and plan. 
And I know it’s difficult for the Finance minister to 
comprehend a longer-term plan than one year because his career 
may not last that length of time. But I would encourage him to 
do so, to give that kind of a consideration. 
 
You know so, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot that can be done with 
the monies that are being collected from the people of 
Saskatchewan. There is a lot that can be done with the money 
that is being collected from the fuel tax by the federal 
government. Together those could go a long ways to fixing the 
highways, the roads, the urban infrastructure in this province, 
including airports across Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have to wonder though how much thought and consultation 
has gone into this process by the minister. Have they given 
consideration? Have they talked with the regional planning 
boards? 
 
Now those groups across Saskatchewan do have a plan. They 
have an understanding of which roads, which highways, which 
streets need to have that kind of a repair. I don’t know that this 
government is actually communicating with those people, or if 
they do — if there is some communication — if they actually 
listen to the message that is being received. Because if they did, 
if they did listen, then highways like No. 8 would actually get 
repaired rather than simply turned into gravel. 
 
When I look at the economic activity that is taking place 
throughout the southeast corner of the province, the huge 
amounts of revenues that are being generated because of the oil 
and gas activity, and that . . . some of that money cannot be 
returned. They keep that infrastructure in place. I can only 
conclude that this Finance minister, this Minister of Highways, 
this Premier are not listening. Because if they were listening 
they would understand that you simply can’t allow your 
infrastructure to be destroyed and continue to produce in the 
same manner from the economic resources in that area. It 
inhibits growth. It inhibits production. It inhibits the economic 
activity that is taking place. And this government simply 
chooses to ignore the realities of that situation. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the idea of committing the fuel taxes 
in its entirety to highways and infrastructure is a good idea. We 
proposed it a significant time ago. I’m amazed, as I said at the 
beginning, that this government has finally realized that. I 



November 22, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

question its sincerity in doing so. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
think it needs to as well consult on the plan to have a highway 
infrastructure maintenance and construction program in place. 
 
And it needs to talk to aviation in this province to determine 
what happens with the monies that are collected off the aviation 
fuel tax, as well as the PST on aviation equipment, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in this province. And that needs to be returned to 
aviation as well. So at this time I would like to move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — The hon. member for 
Cannington has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 3, 
The Fuel Tax Accountability Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 21 — The Evidence 
Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi sur la 
preuve be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to speak to Bill No. 21, The Evidence Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this, as the minister has stated, gives people and I 
assume institutions the ability to make an apology, an 
admission of guilt without any legal repercussions. And I 
understand that it would make us the second province behind 
British Columbia which also removed apologies from being 
admission of guilt. 
 
This is an interesting Bill. Throughout history any time a person 
or an institute admitted guilt, it obviously led to possible legal 
implications. Depending on the type of situation or crime or bad 
behaviour or whatever, an admission of guilt would 
automatically be incorporated into a legal process. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our world, in our lives, 
admission of guilt is very, I think, very important. It’s not only 
important to the person or the group that has been done wrong 
by an individual or an institution, but I think it’s very important 
that the person admitting guilt . . . I believe it’s very important 
to the person that admits guilt as kind of a cleansing process, 
cleansing of the soul. I believe we all know that. Maybe not all 
of us will admit to that. But I think that’s something that hasn’t 
been done, certainly in the realm of government and 
institutions. In the past it’s been done, but it hasn’t come easily. 
 
And whenever an individual speaking on behalf of a 
corporation or a government or an individual admits to doing 
something wrong, I believe it’s only after a long time and in 
many cases being basically forced into that situation before they 
come to that decision and admit guilt. I certainly feel in our 
Western world and our Christian heritage that admitting one’s 

fault is important, is certainly something that, as I had said, is 
cleansing. And as the minister said in his speech in the first 
reading that that’s an important aspect. 
 
Now you might have to think . . . We’ll have to debate whether 
the admission of guilt in every instance should not bring legal 
complications or legal aspects to the admission. There are some 
very serious things that happen in this world — both done by 
individuals and by corporations or identities or governments or 
agencies — and one has to maybe rethink that or consider 
whether this should apply to every circumstance. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we only need to look at some 
admissions of guilt that have happened in this legislature. The 
Minister of Highways had to apologize for misrepresenting 
some facts to do with the whole SPUDCO affair. It took him six 
years to do it. And I think it’s unfortunate that he felt and the 
NDP government felt that they couldn’t come clean much 
earlier. They only came clean after they lost $36 million. And 
when it all came to light and it was out in the public, then they 
felt necessary that there’s an apology needed to be made and a 
recognition of something that was done wrong. 
 
We have a situation going on right now with the Oyate Safe 
House. There’s been no apology. I certainly think that it won’t 
be long till the government will be apologizing for its handling 
of the safe house. 
 
We have evidence. It’s duly reported in the media about the 
circumstances around that safe house, how children who are 
disadvantaged and at risk were put in that safe house to be safe, 
and unfortunately they weren’t safe. And we have yet to see this 
government apologize for its actions, how they really left these 
young people at risk. We hear about reports, a news report of, I 
believe it was, a young lady that was beat quite badly, broken 
bones in her face and ribs. And this took place in a so-called 
safe house. This is a situation where the government is in 
charge. As the member has said, that really the government is 
the parent in charge of these young people. 
 
[16:45] 
 
We also hear reports of these young people . . . The reason why 
they’re in this safe house or they need protection is because 
they’re working the streets as child prostitutes. There’s 
obviously people, pimps, that are using them, and they need a 
place to get away from these people so that they’re safe. And 
we hear reports that these people, that these young children 
were not safe. They were being taken out of the so-called safe 
house. And this is just an example, Mr. Speaker. I think that the 
government . . . [inaudible] . . . the minister, the member from 
Athabasca, took the high road initially and say yes, you know 
there’s a problem. We fell short. We didn’t look after these 
young people and we apologize. 
 
I think this issue would have gone away much earlier. We 
would have been much more co-operative atmosphere in the 
legislature and in the province to dealing with . . . getting to the 
point about dealing with that situation at the Oyate Safe House 
instead of stonewalling and having the Children’s Advocate and 
the Ombudsman coming down and pointing out the errors of the 
government and forcing them into actions that otherwise they 
wouldn’t take. 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2006 

If an individual or in this case the government and the minister 
had come clean earlier, I believe that for the good of the 
children that need that safe haven that things would have been 
turned around and changed earlier for the good of those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’d mentioned the whole SPUDCO fiasco was 
another situation where if the government had, had really 
screwed up its courage and admitted its mistakes earlier, it not 
only would have been a cleansing process . . . But people that 
lost their livelihood, and it happened to be in this situation two 
gentlemen and their families who lost everything they own 
because of the whole SPUDCO affair. These people lost all 
their savings. They lost their homes. They and their spouses had 
to go out and get new jobs and start from scratch because of the 
actions of the minister and of this government which . . . Well 
we won’t go through the whole SPUDCO affair again today, 
but it certainly was a situation where people trusted in the 
government, believed in the government, and were let down by 
this government. 
 
It’s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, in our Western world, in our 
Christian society, the church that I attend, the admission of guilt 
— confession — is very important. In the church I go to, which 
is the Roman Catholic Church, there’s a general public 
confession every time you go to church. None of us are perfect. 
Everyone makes mistakes, and it’s recognized when you go to 
church that you need to confess your sins in a general way. And 
I think that’s important again for the cleansing of the soul and 
to renew yourself and try to do the right thing in all aspects of 
your life. 
 
And if you fail or you falter — which we all do at some time in 
our life — that this provision of confession, omission of guilt is 
there in order to help us move ahead in our day-to-day lives. 
And it’s interesting, in the Roman Catholic faith there’s the 
public confession that is done. There is also a private confession 
that can take place just between yourself and the priest. And 
again that is a more private, personal way of admitting guilt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very interesting Bill, and I think we’re 
going to have to speak to other groups and individuals how they 
feel about this Bill and do more research and discuss this 
further, the implications of admission of guilt. And not being 
able to be sued or used as evidence in the court of law is 
something that we just need to do more work on and get our 
minds around and see how that works out. So at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Biggar 
that debate on second reading on Bill No. 21 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Members of the Assembly, I’m advised that His Honour is here 
for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 16:53 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated please. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed a Bill which, in the 
name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour and to which 
Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bill is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 4 - The Education Amendment Act, 2006 (2)/Loi de 

2006 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
(no 2) 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this Bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:54.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10:00 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:56.] 
 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................525 
  Eagles .........................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Allchurch ...................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................526 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................527 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................527 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................527 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................527 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................527 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................527 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................527 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................528 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................528 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................528 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................528 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Duncan .......................................................................................................................................................................................529 
  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................537 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................537 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Recognizing the Need for Affordable Housing 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................529 
 True Spirit of Giving 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................529 
 Melfort Wishmaker Parade 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 Office of the Treaty Commissioner Recognized for Excellence in Education 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 Cadets Earn Duke of Edinburgh’s Award 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................530 
 Saskatchewan’s Economy 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................531 
 Foam Lake’s Fundraising Achievements 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................531 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Combatting Population Decline 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................531 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................532 
 Wait Times for Cancer Care 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................533 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................533 
 Government Funding for Community Facilities 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................534 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................535 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 New Commemorative Naming Program for Geographic Features 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................536 



 

  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................537 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk ...................................................................................................................................................................................537 
  The Speaker...............................................................................................................................................................................537 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 37 — The Court of Appeal Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi de 2000 sur la Cour d’appel 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................538 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................538 
 Bill No. 38 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................538 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................538 
 Bill No. 39 — The Tobacco Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act 
  Addley ........................................................................................................................................................................................539 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................539 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 34 — The Labour Market Commission Act 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................540 
  Atkinson (referral to committee) .............................................................................................................................................541 
 Bill No. 35 — The Infrastructure Fund Act 
  Huyghebaert ..............................................................................................................................................................................542 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................543 
 Bill No. 36 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2006 (No. 2) 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................546 
  Thomson (referral to committee).............................................................................................................................................549 
 Bill No. 32 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................549 
 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2006 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................550 
 Bill No. 3 — The Fuel Tax Accountability Act 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................552 
 Bill No. 21 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi sur la preuve 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................555 
ROYAL ASSENT .............................................................................................................................................................................556 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. Warren McCall 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 

 
Hon. John Nilson 

Minister of Environment 
Minister Responsible for the Office of 

Energy Conservation 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 

Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 


