






















































Hansard: March 20, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 23A  MONDAY, MARCH 20, 2006, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 673 
 March 20, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of constituents, 
especially those living along Highway 32 from the community 
of Cabri through to Leader. The prayer of this petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these two pages of petitions are signed by 
individuals from the communities of Mendham, Leader, Prelate, 
Sceptre, and Eatonia. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
pages of petitions of citizens concerned about the safety of 
Highway No. 5. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Middle Lake, St. 
Gregor, Humboldt, Annaheim, Bruno, Lake Lenore, and Pilger. 
I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present another petition from constituents opposed to possible 
reduction of health care services in Biggar. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, and ambulance services maintain at 
the very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Kinley and Perdue. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from parents in the Saskatoon 
Silver Springs constituency regarding a much needed 
elementary school in the Arbor Creek area of Saskatoon. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to implement an allocation of 
financial resources in this year’s budget to build an 
elementary school in Arbor Creek. 

 
The petitioners today live on Brunst Crescent, Peters Cove, and 
Adaskin Cove in northeast Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the huge surplus that this 
government’s sitting on. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure a portion of the province’s 
windfall oil revenue be used to reduce the provincial gas 
tax. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Davidson. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today regarding the 
conditions of Highway No. 5 and would like to present a 
petition regarding Highway No. 5. I’ll read the prayer for relief, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to upgrade and widen Highway No. 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed the citizens from Humboldt, 
Muenster, Lanigan, and Prud’homme. I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
hereby present a petition for a private Bill on behalf of the 
petitioners from the Orange Benevolent Society of 
Saskatchewan in the province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hereby present a 
petition for a private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Inc. in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as addendums to previously tabled petitions being 
sessional papers nos. 5, 7, 8, 27, 64, and 67. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today is International Francophone Day, a time to 
celebrate French culture, history, and language. 
 
In recognition of this day there are several guests who are 
attending the session today and they are seated in the west 
gallery. It is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly the following individuals. And I 
would ask them to stand as their names are called out, and after 
which I would hope that the members would join me in 
recognizing their presence. 
 
First from the Assemblée communautaire fransaskoise: Hélène 
Bourget, Geneviève Lapierre, Isabelle Boucher, Jérémy Kenzle, 
Brinda Ramlochun, Bassel Abouchakra, Siriki Diabagaté. From 
the language institute at the University of Regina: Michel 
Laviolette, Lorraine Laliberté, Abdoulaye Yoh. From the 
Direction de l’éducation française et des langues: Simone 
Gareau, Monsieur Mario Rainville, Monsieur Paul Heppelle. 
From the Éditions de la nouvelle plume, Françoise Sigur 
Cloutier. From the Conseil de la Coopération de la 
Saskatchewan: Robert Revet, Sylvian Lejeune. From the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police, Saskatchewan depot, Marie 
Paterson. From the Division scolaire francophone no. 310, 
Gilles Groleau. And from the Office of French Language 
Co-ordination, France Roussel. 
 
I’d ask all members to help me in welcoming these guests and 
in recognizing International Francophone Day. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with 
our colleague on the other side of the House we would like to 
welcome the people from Francophonie ici aujourd’hui. It’s our 
pleasure to welcome them to the Assembly on behalf of the 
official opposition. And please join me in welcoming them 
again. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I introduce two people that 
are sitting in your gallery that probably don’t need too much of 
an introduction to most members of the House. 
 
I would like members to give a welcome to Lyle Vinish, who is 
the general secretary of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
and also to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh God. Sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, I forgot my switch of portfolio. Can we start again, 
please and thank you? Lyle Vinish, general secretary of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. Is that better? 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I don’t know who’s redder, Mr. Speaker, 
myself or Mr. Vinish. Also, also please . . . Okay, I’ll try and 
. . . A bit of decorum, please. And also welcome Heather 
Vermeersch, who is the president of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation and has been since July 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a meeting earlier with these two 
representatives of the Teachers’ Federation and they are going 
to hopefully be able to stay with us this afternoon for a second 
reading of the Bill, The Teachers’ Federation Act, which is of 
great interest to them. They have put a great deal of work into it 
and I truly do appreciate them being here this afternoon. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to join the minister with at least some of her remarks 
and welcome the two guests from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation to their gallery this afternoon. 
 
I as well had the pleasure of meeting with them briefly this 
morning to discuss some of the issues and challenges facing the 
teaching profession. It’s always good to meet outstanding 
leaders of the profession. So welcome here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly four beautiful young women sitting in your gallery in 
the front row. And perhaps they can stand as I call their names. 
 
We have Kristen Schneider, who is with the O’Neill junior 
girls’ curling team, O’Neill High School, Archbishop O’Neill. 
The high school is located here in Regina. And we have 
Melanie Kuzyk and Tiffany Morin, unfortunately no relation, 
and Lynea Davidowich. They are accompanied by their parents, 
Sheila Schneider — perhaps Sheila could stand as well — 
Karen Kuzyk, Sherry Morin and her daughter Sheridan Morin, 
as well as her friend, Morgan Morin, who happens to be my 
daughter. 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

So I’d like to welcome them to the Assembly today and thank 
them for their wonderful efforts in representing their high 
school, their city, as well as their province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just prior to my 
introduction, I want to join with the hon. member in welcoming 
the young curlers and their parents to their Legislative 
Assembly as well. 
 
In your gallery we are joined by a distinguished group of 
visitors today, Mr. Speaker. And to you and through you to 
members, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce three grandchildren 
of the former premier, Jimmy Gardiner, who have come here 
today. And I’ll maybe get them to stand or wave as I read their 
names. Mike Gardiner, grandson of former Premier Jimmy 
Gardiner, is here as well as granddaughter, Mary Morley, and 
another grandson, Earl Gardiner. We’re also joined by cousins 
of the late former premier. Vic and Peggy Cole are here as well 
as Gordon Gardiner, all cousins to the former premier and the 
former national minister of Agriculture. 
 
I wonder if all members of the Assembly will join with me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cannington. 
 

Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is the Journée internationale de la Francophonie 
[International Day of the Francophonie]. It is a day to celebrate 
French language worldwide. Of course as members know, it is 
also Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie, a 16-day national 
celebration of French culture. This has been marked here in the 
legislature with the Fransaskois flag that hangs in front of our 
building. 
 
French culture and language have helped shape Saskatchewan 
into what it is now. There are over 18,000 French-speaking 
Saskatchewan citizens, and Saskatchewan’s francophones, les 
Fransaskois, have played an active role in Saskatchewan’s 
economy and social development even before we were 
officially a province. The French place names that dot 
Saskatchewan bear witness to the contribution of French 
Canadians who were among the very first pioneers to arrive in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the years, Fransaskois have worked hard to ensure the 
vitality of their language and heritage. All across Saskatchewan 
and Canada, there will be celebrations of the French language 
and culture including art displays, theatre, and dance. 
 
Members on this side of the House would like to join with 

Saskatchewan’s francophones in celebrating their language and 
culture. 
 
Vive la langue et culture françaises. [Long live the French 
language and culture.] Merci, Monsieur le Président. [Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very, Mr. Speaker. March 10 to 26 
has officially been proclaimed Les Rendez-vous de la 
Francophonie in Saskatchewan by the Minister of Government 
Relations. La Francophonie brings together over 54 countries 
and governments who share and prize the French language. 
Today, March 20, is the International Day of the Francophonie, 
a day which is at the heart of Les Rendez-vous festivities to 
celebrate French language and francophone culture and to 
recognize the many achievements of our country’s 
francophones and francophone communities. 
 
Monsieur le Président, les semaines du dix au vingt-six mars 
ont été proclamées officiellement Les Rendez-vous de la 
Francophonie en Saskatchewan par le ministre des Relations 
gouvernementales. La Francophonie regroupe plus de 
cinquante-quatre pays et gouvernements qui ont le français en 
commun. C’est un honneur pour moi de souligner cette 
occasion en français dans notre Assemblée législative 
provinciale. 
 
Nous apprécions beaucoup, beaucoup la contribution de nos 
concitoyens et de nos communautés francophones au 
développement social, culturel, et economique de notre 
province durant toute l’année. J’encourage tous mes collègues à 
soutenir les francophones tout au long de l’année et les fêter 
dans leur circonscription. 
 
Merci, Monsieur le Président, et vive la Francophonie. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, the weeks of March 10 to 26 have 
been officially proclaimed Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
in Saskatchewan by the Minister of Government Relations. La 
Francophonie brings together over 54 countries and 
governments who share the French language. It’s an honour for 
me to observe this occasion in French in our provincial 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
We greatly appreciate the contribution of our francophone 
citizens and communities to the social, cultural, and economic 
development of our province during the whole year. I encourage 
all my colleagues to support francophones year-round and to 
celebrate them in their constituencies. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and long live the Francophonie.] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

Holy Cross Crusaders Provincial 6A 
Basketball Champions 

 
Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I stood in 
this legislature and congratulated the Saskatoon Holy Cross 
High School senior boys’ basketball team for capturing the 
Saskatoon league and city titles. It gives me great pleasure to 
rise again today, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate these same Holy 
Cross Crusaders. 
 
This past weekend the Crusaders competed in the Hoopla 
provincial basketball championship in Moose Jaw. The team 
had a great weekend and was successful in defeating Regina 
Balfour 87 to 64 and Regina Campbell 88 to 75. On Saturday 
evening the Crusaders defeated Regina Sheldon Williams in the 
gold medal final 90 to 83 and were crowned the 6A boys’ 
provincial basketball champions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate coaches Barry Rawlyk and Brett 
Czarnota. It is my understanding that under their leadership the 
team had a 32-win, 2-loss record over the entire season. To the 
Holy Cross Crusader players, congratulations on their hard 
work over the past five months culminating in this gold medal 
victory. As MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 
Saskatoon Southeast and many of the Saskatoon Holy Cross 
team, I would like to say how proud I am of their 
accomplishments. 
 
I ask the rest of the Assembly to join me in congratulating and 
recognizing the Saskatoon Holy Cross senior boys’ basketball 
team as provincial 6A high school champions. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Saskatchewan Team Wins Silver at World 
Junior Curling Championships 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to extend congratulations 
to skip Mandy Selzer, third Erin Selzer, second Kristen 
Mitchell, lead Megan Selzer, and coach Ken Bakken of 
Balgonie, Saskatchewan — silver medallists at the 2006 world 
junior championships in Jeonju, South Korea. 
 
Dubbed the extra-end kids in this tournament for their 
suspense-filled wins, the Balgonie curling rink made a heroic 
stand against team Russia in the gold medal match on Sunday, 
with the championship decided by a single point in the final 
end. Said skip Mandy Selzer, and I quote: 
 

We played well and I am proud of my team as they 
worked so hard. It was a close game and that was the way 
I wanted it. 
 

Spoken like a true competitor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Selzer rink won the right to represent Canada at the world 
junior championships when they claimed the Canadian junior 
women’s curling championship in January of this year in 
Thunder Bay, Ontario, becoming the 10th Saskatchewan team 

to win the title since the tournament began in 1971, a total 
unmatched by any other province. 
 
We all know, Mr. Speaker, curling is much more than a sport in 
Saskatchewan. It’s part of our culture and part of our way of 
life. And the Selzer rink of Balgonie is now part of a pantheon 
of curling champions who have made our province very proud. 
So once again, congratulations Mandy, Erin, Kristen, and 
Megan — 2006 world junior silver medallists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Congratulations to Brier Participants and Volunteers 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to take a few minutes and congratulate and 
commend Bernadette McIntyre and the many, many volunteers 
from Regina and area that hosted and put on a tremendous Brier 
in the province of Saskatchewan. They did a great job and every 
time they host something like that in the Queen City and other 
cities here, they do a tremendous job and I know it’s 
appreciated by the people that come to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’d be remiss though if I also didn’t 
acknowledge the knowledgeable curling fans in Saskatchewan. 
I noticed naturally they were cheering for our Pat Simmons rink 
earlier in the week until the rink got knocked out just before the 
playoffs. But they would commend good shots and I know the 
curlers that come in when you talk to them really appreciate the 
knowledgeable fans in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I along with every other person I believe from 
Saskatchewan were pulling for Pat Simmons. And when the 
week started they knew he was in tough right off the bat 
because he hit rinks right off the bat like Kevin Martin, Jeff 
Stoughton, Mark Dacey, and Glenn Howard who evidently got 
right to the final — I think had a 10 and 1 record. What they 
forgot to mention the other one in the first five rinks was 
Jean-Michel Ménard who actually ended up winning it all 
yesterday. So what a tough way to start. They got off to a slow 
start and recovered very well but just missed the playoff. So 
congratulations to the Pat Simmons rink. I know they’ll be 
back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to acknowledge the rest of the 
Jean-Michel Ménard rink, François Roberge, Eric Sylvain, and 
Maxime Elmaleh. And one thing I’d like to talk about a little 
bit, Mr. Speaker, is the third for Quebec. The day that we saw 
the first game going on out there — and I’d seen them curl 
before but my partner hadn’t — I said well can you believe 
this? My son is subbing for Quebec, Mr. Speaker. And for a 
whole half an end she believed that . . . My son is identical to 
the third for Quebec, Mr. Speaker. And I actually had to pull for 
them for that reason afterwards. I congratulate a very classy 
rink from Quebec, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s a little political tie to it, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
quotes from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think the member’s time has slightly 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Walsh Acres. 
 

O’Neill High School Senior Girls’ Curling Team 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to continue singing the 
praises of Saskatchewan curlers. Mr. Speaker, supporting our 
constituents can take place well outside of our constituency 
boundaries as well. That was certainly the case earlier this 
month when I took the opportunity to visit Tisdale to cheer on 
the Archbishop M.C. O’Neill High School senior girls’ curling 
team at the provincial championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this very successful rink is coached by Kevin 
Anderson and is made up of lead Lynea Davidowich, second 
Tiffany Morin, third Melanie Kuzyk, and skip Kristen 
Schneider. 
 
Last year this rink won the city championship for junior high 
school girls and this year played their way to the city senior 
girls’ title on their way to the provincials. I regret to say that 
although the girls curled very well in Tisdale, they didn’t take 
home the provincial championship. Having said that, 
considering the fact that Melanie is only in grade 11 and Lynea, 
Tiffany, and Kristen are only in grade 10, their high school 
curling future looks very, very bright. 
 
I want to congratulate them on their past success and wish them 
every success in the future as well as thank them for being such 
good role models to others in their participation of curling as 
well as other activities. 
 
And one more thing, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this 
opportunity because I was storm-stayed in Watson on my way 
home from Tisdale that afternoon, and I just want to take this 
opportunity to thank the mayor of Watson, Ted Reifferscheid, 
for the splendid Prairie hospitality he showed to me and the 
other storm-stayed travellers. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 

Comments by Government Members 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday we heard some 
incredulous comments from the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
members. First the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow said that 
losing millions of dollars is the normal course of business for 
SaskTel. She also said that she considered illegal cellphone 
towers in Trinidad part of SaskTel’s core operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member’s comments may reflect this 
government’s lack of standards, but make no mistake — they 
do not reflect the accountability that Saskatchewan people want, 
expect, and deserve from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also compelled to remark on comments made 
by the member from Regina Walsh Acres that triggered a 

number of phone calls to my office. The member said that the 
cost of covering the cancer drug Avastin is too much because it 
would only prolong life for six months. It’s clear that this 
government chooses to put money before people. The member 
inferred that the money would be better spent elsewhere — 
perhaps $600,000 on a movie about Tommy Douglas or maybe 
yet another money-losing, out-of-country Crown investment by 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas would be rolling over in his 
grave if he knew the way that this government is administering 
health care in Saskatchewan. Avastin is the first drug in this 
province’s history that was recommended by the cancer agency 
for coverage, and yet coverage has been denied by this 
government. According to Barry Stein, the president of the 
Colorectal Cancer Association of Canada, Avastin, when 
combined with other treatments, is a standard of care for this 
horrible disease. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want to 
know how this NDP government let its priorities go wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last week the NDP Health minister talked an awful lot 
about credibility. Well for such a new Health minister, let’s 
review his credibility on a number of issues. On Friday he said 
that a 66 per cent nursing retention rate was a positive thing, 
kind of like a success story for Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the worst retention rate of any province in Canada is 
no success story. It’s far below the standard across Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does this minister think that a 66 per cent 
nurse retention rate — according to CIHI [Canadian Institute of 
Health Information] numbers, the worst in Canada — is good 
enough for Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
does bother me. Members take words that are spoken in this 
Chamber and make their own interpretation about those words. 
The member can read Hansard, and it’s very clear I said that, in 
response to the member’s question about 66 per cent, that it was 
clear the majority of nurses were remaining in Saskatchewan. 
Sixty-six per cent is majority, Mr. Speaker. I said nothing about 
success. I said nothing about celebrating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 66 per cent is not good enough. My answers to 
questions all last week indicate that this government is very 
committed to increasing the number of nurses practising in this 
province, and we have a plan to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
minister made other comments that makes one question his 
credibility. He told the Assembly and the media that the 
majority of the nursing vacancies were in rural Saskatchewan 
and in remote areas. It was kind of a location issue more than 
anything else. 
 
Well figures from both registered nurses and licensed practical 
nurses tell a different story. According to the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses there are 65 RN [registered nurse] vacancies in 
Regina, 37 in Saskatoon, and 42 in Prairie North. According to 
the department’s own numbers in 2003, there were a total of 
116 LPN, licensed practical nurses vacancies in Regina, 46 in 
Saskatoon, and 42 in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what he said, that it was only in rural 
Saskatchewan or northern regions, is a distortion of the truth. 
It’s a misleading statement, Mr. Speaker, because a large 
majority of the vacancies are in our urban centres. Why won’t 
he come clean so we can start building a human resources plan 
by dealing with the real numbers that people are facing in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
indicated last week, both in this Chamber and to members of 
the media, the government is committed to increasing the 
numbers of nurses practising in Saskatchewan. We have last 
year increased the number of seats available in the nursing 
education program. I have committed to meet with the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses — I will be doing so this week 
— to discuss the specifics of their numbers and the needs in the 
province. I have at this point met with both the association 
representing the licensed practical nurses and the psychiatric 
nurses practising in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to consulting. We are 
committed to improving the numbers. We are committed to 
improving the standard of care for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week the minister outright refused to set a target for the number 
of RNs that were needed in this province. He went on to say 
that the NDP doesn’t set targets because we probably won’t 
meet them. That’s quite the reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve obtained a document from 2003 from the minister’s own 
department, a document called, A Joint Report on the Education 
and Employment of Licensed Practical Nurses in 
Saskatchewan. This document had the nerve to outline target 
numbers. For the number of licensed practical nurses in 

Saskatchewan, the document projected a target of 555 LPNs 
would be needed by 2005. Can the minister tell this Assembly 
then was he able to meet that target? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
one thing this government is targeting, Mr. Speaker, is the 
number of nurses practising in this province must increase. 
 
We are targeting the issue. We have put together, Mr. Speaker, 
a plan in conjunction with the professionals practising in the 
province. We have met with them considerably. We have 
reached some agreement on making progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no question that recruitment and retention is a 
significant issue in this province. It is a significant issue in 
almost every jurisdiction in Canada; in fact in central United 
States as well. And, Mr. Speaker, we are seriously addressing 
the issue of recruitment and retention. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
number of nurses practising in Saskatchewan next year and the 
year after that will be greater than the number practising this 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that’s appalling to stand there 
and say that the number of nurses practising next year in 
Saskatchewan will be greater. By one? By two? By three? What 
is greater than? By three or four? Come up with a number that 
you can target, Mr. Speaker, because, you know, Mr. Speaker, 
he had no problem in 2003 setting a target for LPNs. But in 
2006 he refuses to set a target for registered nurses. 
 
Will the minister commit today that he will work with the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses when he meets with them on 
Wednesday to, number one — and this is what they’re asking 
for; guess what? — set targets on filling vacancies and develop 
a target for RNs in this next budget year and, number two, to 
increase the workforce so that it will, as SUN [Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses] said, meet the professional standard of care 
that clients need in this province. Will he commit to doing that 
when he meets with SUN on Wednesday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very much looking forward to the meeting with the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. I think the discussion that I 
have with them will in fact be much clearer and much more 
direct than my conversation with the member opposite has been 
last week and this week. 
 
I do not expect to be misquoted after a meeting with the 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Mr. Speaker. I expect that we 
will emerge from that meeting with an understanding and an 
agreement as to how to proceed on the action plan presented by 
the department in December, an action plan that will increase 
the number of nurses practising in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Commitment to Policing 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Justice 
inform this Assembly on the progress made so far in living up 
to his government’s 1999 promise to hire 200 new police 
officers and what effect that has had on the total number of 
police officers serving in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House 
that, as of this budget year and the 29 officers that will be added 
and have been previously announced, what we added in this 
budget, we will be exceeding, well exceeding the 200 officers 
by October 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that’s an interesting answer. 
According to Statistics Canada, there were 2,011 police officers 
serving in Saskatchewan in 2005. In 2004 there were 2,010. 
That’s an increase of one officer over the entire calendar year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Justice explain why his 
government’s plan to put an additional 200 police officers on 
the streets is in fact failing so miserably? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, from Statistics Canada, 
for the fifth year in a row Saskatchewan had the highest rate for 
police strength in Canada at 202 police officers per 100,000 
people. During the past decade, Saskatchewan is one of only 
three provinces to have recorded notable increase in police 
strength. All other provinces have remained relatively stable. 
Saskatchewan reported the largest increase in police strength 
during the last decade. The increase was plus 8 per cent from 
Statistics Canada. Among census metropolitan areas, Regina for 
example reported the highest rates of police officers per 
100,000 population at 207. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when you have the highest crime 
rate, you need the highest level of police force. In 1999 the 
NDP promised to put 200 new police officers on the street in 
four years. By my math, that’s 50 officers a year. 
 
According to Statistics Canada, there were in fact only 81 more 
officers on the streets in Saskatchewan from 1999 to 2005. Mr. 
Speaker, 81 is not 200. Mr. Speaker, this minister has failed to 
live up to the government’s commitment. Will he admit that and 
tell us what he is going to do to live up to that promise, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, since 1999 when the 
commitment was made to this budget year of 2006, this 
government will have added in excess of 200 police officers, 
funding for in excess of 200 police officers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Statistics Canada has said that Saskatchewan reported the 
largest increase in police strength during the period that they 
recorded — an increase of 8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And there’s 
no province close to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister Responsible for the Forestry 
Secretariat. On Friday the minister was heard on a local Prince 
Albert radio station as saying an investor or investors are in 
serious talks on the purchase of the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill. 
This is something big, the minister said. Later that same day the 
minister appeared on CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 
saying a sale prior to the announced closure date was difficult 
because this was such a large asset. The story went on to say 
that there are no takers for the Prince Albert mill. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister: there either will 
be a sale prior to the closure date or there won’t be; which one 
is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, again half quotes 
from members of the opposition . . . I’ve read, by the way, the 
transcript from CTV and I know what I said. I’ve also read the 
reporter’s comments. I know what I said when I was 
interviewed with CKBI radio. Now I’m going to tell that 
member again what I said. 
 
I said that yes, there had been a visit to the Prince Albert mill. I 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

said that it was a positive initiative although we were a long 
way away from a sale closure. I said, Mr. Speaker, that I am 
encouraged by the work that officials of this government have 
done because the people who have entered Weyerhaeuser’s 
process for the most part have come from the work that’s been 
done by officials within this government. 
 
I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, that I am encouraged by the fact that a 
site visit had taken place and it was part of the due diligence 
process that companies will do. Mr. Speaker, that’s what I said 
yesterday. That’s what I say today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
the minister has to clarify the confusion he’s creating. He’s 
telling one media outlet something big is happening. He’s 
telling another media outlet there’s little chance of preventing 
next month’s closure. 
 
And while he’s busy sowing the seeds of confusion, this 
minister is telling me I better not say anything; otherwise I 
would jeopardize the deal. In a recent letter from the minister, 
he asked me to keep the families and workers in mind during 
question period. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is he keeping the 
workers in mind with his seemingly contradictory comments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, now it’s a 
seemingly contradictory comment. I’ve got to table a copy of a 
letter that I sent to that member. On March 6, Mr. Speaker, I 
asked that member to join me in my office so that I could brief 
him in terms of what had taken place from the government’s 
perspective, from the task force, the discussions that we had had 
with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
I indicated to him that there were some companies who were 
looking at the assets, and it was very much their intention that 
their names should not be made public in this legislature 
because it could have the impact of jeopardizing the sale. And 
that’s what I told that member. Mr. Speaker, I stand by that. I’m 
going to table this letter so that there’s no confusion. 
 
I asked the member to continue to work with us. We have 
hundreds of jobs who are at risk, based on Weyerhaeuser’s 
decision. There is some optimism, but we’re not close to a deal 
yet, Mr. Speaker. A timeline of April 13 is very difficult to 
reach. I indicated that and it may be that the mill is closed for a 
while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, the minister tells one group one 

thing and another group something else. Then he tells me I’d 
better not say anything for fear of jeopardizing negotiations. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s probably good advice; why didn’t he take 
it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stop sowing seeds of confusion? 
And what can you tell the workers and their families about the 
current state of negotiations concerning the sale of the Prince 
Albert mill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister 
Responsible for the Forestry Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell the people 
of Prince Albert and the people who work in the industry what I 
have been telling them consistently, that this is a difficult 
arrangement to put together. It’s a large, large initiative, that the 
times frame that’s been put together by Weyerhaeuser makes it 
very, very difficult for a potential investor to make a decision to 
purchase. 
 
What I said, when I was asked by the media about a visit to the 
mill site, was that it’s part of the due diligence process that a 
company will take, that I’m encouraged, and of course all of us 
in the community and other communities are encouraged that 
someone would have moved their sale process, their 
investigation process to the point where they’re taking a 
physical look at the assets. I said that that was encouraging, but 
I also said that there’s a long way to go. 
 
So I say to the members opposite: get on board with us; attempt 
to support this process, to work to condense the process that 
Weyerhaeuser has imposed upon this initiative. I think that 
we’ve got the right things to make a deal work, but the 
timelines are going to be very difficult. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Film’s Portrayal of Former Premier Gardiner 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] recently has broadcast the 
two-part miniseries telling the story of Tommy Douglas. The 
Government of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
have contributed some $600,000-plus for the centennial project. 
And while most people agree that this is a story that should be 
told, there are a growing number of people in the province who 
are taking exception, Mr. Speaker, to some grossly inaccurate 
portrayals of history, of fact, and of individuals, especially of 
former Premier Jimmy Gardiner, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He was shown in the movie giving a province-wide radio 
address rallying the province against Estevan coal miners. We 
know that that couldn’t have happened. It did not happen. He 
wasn’t even premier at the time. He was shown and portrayed 
as a drinker when in reality, Mr. Speaker, he was an abstainer. 
In short I think any fair assessment of the movie would agree 
that he was vilified, former Premier Jimmy Gardiner was 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

vilified by this movie. One columnist called his character 
“mean, arrogant and selfish.” The character — “A blacker 
figure could scarcely be imagined.” 
 
The problem of course, Mr. Speaker, is none of this is true. My 
question to the Premier, my first question is, how does he view 
the portrayal of former Premier Jimmy Gardiner from this 
movie? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to respond 
to that question. First of all I would want to acknowledge the 
important role in the history of Saskatchewan that Mr. Gardiner 
has played. We will all know that he served twice as premier in 
the first part of our first century and then went on to a 
distinguished career for an extended period of time with the 
ministry of Agriculture, and we understand the importance of 
that to our province in the course of our first half century when 
he was serving in that capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the content, the creative content of a production is 
the responsibility of the producer. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
say very clearly, it is not the place for the government to 
exercise editorialization of creative content, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would simply ask, is it the position of the Leader of the 
Opposition that it is the role for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to exercise editorial of the creative content of 
films produced in Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, I say no. What 
is the position of the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan] political studies professor, David Smith wrote 
the only biography of Jimmy Gardiner. He called the movie’s 
portrayal of former Premier Gardiner scandalous and a travesty. 
Former Premier Allan Blakeney described the movie as 
“seriously flawed” and said Gardiner was “not a simple-minded 
demon as he was portrayed.” And historian Bill Waiser called it 
bizarre. He said that Gardiner was in fact “. . . more of a Boy 
Scout than [Tommy] Douglas.” 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Gardiner family is here today in their 
Legislative Assembly, and I believe, the Saskatchewan Party 
believes they’re at the very least owed an apology. Mr. Speaker, 
after question period I’ll introduce a motion saying that the 
legislature regrets the inaccurate portrayal — we’ve sent a copy 
over to the government — of a respected former member of this 
Assembly. 
 
We call on the government; we call on members of this 
Assembly to apologize to the Gardiner family for this unfair 
attack on a former premier. Will the Premier support that 
motion, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it would be my preference 
that, whenever there is a representation of historical characters 
in this province, political or otherwise, that those would be both 
accurate and positive. Mr. Speaker, having said that, it is very 
important that if I acknowledge that when films are being made, 
movies are being made, dramas are being made in the province 
of Saskatchewan that it is not the role for the government of 
Saskatchewan to exercise editorializing of the content of that 
film. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. Minister of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
seems to be saying that if public funds go into a film 
production, that the government should assume responsibility of 
the creative content. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am firmly of the view that that is not the case. 
That is inappropriate. And I ask once again, will the Leader of 
the Opposition make clear the position of the Saskatchewan 
Party? Is it appropriate for government to exercise editorial of 
the creative content or not, yes or no? I say no. 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has lapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that minister and that government, 
they don’t say no when it comes to putting conditions on 
taxpayers’ money for funding the arts, for funding a movie. 
 
And here are the conditions set about for this very movie. They 
wanted, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the centennial logo — this 
now as a condition of funding from this government — was 
placed in certain parts. They wanted to make sure the logo for 
the centennial was placed on teachers’ guides for the movie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a condition they put on this movie’s 
funding that said before there was any public announcement, a 
cabinet minister had to be there for some political benefit, Mr. 
Speaker. Why wouldn’t there be a condition that said if this is a 
funded movie about the history of the province, that we would 
ask an independent third party like a professor or a historian to 
make sure that someone’s not vilified in the movie to build up 
the legacy of Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So I’ll ask the Premier this question: will he 
permit, will his government permit this movie to be allowed as 
educational curriculum in the schools? Will he allow this movie 
with its inaccuracies to be put into schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it would appear from the 
words of the Leader of the Opposition that censorship is 
squarely on the political agenda of the Saskatchewan Party. It is 
impossible to interpret nothing other than that from what he has 
said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were unquestionably public funds that were 
committed to the film. And the film, as it was presented to the 
province by CBC, Telefilm Canada, with their endorsement, 
was to represent a historical experience in the province of 
Saskatchewan as the home of medicare, home to our province, 
and home to our nation. Mr. Speaker, that content and the actual 
delivery of the film is the creative right of the producer. 
 
And once again, I say it is not the role of the Saskatchewan 
government to exercise editorial content in the creation of the 
film. And I ask once again, is it the position of the Leader of the 
Opposition that the government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party that educational tools used in our schools 
should tell the truth, Mr. Speaker. That’s the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 30 years from now, there might be a movie made 
about politics today. The Premier himself might be portrayed in 
the movie. I would want — we, in this Assembly would want 
— that portrayal to be accurate. We would want the portrayal of 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker, to be accurate. 
 
We know that this particular movie is not an accurate portrayal 
of someone who contributed mightily to the province, 
notwithstanding the fact he doesn’t share the Premier’s political 
ideology or that he didn’t share it. Mr. Speaker, though there 
are two young people in this city, the great-grandchildren of 
former Premier Jimmy Gardiner, Michael and Jessica, who will 
one day potentially be in a classroom that’s subjected to this 
film and the portrayal of their great-grandfather in this 
inaccurate way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the government, to the Premier of the province 
of Saskatchewan, will he ensure, can he tell this House if he’s 
going to allow this film to be used as an instruction tool in the 
classrooms of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I have already acknowledged 
my position as to my preference as to how historical figures in 
Saskatchewan history are represented. It would be my wish that 

they would be represented in a positive and accurate way. Mr. 
Speaker, the question that is before the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. I 
would ask the members on both sides of the House to allow the 
debate to come to its logical conclusion. Order. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the teachers’ guides 
will be crafted responsibly. It is a very important signal 
however, Mr. Speaker, to send to the creative personnel in our 
province and beyond, including the film industry, that when you 
come to Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. I would ask the member 
for Canora-Pelly and the member for Saskatoon Nutana to 
maintain order please and to respond positively to a Speaker’s 
request. The Minister for Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is an important signal to 
the film industry which is growing in this province — and 
significantly, having produced $64 million worth of film in the 
last year — that they ought to know that when they come to 
Saskatchewan to produce a film that their government will not, 
that the Saskatchewan government will not interfere with the 
creative content. It will not editorialize. That is clearly the 
position of this government. And one last time I ask, what is the 
position of the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Leader of the Opposition on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I am on 
my feet to request leave to move to a motion under rule 49. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member please state the nature of 
the motion he wishes to present. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 

Film’s Portrayal of Former Premier Gardiner 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’d be happy to. Mr. Speaker, it relates to 
questions we were asking at the end of question period today. 
And certainly we have sent the motion over to the government. 
If you will, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just read the motion because it 
pretty much describes and explains exactly the purpose of my 
request for leave of the Assembly. The motion says as follows: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the historical inaccuracies in 
the Prairie Giant: The Tommy Douglas Story produced by 
Minds Eye Pictures, specifically the inaccurate portrayal 
of former Premier Jimmy Gardiner, and urges the 
government to issue a formal apology to the Gardiner 
family since this film was funded through the Centennial 
office as a centennial project using taxpayers’ money. 

 
There are other attendant questions around this that deserve 
some discussion including the education element and the 
funding of the film itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

The Speaker: — Member for Swift Current, the Leader of the 
Opposition, is requesting leave to proceed with the motion. 
Unanimous consent is required. Is consent granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. Order please. 
Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting 
Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 

 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting 
Professions) Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last several years significant strides have 
been made to ensure that legislative . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, over the last several years 
significant strides have been made to ensure that legislative 
references to duties to be performed by accountants include 
certified general accountants and certified management 
accountants in addition to chartered accountants. Mr. Speaker, 
this omnibus Bill will complete the task by amending six Acts 
and four regulations that contain unnecessary restrictions. 
 
The six Acts that are being amended, Mr. Speaker, are: The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act, The Builders’ Lien Act, 
The Legal Profession Act, 1990, The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Act, The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit Association Act, 
and The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. 
 
The four regulations that are being amended are: The Helium 
and Associated Gases Regulations, 1964, The Oil Shale 
Regulations, 1964, The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulations, 
1969, and The Subsurface Mineral Regulations, 1960. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments reflect the fact that members of 
the three recognized accounting professions may perform the 
duties imposed by the legislation. Mr. Speaker, during the 
preparation of this amendment Act, the Certified General 
Accountants Association, the Society of Management 
Accountants of Saskatchewan, and the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Saskatchewan were consulted. These agencies 
are supportive of the omnibus legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment 
Act, 2006. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 31, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting 
Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 be now read a second time. 
The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise to speak briefly today on Bill No. 31, An Act to 
amend certain Statutes and regulations with respect to 
Accounting Professions. Mr. Speaker, the minister mentions in 
his comments about the legislation that this is rather routine, 
and it applies to various categories of accountants in the 
province. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that insofar as this has been 
done with the approval of these various organizations and with 
their proper consideration, that that’s positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition it should be pointed out that 
accountants in our province of the various different categories 
also have responsibilities not only in this province but 
interprovincially and indeed internationally. I know specifically 
that there are requirements in order for transitions to be audited 
on international companies and things of this nature, that it’s 
very important that the standards and the regulations that apply 
to the accountants that practise in our province also meet the 
national and international criteria. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation has been brought forward on I 
believe Friday last, and we certainly have not had an 
opportunity to consult with the various groups that are being 
affected, clearly, by this legislation. And we have noticed some 
changes in the legislation about trusteeships and arbiters and the 
designation or requirement of chartered accountants being 
changed. We very much want to consult with these various 
organizations to see specifically how this legislation is going to 
impact on their mandate and their profession. And in order to 
facilitate that, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill 31 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi 

de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 16 of The Interpretation Act, 1995 
establishes the corporate rights and powers for any corporation 
created or continued by enactment other than The Business 
Corporations Act, The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995, The 
Co-operatives Act, 1996, The New Generation Co-operatives 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

Act, The Credit Union Act, 1998, or The Crown Corporations 
Act, 1993. 
 
That section also sets out the duty of care for officers and 
directors of such corporations and establishes the authority by 
which the corporation may identify such officers and directors 
and buy liability insurance with respect to their actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canada Business Corporations Act, CBCA, 
was amended by a 2001 Bill to include certain modifications 
and improvements in its statement of corporate rights and 
powers that are desirable to include in The Interpretation Act, 
1995. These changes broaden the basis for indemnification and 
insurance which should assist in the recruitment and retention 
of officers and directors for such corporations. 
 
Members of the bar had raised the concern that the existing 
provisions are out of date when compared to the federal 
legislation and that this is creating additional risk for officers 
and directors serving with a statutory corporation. We are 
responding now to that concern to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
business legislation remains current and effective in this 
important area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would stress that the changes that were made to 
the CBCA and the changes before this Assembly today do not 
reduce the individual or corporate liability to third parties for 
such directors, officers, or corporate bodies. 
 
Instead The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006 includes 
changes to: authorized indemnification to any individual who 
serves at the request of the corporation as a director or officer of 
another entity in which the corporation has no shares or debt; 
include costs incurred in an investigative proceeding to the list 
of proceedings for which indemnity may be provided; authorize 
the advancement of cost for indemnification prior to completion 
of final settlement or a final decision; mandate indemnification 
if there is a finding of no fault by the court rather than only 
where the court actually directs indemnification; remove the 
restriction on the corporate purchasing liability insurance for 
actions taken other than in good faith by officers and directors; 
and provide that an officer or a director is not only free from 
liability but has also met his or her duty of care by relying in 
good faith on financial statements or reports of professionals. 
 
By separate Bills to be introduced this session, one English and 
one bilingual, The Business Corporations Act, The Non-profit 
Corporations Act, 1995, The Co-operatives Act, 1996, The New 
Generation Co-operatives Act, The Credit Union Act, 1998, and 
The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 will also be amended to 
include these provisions. 
 
In addition to these changes regarding officers and directors, 
this Bill also makes certain housekeeping amendments that will 
correct a previous error made by a consequential amendment to 
the French version of this Act, update the definition of 
Governor General under the Act, add the ability to use 
regulations to define terms that are used in an Act but not 
otherwise defined if that Act is a general regulation-making 
authority, and update the definition of will under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to respond to the need for 
Saskatchewan’s business legislation to remain current with 

changes on the national level. This will ensure that our 
corporations are operating on an equal footing in the 
recruitment, retention, and protection of officers and directors 
who act in good faith and meet the legislative duty of care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Interpretation Act, 1996. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 35, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
The Chair recognizes the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for 
me to rise and speak briefly on An Act to amend The 
Interpretation Act, 1995, Bill No. 35. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, it is extremely important 
that corporations that are based in Saskatchewan and have their 
head offices and their directors and officials based in 
Saskatchewan, that our corporations are indeed very much kept 
competitive and their structures are similar to corporations in 
Canada and internationally. I think it’s very important that these 
structures are appropriate to a very competitive world and very 
appropriate to making sure that our officials and directors are 
not disadvantaged in respect to other corporations in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, these changes in this 
legislation impact on a large number of other pieces of 
legislation, and it is important that this is all done very 
thoroughly and practically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that one of the things that stands out in this 
legislation is the fact that it expands the protection for officers 
and directors of companies where they are indeed relying on 
proper financial statements and financial information that’s 
reported to them by their auditors and their accountants. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this is done properly. 
 
It’s also worthy of note that the French version corrects some 
inaccuracies that exist in the present legislation and that is 
important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s pretty obvious that this Bill has fairly 
large, wide-ranging consequences. And it’s important for the 
official opposition to consult with some of the senior leaders in 
the business community in our province to see if everything and 
every concern that they raised, that precipitated the drafting of 
this Bill, are being met, and we certainly want to take the 
opportunity to have those discussions. And therefore in order 
for that to be facilitated, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill 35 be adjourned. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au 

profit des administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (no2) 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2) seeks to make the same changes regarding 
directors and officers as The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
2006 and The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ 
Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006. This 
bilingual Bill updates the indemnity and insurance positions 
contained in The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 and The 
Co-operatives Act, 1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canada Business Corporations Act, CBCA, 
was amended by a 2001 Bill to include certain modifications 
and improvements in its statement of corporate rights and 
powers that are desirable to include in these Saskatchewan 
Acts. These changes broaden the basis for indemnification and 
insurance which would assist in the recruitment and the 
retention of officers and directors for such corporations. 
Members of the bar have raised a concern that the existing 
provisions are out of date when compared to the federal 
legislation and that this is creating an additional risk for officers 
and directors serving with the corporation. We are responding 
now to that concern to ensure that Saskatchewan’s business 
legislation remains current and effective in this important area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would stress that the changes that were made to 
the CBCA and the changes before this Assembly today do not 
reduce the individual or corporate liability to third parties for 
such directors, officers, or corporate bodies. Instead this Bill 
includes amendments that will authorize indemnification to any 
individual who serves at the request of the corporation as a 
director or officer of another entity in which the corporation has 
no shares or debt; add costs incurred in an investigative 
proceeding to the list of proceedings for which indemnity may 
be provided; authorize the advancement of costs for 
indemnification prior to completion of final settlement or a final 
decision; mandate indemnification if there is a finding of no 
fault by the court rather than only where the court actually 
directs indemnification; remove the restriction on a corporation 
purchasing liability insurance for actions taken other than in 
good faith by officers and directors; and provide that an officer 
or director is not only free from liability but has also met his or 
her duty of care by relying in good faith on financial statements 
or reports of professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to respond to the need for 
Saskatchewan’s business legislation to remain current with 
changes on the national level. This will ensure that our 
corporations are operating on an equal footing in the 
recruitment, retention, and protection of officers and directors 
who act in good faith and meet their legislated duty of care. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend certain 
Statutes with respect to Indemnification of and Insurance for 
Directors, Officers and certain Other Individuals (No. 2). 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 36, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise and speak briefly on Bill No. 36. Mr. 
Speaker, a comment that the minister made that I think is very 
important is that this legislation is intended to make sure that 
Saskatchewan corporations — and co-operatives, I guess, more 
specifically in this case — have legislation that indeed is 
appropriate not only for our province but appropriate on the 
national and international stage. 
 
Certainly in the business world there is a keen competition for 
quality officers and employees and directors of these 
organizations. And I think it is important that our legislation 
that governs the responsibility and conduct of these individuals 
is appropriate and fair and balanced with the situation in other 
jurisdictions around the world, in fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important as well that the legislation 
that governs these organizations and the officers and directors 
of them be brought up to contemporary wording and 
contemporary language from time to time, and I believe that 
that is the intent of this legislation, both in the English and the 
French version. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that seems to make eminent sense and we look 
forward to hearing comments from the business community 
about this legislation as well as the previous Bill that was 
outlined. And in order for that to be facilitated, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 36 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) 

Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will update the indemnity and insurance 
provisions contained in The Business Corporations Act, The 
New Generation Co-operatives Act, The Credit Union Act, 
1998, and The Crown Corporations Act, 1993. 
 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

The same changes regarding directors and officers are 
concurrently being addressed in The Interpretation Amendment 
Act, 2006 and The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and 
Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 
2006 (No. 2). 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canada Business Corporations Act, CBCA, 
was amended by a 2001 Bill to include certain modifications 
and improvements in its statement of corporate rights and 
powers that are desirable to include in these Saskatchewan 
Acts. 
 
These changes broaden the basis for indemnification and 
insurance which should assist in the recruitment and retention 
of officers and directors for such corporations. Members of the 
bar had raised the concern that the existing provisions are out of 
date when compared to the federal legislation and that this is 
creating additional risk for officers and directors serving with a 
corporation. We are now responding to that concern to ensure 
that Saskatchewan’s business legislation remains current and 
effective in this important area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to recognize the changes that were 
made to the CBCA and the changes before this Assembly do 
not reduce the individual or corporate liability to third parties 
for such directors, officers, or corporate bodies. 
 
Instead, this Bill includes amendments that will authorize 
indemnification to any individual who serves at the request of 
the corporation as a director or officer of another entity in 
which the corporation has no shares or debt; add costs incurred 
in an investigative proceeding to the list of proceedings for 
which indemnity may be provided; authorize the advancement 
of costs for indemnification prior to completion of final 
settlement or a final decision; mandate indemnification if there 
is a finding of no fault by the court rather than only where the 
court actually directs indemnification; remove the restriction on 
a corporation purchasing liability insurance for actions taken 
other than in good faith by officers and directors; and provide 
that an officer or director is not only free from liability but has 
also met his or her duty of care by relying in good faith on 
financial statements or reports of professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to respond to the need for 
Saskatchewan’s business legislation to remain current with 
changes on the national level. This will ensure that our 
corporations are operating on an equal footing in the 
recruitment, retention, and protection of officers and directors 
who act in good faith and meet their legislative duty of care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend certain 
Statutes with respect to Indemnification of and Insurance for 
Directors, Officers and certain Other Individuals. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 37, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors and 
Officers Identification and Insurance) Amendment Act, 2006 be 
now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again as well 

to speak on Bill No. 37. Mr. Speaker, it seems as if this last 
series of Bills have all similar intent of updating and 
modernizing the legislation and the appropriate regulations in 
respect to companies and credit unions and co-operatives and 
other organizations in our province, and I think that this is 
important work. I know it’s probably very scintillating for 
people watching this discussion and unless you’re a director of 
a corporation or an officer of a corporation it probably is not the 
kind of thing that’s top of mind for most citizens at any given 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the Minister of Justice has been working 
on this for a good part of his career and he’s very motivated to 
make sure that this passes in a timely fashion, but I certainly 
apologize to guests in the gallery who are watching this and are 
not sure exactly what the purpose is. 
 
However I would like to commend the government on the 
thoroughness of looking through this information. I expect that 
the comments from the corporate community is going to be 
positive. I certainly take the minister’s word when he said in his 
remarks on previous Bills that this has been thoroughly 
discussed and consultations have been very comprehensive with 
the respective parties and individuals who are affected by this 
legislation. 
 
I look forward for our critic in this regard to have those same 
conversations with the official opposition and I trust that 
everything indeed will be in order and that these officers and 
employees will indeed ask us to support this legislation. In 
order for that discussion to occur, Mr. Speaker, at this time I 
would like to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 37 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Settlement of International Investment 
Disputes Act/Loi sur le règlement des différends 

internationaux relatifs aux investissements 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Settlement of International Investment 
Disputes Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of this House are well aware that 
Saskatchewan businesses are increasingly involved in 
international investment activities. The Settlement of 
International Investment Disputes Act implements the 1965 
World Bank Convention on the Settlement of Investment 
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States also 
known as ICSID [International Centre for Settlement of 
Investment Disputes]. 
 
By implementing this Act in Saskatchewan we facilitate the 
subsequent extension of the convention to Canada and the 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

important voluntary dispute, conciliation, and arbitration 
mechanisms offered under the convention. The implementing 
Bill before you today is based on the Uniform Law Conference 
of Canada Act that was prepared following consultations with 
the Canadian international business community. Mr. Speaker, 
the ICSID convention is designed to facilitate the settlement of 
investment disputes between governments and foreign 
investors, thereby improving conditions for international 
investment. 
 
The adoption of this convention by Canada would assist 
Canadian investment internationally by providing a dependable, 
voluntary, and uniform set of rules and procedures for dispute 
settlement. Conversely, Mr. Speaker, foreign investors in 
Canada would enjoy similar advantages. 
 
The conciliation and arbitration mechanisms established under 
the convention are entirely voluntary and are only applicable 
where they were chosen by the parties at the time they entered 
into the initial relationship. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, there are no surprises for businesses 
or states under the convention, and indeed one of the central 
goals of the convention is to provide greater certainty for 
businesses involved in international business disputes. 
 
In addition to establishing this important dispute resolution 
process, the 1965 World Bank Convention also established the 
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes. 
Based in Washington, DC [District of Columbia], this facility 
provides on a user-paid basis ready expertise in conducting the 
conciliations and arbitrations required under the convention. 
Any parties to an agreement may however instead designate any 
other location they prefer to conduct their proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very popular international convention. We 
are advised that there are currently 142 state parties to the 
ICSID Convention, including the United States, Germany, 
United Kingdom, France, and Australia. When it was passed in 
1965, the ICSID Convention did not include a federal state 
clause. 
 
Accordingly, implementation of the convention in Canada 
requires every jurisdiction in Canada to pass implementing 
legislation. The Government of Canada has now asked all 
provinces to make this a priority, and Saskatchewan is pleased 
to be among the first provinces to take this step towards 
providing greater certainty for businesses involved with 
international business disputes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting The 
Settlement of International Investment Disputes. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 38, The Settlement of International Investment 
Disputes Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise and speak on Bill No. 38 as well. Mr. Speaker, this piece of 
legislation, which is fairly substantive in terms of the detail 
that’s in the Bill, is very important. As I had indicated in my 
comments earlier that our corporations, our organizations need 

to be competitive not only on the national, but clearly this 
legislation indicates the importance of us being competitive and 
that our regulations and rules are appropriate on an international 
basis. And it’s important that we streamline our mechanisms 
and our processes in line with national and international 
standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a significant number of issues that are in 
this piece of legislation. It is fairly substantive in nature with a 
good number of clauses — 15 sections — and I think it’s 
important that this information is reviewed thoroughly and 
completely. While we’re going through the exercise of updating 
the regulations and the rules under which our corporations 
function on the international scene, I think it is particularly 
important that we do not overlook anything to make sure that 
we’re not back here a year from now making further 
amendments that we could have considered at this stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think clearly in the international theatre, 
particularly since the Enron debacle in the United States, that 
there is a greater need for transparency and a greater need for 
appropriate rules and regulations as to how our corporations 
conduct their affairs, and that we make sure that we’re 
competitive and appropriate to neighbouring jurisdictions. 
Saskatchewan is our home but it’s also very much a player on 
the international stage, and many of our corporations function 
very comfortably in this international world trade milieu. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is really extremely important that our 
rules and our regulations that govern our corporations’ 
relationships with other corporations in the international stage 
are appropriate and timely and effective. And in order to make 
sure that this legislation meets its intended challenges and 
purposes, we certainly would like to have the time to consult 
with people that are involved intimately with this. And in order 
to facilitate that discussion at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on second reading of Bill No. 38 be now adjourned. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Income Trust Liability Act. Mr. Speaker, 
The Income Trust Liability Act will provide important 
protection from liability for investors in Saskatchewan income 
trusts. Income trusts are becoming an increasingly popular 
investment vehicle since the mid-1990s. Income trusts are 
publicly traded investment entities that utilize a tax-efficient 
distribution of cash flow generated from underlying business 
operations or assets. They have become popular with investors 
because of their ability to produce cash flow in a manner which 
reduces tax liability. 
 
Income trusts come in a variety of guises. Income trusts may be 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

royalty trusts, real estate investment trusts, or business trusts. 
The trust holds property consisting of real property or interest in 
an operating entity or an active business that typically produces 
a predictable revenue stream. If the cash flow from the business 
is retained in the trust, the trust must pay income tax on those 
funds. However the income trust is able to reduce its taxable 
income by the amount of the distributions to its unitholders — 
only the unitholders pay tax on the amount distributed. 
 
The popularity of income trusts lies in the fact that, unlike 
corporate dividends which are taxed at the corporate level and 
again in the hands of the shareholders, funds distributed to the 
unitholders of a trust are taxed only once in the hands of the 
unitholder. As a result, income trusts generally provide an 
opportunity for unitholders to plan for and receive a real 
reduction in the taxes that would normally be assessed and 
payable. 
 
Publicly traded income trusts raise capital by way of a 
prospectus. Typically the trust units are listed on the Canadian 
stock exchanges, permitting investors to buy them and sell them 
much as they would shares in a publicly traded corporation. 
 
Recent statistics indicate that there are more than 150 income 
trusts on Canadian stock exchanges with a total market 
capitalization of more than $90 billion. Monthly net sales in 
Canada recently averaged $200 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, liability of unitholders has admittedly not been a 
huge problem in the past. Historically unitholders of trusts, like 
the beneficiaries of other trusts, have not been held liable to 
third parties for debts and obligations of the trust. The trustee is 
the legal owner of the trust property and is at first instance the 
party legally responsible for the obligations and liabilities of the 
trust. 
 
However there is a concern that in situations where the trust 
property is insufficient to cover liabilities, beneficiaries may be 
called upon to indemnify the trustee. For example concern has 
been expressed that under circumstances such as an 
environmental disaster for which a trustee is held responsible, a 
unitholder of an income trust may become liable for amounts in 
excess of the investor’s initial investment. Although a potential 
for such a scenario may be quite remote, it has discouraged 
some individual investors as well as institutional investors, such 
as pension funds, from investing in income trusts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill follows legislation which has been 
recently introduced in other Canadian jurisdictions. The Alberta 
Income Trusts Liability Act came into force on July 1, 2004. 
Ontario enacted The Trust Beneficiaries’ Liability Act, 2004 in 
December 2004. Manitoba passed The Investment Trust 
Unitholders’ Protection Act in June 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intended effect of this legislation is that 
unitholders of a Saskatchewan income trust — i.e., a trust 
governed by the laws of Saskatchewan that is a reporting issuer 
within the meaning of The Securities Act — will receive 
limited liability protection similar to shareholders of a 
corporation. 
 
Although there are currently no Saskatchewan income trusts 
that are reporting issuers, many Saskatchewan investors have 

invested in income trusts created in other jurisdictions and 
enjoy the protection of similar legislation in those jurisdictions. 
In addition some Saskatchewan businesses form part of the 
operating entity for income trusts created in other jurisdictions. 
 
The Saskatchewan legislation will provide the level playing 
field necessary to facilitate the creation of such entities in this 
province. I believe that the new statutory limited liability 
protection will serve to increase investor confidence in income 
trusts and facilitate institutional investor and pension fund 
involvement in income trusts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Income Trust Liability Act. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 40, The Income Trust Liability Act be now read a 
second time. The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 
that I rise to speak briefly on Bill No. 40, An Act respecting 
Income Trusts. Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, income 
trusts have become an increasingly popular vehicle for investors 
to balance out their income streams. And certainly it is a 
relatively new phenomenon and is indeed, as the minister 
outlined, a very popular vehicle right across Canada and 
internationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister outlined, the official opposition is 
aware that other jurisdictions in Canada have passed legislation 
that creates limited liability protection for income trusts similar 
to what exists for other corporations. And I think similarly with 
my comments on these other groups of legislation that are 
affecting our corporations and organizations, it’s important that 
our province creates a level playing field and a competitive 
environment for these financial vehicles in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am quite confident — this is very clear and fairly 
simple legislation in this Act — that it indeed will meet the 
requirements of the income trusts as similarly defined in other 
provinces. The minister outlined recent passage of similar Bills 
in other jurisdictions in the country, and I am quite confident 
that when the official opposition has the opportunity to 
investigate this completely, we will see that this legislation 
indeed meets the requirements that we have in this province. In 
order for this discussion to occur and for us to look into this 
information, at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Melfort that debate on second reading of Bill No. 40 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

second reading of The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006. Mr. 
Speaker, The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 will amend 
The Partnership Act by including a new definition of person 
which will include Indian bands and limited partnerships. In 
addition a new provision is added to require that individuals 
must be the age of majority in order to be eligible for 
partnership in a general or limited partnership. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the scope of The Partnership Act is not currently 
broad enough to accommodate all those who reasonably wish to 
become partners or limited partners within the meaning of the 
Act. The Act provides that partnership is the relationship 
between persons carrying on business in common with a view 
for profit. However the term person is not currently defined in 
the Act. The result has been that entities such as Indian bands or 
other limited partnerships cannot become general partners or 
limited partners within the meaning of the Act. This has unduly 
restricted the business model options for Indian bands and 
limited partnerships and those who would like to enter into 
partnerships with such entities. 
 
The proposed amendments will make it clear that individuals, 
corporations, limited partnerships, and Indian bands can be 
general partners under part I of the Act. In addition, individuals, 
corporations, other limited partnerships, and Indian bands will 
now be eligible to be partners in a limited partnership as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill includes a further amendment that will 
require that individuals must have attained the age of majority 
in order to be eligible for partnership. This amendment reflects 
the fact that certain legal obligations flow from partnership that 
are often unenforceable as against minors. It also removes the 
potential for any of these to attempt to escape liability for the 
business operations by carrying on business under the name of a 
partnership that has children as partners. 
 
These amendments respond to concerns raised by the business 
community in Saskatchewan. Lawyers for business clients have 
indicated that options for business models are unduly restricted 
by the current provisions which do not allow Indian bands to 
become partners in general or limited partnerships. In addition 
the inability of a limited partnership itself to become a partner 
in either a general or another limited partnership unnecessarily 
limits business structure options. This Bill responds to those 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that these amendments provide a timely 
and meaningful response to concerns raised by the 
Saskatchewan business community. The amendments will assist 
Saskatchewan businesses by providing additional business 
model options. This is particularly important in the context of 
the growing contribution to the provincial economy of business 
conducted by First Nations in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2006. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
that Bill No. 41, The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 be now 

read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, strange as it may seem, it’s a 
pleasure to rise and speak to Bill No. 41, An Act to amend The 
Partnership Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice I think did a pretty 
comprehensive updating on the legislation governing our firms, 
our corporations, our co-operatives, and indeed is updating the 
requirements to enter into legal partnerships under this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as in the comments on the other Bills that are 
brought forward this afternoon, I think it really is important that 
our legislation is reviewed and updated to make sure it’s 
appropriate for our present reality and the competitiveness that 
our firms and organizations find themselves in in the national 
and international stage. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this also would 
extend not only to the corporate world or the co-operative world 
but also to legal partnerships. And I’m pleased to see that the 
minister has not omitted to update this legislation as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice in the minister’s comments under section 
3(f) it includes under the Act an Indian band, which I think is 
important because increasingly First Nations financial 
initiatives are very important to our province and it’s important 
that they be properly recognized and the legislative tools be 
there to facilitate their participation in our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we again will need to consult and meet with 
individuals who are particularly affected by this legislation to 
solicit their comments and potentially to hear any concerns that 
may exist. And in order for us to facilitate that, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Melfort 
that debate on Bill No. 42, second reading, be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ 
Federation Act, 2006. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, in 1935 The Teachers’ 
Federation Act established the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, STF, as the professional organization for 
Saskatchewan teachers. The STF has taken on a number of 
responsibilities since that time that go well beyond its original 
mandate and the Act has been amended accordingly from time 
to time. 
 
The purpose of the amending Bill I introduce today is to repeal 
the current Act and replace it with a revised version. This Bill 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

updates terminology, reorganizes sections of the current Act, 
and adds some new provisions to more accurately describe the 
management, governance, professional and business practices 
of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me start by stating I value the important role 
teachers and the STF play in providing the best possible 
educational experience and opportunities for Saskatchewan 
students. Their work is an investment in the future and it’s an 
investment that will ensure for our generation and those that 
follow that Saskatchewan truly is the best place to live, work, 
and raise a family in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes to the Bill confirm the current role of 
the STF. There is no expansion nor any restriction of the 
authorities and responsibilities or practices that the STF has 
under the current Act. The intent, Mr. Speaker, is to bring 
clarity to The Teachers’ Federation Act by defining the 
authorities and responsibilities of the STF in more 
contemporary and specific language than the current Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me elaborate on certain provisions that have 
been clarified in the Bill: the definitions of terminology used 
throughout the Act; the legislative authority for the STF to 
govern the federation and to manage the business 
responsibilities of the organization; the federation’s authority to 
develop bylaws; the regulatory requirements of membership; 
the regulatory provisions for the federation to administer the 
pension plan for members; the composition, duties, 
responsibilities, and procedures of the ethics and competency 
committees; and the parameters for the collective interests of 
teachers relative to collective bargaining. Finally, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a regulation that structures set under the authority of the 
existing Act continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is agreement between the Department of 
Learning, Department of Justice, and the STF about the 
appropriateness of the provisions in the Bill. And I would also 
like to add, Mr. Speaker, the federation has undertaken 
consultations with the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association, the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents, and the Saskatchewan 
association of school-based officials, none of whom have 
expressed concern with the content of the proposed Bill. 
 
I would like to use this opportunity to thank the STF for their 
dedication to the education of our children and their passion for 
teaching. I look forward to our continued work together in 
support of the high-quality and responsive education system for 
our province. Mr. Speaker, education is the springboard for the 
social, economic, and personal well-being of the people in our 
province, from our youngest citizens and on throughout the 
ages of lifelong learning. Without teachers, there is no learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accordingly I’m very pleased to move second 
reading of Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Learning that Bill No. 44, The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
be now read a second time. The Chair recognizes the member 

for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
respond to the second reading of Bill No. 44, an Act respecting 
The Teachers’ Federation Act. I think it’s kind of fitting when 
we’re talking about the teaching profession because I can 
honestly tell you I’ve learned a couple of things today in about 
the last half hour or hour. 
 
I wasn’t aware than when a Bill is presented, if it’s just 
amending the Act there are explanatory notes so that we can 
follow along with the changes in the Act. But if it’s a repeal of 
an Act and a whole new Act put in place, there aren’t 
explanatory notes. I didn’t know that before. I thought each Bill 
had explanatory notes so that we could follow along. But this 
Bill, because it’s repealing the old Act and a whole new Act 
going into place, that’s why there are no explanatory notes. So I 
have learned something today, Mr. Speaker, regarding that 
aspect. 
 
But I think it’s significant because this is quite a lengthy Act. 
There are 20 pages in the Act and so the only way that we can 
compare other than take the minister’s words is to compare the 
old Act with the new Act and look at the changes all the way 
along which will take a little bit of time. 
 
The other thing that I learned today is that I don’t know 
personally myself that if I was to be speaking eventually, I 
hope, on the other side of the House and introducing a Bill and 
I’d invited people to come and listen to the Bill being 
introduced, I would move it up on the order paper so they didn’t 
have to sit through about an hour and a half of Bills on 
miscellaneous statutes and everything else. I think if I was 
inviting people here I’d move it ahead on the order paper so that 
they could hear what the minister had to say, listen to the 
response by the opposition, and then carry on with their very 
busy lives which I know they have. So that’s the other thing I 
learned today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other issue that I want to talk without getting into specifics 
on the Bill so much are the whole issues around the teaching 
profession. I do want to say, and I know the minister talked a 
little bit about the absolutely excellent job that our teachers do 
around the province, and I just want to talk a little bit about that 
— the teaching profession and the good job that they do. 
 
I can look back and tell you that as I went through school — 
that was quite a few years ago — some of the teachers that I had 
were absolute role models. Some of the commercials that the 
STF have on TV right now talking about the teaching 
profession, I can honestly 100 per cent relate to. Some of the 
testimonials by people talking about the teachers that they had 
and what role models they were and how it helped them along 
in whatever career they chose were exactly right. And I can 
honestly say that I don’t know if too many of the teachers that I 
had were saying, you should go into politics, mind you, but they 
did certainly instill, you know, maybe a bit of a work ethic and 
some confidence and those type of things that we all need as we 
go through the school system. That’s all part of it. 
 
It’s not maybe the tangible part of the curriculum but it’s the 
intangibles that they help you with to succeed and hopefully be 
successful once we get out of the high school system. Because I 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

was absolutely blessed with some excellent teachers that I still 
keep in touch with today. I know one of them happens to live in 
the constituency that I represent, Indian Head-Milestone. She 
lives in Indian Head and she was an English teacher for me in 
grade 11 and 12. 
 
And I can tell you, and you’ll know probably from many of my 
speeches, that my English at times isn’t always the best. I’m 
glad that I can speak it, not have to write it because my writing 
is atrocious at times. But I can tell you that it was that teacher 
that helped me get through the high school system, get through 
grade 12 — especially English, because it wasn’t one of my 
stronger subjects. 
 
The other thing I want to just quickly mention too is regarding 
teachers. And I guess you have a little bit of a different 
perspective when you’re at school compared to when you’re out 
of school, and now you have kids going through school. And 
you look at the teaching profession from a different light. And 
that’s kind of where we’re at right now with two boys in grades 
6 and 8. And I certainly don’t ever remember my parents being 
at the school nearly as much as we are. We tend to be able to be 
at the school a lot more and involved with the activities. From 
what I remember, the only time my parents came to the school 
it usually wasn’t a good thing. 
 
But we’re certainly involved a lot more with our kids’ 
education. And it is absolutely wonderful you know when 
people . . . And I’ve heard people talk about teachers and it’s, 
you know, a 9 to 3:30 job. Well I can tell you where — I think 
in every school across the province — but I can certainly talk to 
you about the school that our kids go to here in Regina, the 
teachers are far more than 9 to 5. 
 
And you see it, because if your kids are at all involved in 
extracurricular activities . . . And what I’ve been amazed at in 
the school that our boys go to who’ve both been involved in 
volleyball in the city — they won the city championship in 
volleyball, they won the city championship in basketball in the 
separate school system — the teachers . . . it didn’t seem like 
any sort of a job. In fact I think they have a bit of a, I don’t 
know whether it’s a contest or how they decide who’s going to 
go on and coach the team after school, because there doesn’t 
seem to be any lack of interest whatsoever. They’re all very, 
very interested in that. And I just think it’s an absolute credit to 
the teaching profession. So that’s what I wanted to say before I 
get to the Bill itself, is the excellent job that our teachers do 
around the province. 
 
The Act is certainly as I said a major Act — 20 pages repealing 
the old Act and replacing it with a new one. For the most part, 
from what I’ve seen it covers off everything that was in the old 
Act and changes a few things. But those few things we’re not 
exactly sure of; we’re going to have to look at and see the 
changes. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I’ve been glad to hear that that the minister talked about 
consulting with the different organizations because that’s 
extremely important. I can tell you from experience speaking on 
Bills that that isn’t always the case. It hasn’t always been the 
case. And sometimes we go to organizations after a Bill has 

been introduced and gone through second reading, and we say, 
did you know this was going to be changing and how that’s 
going to impact your profession? And quite often they weren’t 
consulted with. 
 
So I am glad that the minister, and if I take her for her word, 
that they have consulted with all the organizations that they 
need to . . . But I would also say that any good opposition is 
going to take the Bill, compare it with the old Bill, and make 
sure — because it’s the only time check in the system — that 
the Bill is actually going to do what the minister says. And 
that’s the job of the opposition. 
 
So we’ll be working with this Bill along with the professional 
organizations to make sure it does meet the needs, and the 
changes that are from the old Bill to the new Bill are what is 
needed going forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 44. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone that the debate on second reading of Bill No. 
44 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 4 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
for the opportunity to speak to Bill No. 4, a Bill to amend The 
Assessment Management Agency Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about The Assessment Management 
Agency Act, we’re talking about SAMA [Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency]. And that’s an acronym that 
most Saskatchewan people are quite familiar with. And I’d like 
to take just a couple of minutes in regards to this Act, looking 
first backwards and then looking forwards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know when it comes to the whole issue of property 
assessment that we’ve had less than a distinguished past in 
dealing with this very, very important issue that affects every 
property owner in the province of Saskatchewan. In the past we 
have seen discrepancies. We’ve seen a lot of confusion. There 
has been a lot of unfairness. And that has generated a lack of 
confidence in our assessment process. 
 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen radical shifts in property 
assessment, catching various sectors of the property owner 
segments of our province off guard. I think of some of the areas 
that have received unpleasant surprises include the hotel 
industry. Also resort properties have just been astonished at 
some of the property assessments that they have received. 
 
We’ve seen the division of communities. I know of one 
community in west central Saskatchewan where for some 
reason SAMA took and drew a line right through the middle of 
the town and increased the assessments on one side of the line 
and decreased the assessment on the other side of the line 
without proper reasoning for those changes. 
 
In the agriculture sector of course we’ve seen assessments again 
that were seen to be unfair. Sometimes the assessment for 
pasture land would rise and cultivated land would fall. That’s 
the current scenario that we seem to be seeing at least in the 
west side of the province. Other times it’s been reversed, and 
we’ve seen perhaps a lowering of assessment on pasture land, 
agriculture land, and an increased assessment on cultivated 
land. 
 
Of course the whole commercial sector has seen some of these 
ups and downs as well. I remember talking to a commercial 
property owner in the city of Saskatoon a few years back who 
just saw a horrendous increase in the taxable assessment on his 
property. It became an unmanageable situation. 
 
And I have a constituent in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency 
that lives in a very small community and has a small home. It’s 
not worth a lot of money. And suddenly he saw in one fell 
swoop of a pen last year his assessment more than double. And 
of course there was no sensible or justifiable reason for this 
happening. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, obviously any legislation that comes 
forward that will address some of these problems would be 
welcome. And we have to be assured that Bill No. 4 does 
address some of these problems. And you can be assured, Mr. 
Speaker, that the official opposition is scrutinizing this 
legislation very closely to make sure that the outcome will 
correct some of these imbalances and injustices of the past. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that I want to mention — and this 
is now not looking backwards at the problems of the past but 
looking forward, looking into the future — according to the 
details of Bill No. 4, it will move the assessment process to a 
market-based one rather than a fair-value basis for assessing 
property. And that’s been called for by a lot of people in the 
province of Saskatchewan for years and years. It’s been the 
modus operandi of property assessment in other jurisdictions 
for quite some time. 
 
And it strikes me as being particularly odd that it’s taken the 
NDP government so long to get on board and start to bring 
forward legislation that would in fact move us to a 
market-based system. But what really surprises me, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this legislation, although it’s moving us toward 
a more market-based system, will not take effect until the year 
2009. And of course this Bill was introduced back in 2005. It 
seems like if it’s not on the front page of the NDP’s agenda, it 
just gets delayed and it’s a low priority, and things that are 

important to a lot of people in Saskatchewan aren’t going 
forward very quickly. 
 
It’s pretty interesting to see what the NDP’s agenda is, what 
they put on the fast track and what they put on the slow track. 
I’m thinking of some of the things that they were in a big hurry 
to implement, Mr. Speaker. They were certainly in a hurry to 
bring forward their most available hours legislation. They didn’t 
consult at all on that one, and of course they got into a real 
wreck, and they actually had to back away from that legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. It was on their agenda, but it certainly wasn’t on 
the agenda of the people of Saskatchewan. And here we have an 
Act that is on the agenda of the people of Saskatchewan and it’s 
not going to be introduced or take effect until the year 2009. 
 
I think of the RM [rural municipality] amalgamation plan a few 
years ago under the leadership of the current Deputy Premier. 
They couldn’t wait to implement that forced amalgamation, and 
again because they hadn’t consulted they got into trouble. They 
could have been implementing the market-value assessment 
agenda contained in this Bill, but they had other priorities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think of the school board amalgamation, which also they 
rushed into place and wouldn’t have had to. And of course I 
guess the king of them all, Mr. Speaker, was the long-term care 
fees which there was no consultation whatsoever, but somehow 
the Premier got it in his mind that this was important and he had 
to rush this thing through. He forgot all about fixing property 
assessment issues. And so you know if it’s on the NDP’s 
agenda it goes quickly, but if it’s on the people’s agenda it can 
wait till 2009. 
 
You look at other areas where the NDP has dragged its feet. 
They have dragged their feet when it comes to lowering the 
PST [provincial sales tax]. Of course that was in the Vicq . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would like to bring to the member’s 
attention that the adjourned debate is on Bill No. 4, The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005. I 
would ask the member to relate what he is saying to this Bill. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and of course I 
accept your ruling. And what I was trying to relate, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the portion of this Bill that brings into effect 
market-value base for assessment does not come into place until 
the year 2009. And I’m trying to determine whether or not 
that’s a fair timetable. And I’m looking at what they’ve done in 
other issues to see whether or not it looks like this is a proper 
timetable. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it seems like they’re really 
dragging their feet on this, as they’ve been dragging their feet 
on lowering the PST. And it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to relate 
what the people’s agenda is and what the priorities of people are 
versus what the priority is of this NDP government. And quite 
frankly, lowering the PST is not on the first page of the NDP 
government’s agenda, just like implementing a market-based 
assessment in Bill No. 4 is not on their agenda either. 
 
Neither is fully contributing to farm programs. They drag their 
feet on that, and of course that has a relationship to the 
assessment that farmers have to pay on land too because they 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

are not receiving the full benefit in a timely way from farms 
program, and yet they are still under the old assessment system, 
Mr. Speaker, so they have the worst of both worlds. It’s very 
important, Mr. Speaker, that when we debate these issues we 
look at the larger context of what the government’s priorities 
are. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the Saskatchewan Party 
is looking at this Bill very closely. We are pointing out where 
the government’s priorities are — right and wrong. If the 
amendments could be made that would speed this process up, 
we would encourage the government to look at it. We want to 
do things that help the people of Saskatchewan. That is the 
responsibility of the Saskatchewan Party. And so while the 
NDP are contemplating on whether they might be able to do 
something to correct this slowness, this tardiness on their part, I 
would suggest that we adjourn debate on this Bill. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose that debate on Bill No. 4 be now adjourned. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 5 —The Cities 
Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise to 
participate in the debate on this Bill. 
 
This Bill actually encompasses two different areas. One is in 
response to the enforcement of parking tickets, especially in our 
larger cities of Saskatoon and Regina. As the members will be 
aware, during the last year there was an individual in each of 
Saskatoon and Regina, they were incarcerated. It was in both 
cases single mothers that were trying to attend school or places 
of employment. Both cases they had accumulated a large 
number of parking tickets and generated several thousand 
dollars worth of expenditure. 
 
Under the existing provisions of law at that time, these people 
were required to serve a sentence because the fines were in 
default. I think it became clear to the public, Mr. Speaker, that 
this was an inappropriate use of the judicial system and 
probably not the best method to ensure compliance with our 
parking laws. There was a large amount of public scrutiny and 
discussion on open-line programs at that time. The net effect of 
that was that people felt that the cities were trying to collect a 
debt for rent of parking spaces. The cities took the position — 
and probably quite fairly — that they were trying to enforce 
their parking bylaws, and it was a matter of respect for the law 
and respect for the judicial process. 
 
This legislation is intended to strike a balance to allow a 

security interest to be registered against the vehicles that are 
used in those offences and to allow for the seizure and ultimate 
sale of those vehicles. Mr. Speaker, the effect of that appears to 
be well-received so far by the public. We have questions and 
concerns about some aspects of it, in particular the priorities 
and how the priorities would be on the sale or disposition of 
those vehicles. 
 
The registration would be done by the municipality under our 
personal property registry. There would be a first priority 
granted to a personal property filer that had registered to protect 
the purchase price money granted for that vehicle. But if the 
individual had granted a personal property interest by way of a 
chattel mortgage to a bank to secure another loan or existing 
loan, the city would have priority of that. So we’ve got a 
question of values as to should the city rank ahead of the 
municipality or somebody else or ahead of a chartered bank. So 
we have issues and we have questions with regard to that, and 
we will certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, want to have 
consultation with lenders that may be adversely affected by 
that. 
 
The other half of this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, deals with 
amendments to the assessment process and the assessment 
procedure. We’re all aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that by 2009 
we want to have all properties in the province — especially 
ones in the cities, commercial and residential properties — 
moved to a market-value assessment model. Right now we’re 
going through the periodic changes in what amounts to, at 
present time, very wild escalations in assessment values. Cities 
are going through phase-in processes, and there’s problems. 
 
I have had constituents come to me with commercial properties 
that have had variations in their assessment by way of an 
increase in 80 per cent from one assessment to another, so that a 
year later you’ll see a commercial property that has had their 
property tax almost doubled. The effect of that has a marked 
effect on the market value of the property because it affects the 
income ability, and it also has very substantial effects on the 
ability of those business owners to conduct their business affairs 
and plan their finances. And in some cases where the increase is 
large enough, it could very easily impact the viability of that 
business to go on. So it’s something that’s troubling. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And the ones that we hear about as MLAs are the ones where 
there has been a very marked increase or a dramatic increase. 
The ones that we don’t hear about are the other end of the 
spectrum — because this is supposed to be revenue neutral — 
where there has been a substantial drop. Those people that have 
received a large drop smile and go to the bank and are quite 
content to take their drop in property tax. So the ones we hear 
about are the increased ones; nobody complains on the other 
end. So there’s appeals going on on the increase, and there’s all 
the issues of people lobbying their MLAs, lobbying the city, 
dealing with assessment appeals. And it’s troubling when 
you’ve got that kind of a variation. 
 
One thing the business community likes is certainty and 
consistency for the long term. And right now, between now and 
2009, we’re not going to enjoy that kind of consistency. And 
it’s my hope that the net effect of this legislation and the 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

changes to the assessment management Act is that we will have 
some form of consistency — long-term consistency — so that 
businesses know where they’re at, homeowners know where 
they’re at, so that values start to retain some kind of consistency 
and values aren’t affected one way or the other by changes to 
assessed value. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I attended a meeting of 
ratepayers in the town of Dundurn. And it was attended by 
people that had been farmers that had received the benefit of the 
recent announcement that the government made of $52 million 
which is going to go to change their tax structure. We also 
heard from acreage owners and commercial property owners 
that don’t share in that. And the effect of what had happened 
with that particular announcement is we are now pitting owners 
of property in one class against owners of another, which is 
troubling. 
 
We know that property tax in a general sense is too high 
because of the large education component in our property tax. 
And I think that’s something that’s related to this, and it’s 
something that we as a province have to work towards. And I 
want to encourage the government members to try and do 
something as they work together to prepare a budget because 
that’s something that we are going to be looking for in that 
budget, is some significant relief for the education component 
in property tax. With that we will want to have some more 
ongoing consultation with our constituents.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast that debate on Bill No. 5 
be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 6 — The 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to get up today to talk about this particular Bill, The 
Municipalities Act. I believe with this particular Bill it was 
introduced and then pulled because there was basically from 
what I understand lack of consultation; a lot of the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] weren’t 
entirely happy with it. It speaks basically to what this 
government always does. It doesn’t seem to consult with the 
people out there in Saskatchewan, and just basically out of 
touch with what’s happening out there — especially in rural 
Saskatchewan on various things —especially when it comes to 
this Bill talking about assessment and assessment of education 

tax which this Bill probably deals a bit with when you go 
through it there. 
 
On education tax, the Premier’s always talked about that here in 
Saskatchewan we have more farm land than the rest of Canada, 
so the rest of Canada should pay a little better proportionate 
towards rather than a 60/40 split. But yet when it comes to 
education tax and farm land, there’s only about 18 per cent of 
the farmers out there that are paying education tax, yet they’re 
paying about 80 per cent. So if he thought that it was unfair to 
federal, then why does he think it’s fair at this end for people in 
rural Saskatchewan to be picking up the majority of education 
tax? 
 
And they’ve been doing that for years. They haven’t addressed 
this problem for a number of years. The members over there 
right now are raising and saying, well they finally did 
something. Well we’ll wait and see in the fall if it’s actually 
going to drop. And that’s what the people out there are asking, 
if they’re actually going to see a drop. Because he says it’s 
going to drop by 20 per cent. Well I will be surprised if I’m 
paying $2,000 less on my farm land next year. Because I’ve got 
a very, very sneaking suspicion that I won’t be, that somehow 
that I won’t be paying . . . my bill won’t be cut by 20 per cent as 
the farmers out there. Why? Because basically when they raise 
that issue, they don’t trust this government. You look at the past 
issues for the number of years that go on here. This government 
is basically running on a lack of credibility for a number of 
years when it comes to that and when it comes to assessment. 
 
The member before talked about property tax on acreages out 
there in rural Saskatchewan right now. There’s people out there 
that are paying quite a bit on assessment on acreages that are 
basically out — unfortunately due to this government — out 
almost in the middle of nowhere now. 
 
There’s highways — No. 15 Highway and No. 19 Highway — 
they’re like goat trails out there now. There is no business and 
no people out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that their property 
is actually worth almost unfortunately nothing. And yet they’re 
still paying assessed tax, especially on acreages, as much as 
they’re paying just outside Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
You take on No. 19 Highway, because businesses just can’t 
move there any more, because they just can’t transport their 
stuff out there . . . Businesses want to come out there for 
various reasons — it’s not only the highway; it’s SaskTel, 
SaskPower, SaskEnergy. 
 
I had a business that wanted to put in a business in a town. 
SaskTel wanted $5,000 for an extra line and the lines are 
running right beside the house — $5,000 to run, put just one, 
extra. And if they wanted a fax line, it was another 5,000. They 
wanted a third line, it was another $5,000. That business was 
looking at $15,000 just in phone lines, never mind they had to 
bring the power in. And if they wanted natural gas at that . . . 
which there wasn’t even a natural gas line, so they couldn’t 
even have it even if they wanted to, at that end of it. 
 
So when they look at assessed property, you know, people are 
. . . they’re upset out there in Saskatchewan. They feel that 
they’re not getting a fair shake from this government at that end 
when it comes to assessment, at that end. They’ve been paying 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

taxes for a number of years. For a number of years they’ve been 
paying taxes out here in rural Saskatchewan and getting no 
services out of it. This government has been taking money, 
putting it in general revenue, spending it on things like Tommy 
Douglas movies, on propaganda stuff, and basically not passing 
it back to out there in rural Saskatchewan. And then you 
wonder why when they talk about assessment, people just see it 
going up. And when they talk about lowering it, the education 
tax, I wonder if they ever will. 
 
Another proponent of this Bill talks about putting a youth 
representative out there on councils. That’s all right, except in 
rural Saskatchewan, there’s no youth left out there — they’ve 
all had to go to Alberta to work. Right now my town has 60 
people. I can count 10 of the kids that are right now out there 
working in Alberta. Why? Because that’s where the jobs are; 
that’s where the money is. And they go there. The taxes are 
lower. They work there for six months. They can claim income 
tax there, and they’ll pay half as much in Alberta as they do in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You wonder why they want to stay here. What are these guys 
doing to address that problem? They’re doing nothing on it. Yet 
they think they really did something by youth by putting a piece 
of legislation in and saying, you can sit on council. Well I 
talked to youth in my area. You know what they want? They 
want jobs. They want to stay here in Saskatchewan. That’s what 
they want. Address that problem. You want to do something for 
youth? Address that problem at that end of it. 
 
I mean putting youth on in there, that’s a nice little platitude for 
them. But it doesn’t address the basic fundamental problems 
that is wrong with this province. And they don’t recognize that 
over there. This province is in trouble. This province is dying. 
We’re losing jobs. We’re losing population. And it keeps 
declining every year at that. How long do you think they can 
keep handing that and being able to retain youth on these 
particular Bills at this end of it? 
 
Another thing this Bill talks about is moving to market value, 
but it doesn’t say on all property. From what I understand — 
and I’m going through the Bill — it says some properties will 
be assessed on fair market value, some will be assessed still on 
the other, on the old system. So which properties go which 
way? Which ones are assessed this way? 
 
When you get to hotels out there in rural Saskatchewan right 
now, they have no business thanks to the smoking legislation, 
the taxes they take off liquor. You know, them hotels yet are 
assessed very high. They’re paying very next . . . They’re 
getting nothing for their services, and yet they’re being taxed. 
And they wonder why . . . I think I had one or two hotels close 
in my constituency. I think everybody’s had one or two close in 
rural Saskatchewan out there at that end of it. 
 
And it’s not only that. It’s every business that’s being assessed 
out there. And one of the things is, is we’re being taxed here. 
Give us a break on our tax. And one of them is the education 
tax whether it is on rural Saskatchewan or in towns. The 
member from southeast had mentioned, yes, acreages and 
people in towns and cities are concerned about . . . Because yes, 
right here in Regina they pay a proportion, a huge proportion of 
education tax on their properties. In rural Saskatchewan on farm 

land, it’s a lot higher. But still it’s high across the board at that 
end of it for education tax of that. That’s your biggest part of 
your bill at that end of it, and it’s going to be going up at that 
end of it. 
 
But dealing with the municipality Act here, going into . . . 
they’ve already made some amendments to it that I’ve looked 
at, at the Bill here, and I doubt if they’re even going to be . . . if 
SUMA and SARM are even going to be happy with some of 
them. But with that, I would like to adjourn debate on this 
particular piece of legislation because I think we’ll need some 
more consulting at that end of it. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
hon. member for Arm River-Watrous that debate on Bill No. 6 
be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That is carried. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Prebble that Bill No. 21 — The Boiler 
and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up today to talk about Bill No. 21, the Act to 
amend the Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act. And it’s kind of 
appropriate that this Bill came up on the order paper after the 
debate by the member from Arm River-Watrous because he’s 
obviously quite steamed today so . . . 
 
When the minister spoke to this Bill in the second reading last 
fall, he admitted that the Act was originally developed and 
passed in 1999 but proclamation was delayed in order to 
develop and finalize the supporting regulations. 
 
Well seven years have now passed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
the NDP have said that they have taken all this time to share 
and discuss the regulations with the key stakeholders to ensure 
that they are practical and effective. Now after seven years I 
would hope that they’ve had enough time to do consultation to 
clean up the Act and the problems within the Act. However as 
the member from Rosetown-Elrose mentioned, and I believe 
one of the members from Saskatoon mentioned, consultation is 
not necessarily the NDP government’s strong point so we can’t 
be totally guaranteed that the proper consultation has been done 
and indeed this Act has been cleaned up so that it serves the 
purpose that it was meant to. 
 
So in light of the fact that it’s taken them seven years to do the 
consultation, the official opposition would like to take a little 
while longer to complete their consultations although we assure 
the members opposite that we won’t take seven years in order to 
go through the consultation process and ensure that this serves 
the needs. 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

The last member of the official opposition to speak to this Bill 
was the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood and he 
described a number of concerns that have been expressed to 
different members on our side of the House with . . . in the 
inspection of boilers and so we will be checking that out and 
ensuring that the Bill addresses those concerns. And with that I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — It’s been moved by the 
hon. member for Humboldt that debate on Bill No. 21 be 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
[The Assembly resumed debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions 
Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to rise today to speak on the forestry professionals of 
Saskatchewan Act. And I had the opportunity to read the former 
minister’s notes and comments regarding this Act. And some of 
the things that concern me in that were that we instituted a 
policy here which incorporated mostly new conditions into this 
Act instead of looking at what other jurisdictions had and to 
copy those. And one of things that bothered me in the minister’s 
comments were that, and I quote: 
 

. . . [a] commitment to build a green and prosperous 
economy by further protecting the environment while 
enhancing sustainable forest industry opportunities. 

 
[15:45] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish we spent as much time looking on the 
marketing side of these products and how Saskatchewan can be 
competitive in world markets. The concern I have is that we 
continually look to regulations and not to marketing. You know, 
we built a forestry centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Prince Albert 
and that forestry centre was to achieve some of these objectives 
that are contained in this Bill. And I would wonder and question 
why we wouldn’t do this quasi in reverse and have had this Act 
prior to the forestry centre. 
 
You know, we always seem to be following the lead of other 
governments. We don’t seem to be able to take initiative and 
get in front of these processes. We are, as I understand, the 
eighth province in Canada to look at this. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, why is it that we always have to be the eighth. Well 
you know, it’s obvious that we’re not last on this, but it would 
be nice to be proactive instead of reactive. 
 
There are many members within the forestry sector who provide 
great work and opportunities who should have their skills and 
their skill sets recognized, not only locally in the province of 

Saskatchewan but across this great country and have the 
opportunity to move laterally within provinces. 
 
You know, one of the concerns I had in reading it too was that it 
said that the majority of the members were in support of this 
legislation. I haven’t had the personal opportunity to find out 
how many that is, but with 150 members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
you have to question how far was the consultation and how 
widespread was it. 
 
You know, it’s one thing to bring in legislation to assist, and I 
believe this legislation will assist. The question comes as who 
do we speak to and when do we speak to them. And as always, 
we speak to them after the horse is out of the barn. We look at 
legislation that comes. And BC [British Columbia] has a 
forestry’s Act that is there to protect sustainability. You know, 
why is it that ours can’t just mirror some of these best practices 
of other jurisdictions and get this legislation in and get it in in 
order to meet the requirements of these professionals so they 
can be recognized across Canada. 
 
You know, it’s one thing that this government does and it’s one 
thing that it does bad. It is always implementation before 
consultation. It doesn’t matter what the subject matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, it is always implementation before consultation. And 
in this Act, we’re concerned that the consultation: (a) has not 
been widespread enough; and (b) has not been long enough. 
We’ve had the opportunity to speak to this legislation here in 
the House and we will continue to do that. But we want to know 
why this government cannot be proactive instead of reactive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be adjourning debate on this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Northwest that debate on second reading on Bill No. 
2 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 24 — The Cost 
of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just make a few 
comments regarding Bill No. 24, The Cost of Credit Disclosure 
Amendment Act. When the minister gave his second reading 
speech he indicated that the purpose of the Bill was to address a 
number of issues arising from the movement of The Cost of 
Credit Disclosure Act, 2002, and the fact that the government 
has not implemented that Act because of a number of 
circumstances they’ve run into in regards to regulatory changes 
that took place at the federal level that really conflict with the 
Act. 
 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

The minister had indicated that there had been discussion with a 
number of provinces in trying to bring the cost of credit 
disclosure forward and working together to ensure that as 
people went from one province to the other that they would face 
the same rules, the same guidelines, and the same regulations 
and that there wouldn’t be such a conflict from one jurisdiction 
to the other. He indicated that this Bill is intended to protect 
consumers against unfair credit practices and will give 
consumers comparable information to make credit decisions. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all agree on the fact that 
consumers need all the information they can get. 
 
One of the problems when you’re dealing with credit agencies 
is you see advertisements of if you work with us, we’ll ensure 
that you have a credit . . . or a cost of borrowing which is much 
better than any other financial institution. But Mr. Speaker, I 
think we’ve all learned just through past experience that you 
best go to the fine print and indeed read exactly what is meant 
by the interest rate that may be offered and what requirements 
might be needed . . . you might need to meet in order to achieve 
that low rate of interest. 
 
And so I think it’s important that we take a very close look and 
that this piece of legislation be brought forward because of the 
fact, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the problems we do face, that 
while the 2002 Bill tried to address a number of inequities in 
the legislation that we had in the past and as has already been 
indicated, the federal regulatory changes that have been made 
created a problem for that 2002 Bill. 
 
We also are aware in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that there isn’t that level playing field. And certainly 
as the credit unions across this province have brought to our 
attention, some of the challenges they face as they deal with 
other lending institutions, multinational lending institutions, and 
when it comes to working with consumers and trying to help 
consumers meet their financial needs and meet their financial 
goals. 
 
So I want to commend the government first of all, Mr. Speaker, 
for recognizing that there are some changes that need to be 
implemented, also the fact that they didn’t implement the 2002 
Bill simply because of the conflicts that arose. However, I have 
to . . . And my colleague mentioned earlier when he spoke to 
this piece of legislation, we need to make inquiries of the 
government exactly what type of consultation process they 
entered into with the federal government in bringing forward a 
number of the concerns they had, concerns going back to 2002 
and the piece of legislation that was introduced at that time. 
 
It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that we would trust the 
provincial government actually was at the table and raising 
those concerns. And maybe, Mr. Speaker, we need to know, it 
would be good to know whether or not they were at the table 
with the other provinces that were dealing the same type of 
legislation. And so as we indicated in the past, there are issues 
that we believe we need to look at a little more closely. We 
need to identify whether or not the piece of legislation will 
indeed provide the protections that the government is indicating 
and that it will meet the needs in the financial community out 
there and that there will not be further problems arising as a 
result of the changes, the regulatory changes at the federal level. 
 

The minister also indicated that while it’s a small Bill, that there 
are a couple new sections, one dealing with unsolicited credit 
cards and another dealing with credit card liability. And I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, the consuming public are certainly 
interested in that part of the legislation. 
 
And I think it’s important that we take the time and converse 
with stakeholders or people that would be more directly 
affected with the changes that are being brought forward by the 
credit disclosure amendment Act, Bill No. 24, that we have 
before us today. And while it’s largely a housekeeping Bill, we 
need to certainly maintain that and may ensure that the 
consumers’ rights are protected, that lending agencies are 
protected in how they offer credit to their customers, and they 
are not impeded in their abilities to function as a lending agency 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Therefore at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill No. 24 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 19 — The 
Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at first 
glance this is a fairly simple and straightforward Bill. And one 
would think it would be the type of Bill that you may be able to 
introduce into the Assembly and just move forward fairly 
rapidly and fairly quickly. The amendments that are brought 
forward in The Trustee Amendment Act, Bill No. 19, codify the 
law relating to trustee liability and the responsibility of the trust 
fund and trustees in the event that a trustee is sued. And I guess 
when we look at the legislation and look at it a little more 
carefully, there’s a little more to this legislation that needs to be 
scrutinized and looked at very carefully. 
 
I believe however that the Bill has a . . . there’s a firm purpose 
in moving forward with the Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, when we 
look at the number of trustee liabilities or the number of 
trust-related funds and the trustees involved in managing these 
funds, the purpose and the intent of the Bill I think is certainly 
straightforward and is worthwhile, and it needs to be pursued in 
view of the fact that many of the people that are involved in 
managing trusts and trust funds in the province of 
Saskatchewan are actually giving of their time, volunteering 
their time to manage these trust funds. And certainly it doesn’t 
speak well for a fund and a trustee who has given of their time 
and somebody becomes dissatisfied with how the fund is 
operating and decides that they feel they have the right to sue 
any trustee in view of the fact that that person may have been 
doing, and in all likelihood were doing, their best to manage 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

that trust and trust fund well. 
 
And so I feel that there are some sound provisions in this piece 
of legislation that are being brought forward, especially in view 
of the fact that we don’t want to interfere and take away from 
the volunteerism that we have in the province of Saskatchewan 
and the way people continue to volunteer their time and efforts 
to assist and help people, whether it’s in managing trust funds, 
whether it’s being parts of pension boards, or whatever the 
circumstance is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of the fact that the province of 
Saskatchewan does have a good record for volunteerism and the 
volunteer hours that men and women across this province put 
into giving of their time and efforts to support community 
events and local organizations. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we just witnessed again this past week as 
the city of Regina hosted the Tim Hortons Brier. And this event, 
Mr. Speaker, would not have happened if it wouldn’t have been 
for the hundreds of volunteers who gave of their time and their 
efforts so that an event like this could come to the city of 
Regina. 
 
And while this piece of legislation doesn’t necessarily deal with 
that type of volunteerism, it points to the fact that in 
Saskatchewan there are issues where people do volunteer their 
time for specific purposes of running trust funds. And it’s 
important that we ensure that their livelihood, their well-being 
is protected while they’re giving of their time and effort to 
ensure that an individual or community trust fund is 
appropriately handled, and that a trustee is not held accountable 
for actions that are beyond their abilities or what the intent of 
their volunteer effort for that trust fund is and how it’s complied 
with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we have a number of questions. While 
the Bill itself may not be that large, I think we need to raise a 
few issues in regards to The Trustee Amendment Act and 
therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Moosomin that debate on second reading of Bill No. 19 be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Quennell that Bill No. 18 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2005 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise to speak to Bill No. 18, The Securities 
Amendment Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very lengthy Bill, lengthy and complex, 
dealing with amending the provincial securities legislation. And 
much of the Bill appears to be of a housekeeping nature, Mr. 
Speaker. Many of the amendments contained in this Bill are 
intended to harmonize Saskatchewan securities legislation with 
that of other provinces and to make that legislation compatible 
with national instruments. Many of the proposed amendments 
in the Bill are required changes to the legislation because of 
agreed-upon national instruments. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of these amendments bring Saskatchewan’s 
securities legislation more in line with other jurisdictions, 
including Alberta. These provisions should give the Securities 
Commission the legal basis to put in place a regulatory system 
called for in the memorandum of understanding based on one 
law and one regulatory regime. Mr. Speaker, it’s a major 
concern of ours in the opposition that the playing field not be 
levelled to such an extent that the status quo be necessarily 
maintained between the provinces in such a way that 
Saskatchewan can progress to take our rightful place as an 
economic leader in this country. So accordingly, Mr. Speaker, 
and since there are many parties to this Act that need to be 
consulted with, I move to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Thunder Creek that debate on Bill No. 18, second reading, be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 15 — The 
Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to get up to talk about 
today to make some comments about Bill 15, some of the 
amendments on it. I see one of them is getting rid of the 
revolving fund into the General Revenue Fund. I wish that they 
would just maybe spend that money on the highways out there. 
I’m not sure what they wanted to put it in the General Revenue 
Fund for unless they’re going to be making another Tommy 
Douglas movie. Maybe they’re going to make one on Shirley 
Douglas there as an actress or ranks right up with Anna Nicole 
Smith as an actress. 
 
But anyways getting into some of the highways out there in 
rural Saskatchewan, I just had a phone call. I’ve got a piece of 
highway that’s being shut down right now on Highway No. 15 
from the Junction 20 east to Semans. And it was just rebuilt. 
There was 6 kilometres that was just built there last fall. They 
spent money on it. I don’t know how much money they spent 
on it, rebuilt it, and now it’s closed down. They don’t say why. 



March 20, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

We’ll be asking some questions maybe in committee on that 
end of it, but there is barricades out there. I just got a call saying 
they’re using it for local traffic. And one of the local people 
said that highway is so beat up, and that they had to shut it 
down. And they just did work on it last fall — last summer is 
when they did the work on it. 
 
Now I don’t know what kind of material they got. Maybe they 
were trying to use some more experimental material, which is 
fine to try that. But I mean when you spend how much money 
to Highway, you should have some idea when you’re going to 
use that, not to be doing that much of . . . [inaudible] . . . on it. 
And I’ll be curious to see what they’re going to say in 
committee at that end of it. Do you know how much of an 
inconvenience this is out there in rural Saskatchewan right 
now? And to have a chunk of highway basically just shut down 
. . . so it’s putting stress on the grids right now. And the RM 
councillor . . . and he phoned me and he says, now our grid road 
is being beat up now by trucks and semis and getting no, 
basically no compensation for it at that end of it. 
 
So it’s the grids now paying for the highways. Before, they 
voluntarily were getting off the highways on No. 19 and No. 15 
highway. Now they’re being forced because they’ve basically 
just shut the highways down, so now they’re forcing them onto 
the grids. So imagine eventually the next plan will be maybe 
they’ll just . . . going to get rid of the highways out there and 
put it to the RMs at that end of it. 
 
But dealing with this particular Bill on the revolving fund at 
that . . . why drop in general revenue? Why isn’t that money 
being used on highways there? I’ve got 19 Highway basically 
that there was a 4 inch drop on a curve out by a gravel pit. I had 
calls on it, you know, from the mayors out there saying, you 
know somebody’s going to get killed there. Somebody’s going 
to fall off that edge and roll a vehicle. And I mean nobody 
wants to see that. But when are . . . They say we’re going to do 
that. 
 
I made calls on that particular curve since December, and I was 
out there in February there at a hockey game, provincial hockey 
game, and the guy says it still hasn’t been fixed yet. It hasn’t 
been addressed. There’s potholes the size of 2, 3 inches deep in 
it and this is already winter time. What’s it going to be like in 
spring when this highway starts getting . . . when the frost starts 
coming out? What kind of trouble is it going to be at that 
particular end? 
 
This Bill also deals with civil disobedience on highways. I think 
it increases the fines out there. Well basically nobody can travel 
anywhere to be disobedient out there in rural Saskatchewan, 
and if you did you’d wreck your vehicle out there. 
 
You know some of the . . . You know this is getting to be a 
problem out there in rural Saskatchewan. These highways are 
beat. There literally just . . . there’s nothing left of them in a lot 
of areas. I’ve had businesses move out. Drake industries, or 
Bergen Industries at Drake makes trailers. You know when I 
was out, you know what he told me a couple years ago? He 
says, I got to load these trailers, or horse trailers. He says I got 
to load them on a trailer and haul them to Saskatoon to sell 
them because I can’t drive them down the highway because by 
the time I get to Saskatoon I got to repaint them. He says, do 

you know how much extra cost that is to him at that end of it? 
So he says right now they were loading them up and taking 
them to Saskatoon on trailers — an extra cost — and you want 
businesses to go out there in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Even the Third World countries out there know when you want 
to start your infrastructure, you start with your basic 
infrastructure, and they’re working on their railways and their 
highways. And what are we doing? We’re ignoring them out 
there in Saskatchewan. You wonder why we’ve got no 
businesses out here and nobody coming to anywhere in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Even No. 11 is getting beat up past Chamberlain there. On the 
older section there is starting to be red flags appearing on that. 
So I wonder how long it’s going to be before maybe they shut 
down. And when I come up to the legislature, I’m going to have 
to go around by Pense before I can come into Moose Jaw at that 
end of it. But you know we’ve talked about how we’ve . . . 
since in ’99, and when I ran in ’99 that was one of the main 
issues when I used to go around. And it hasn’t changed. You 
haven’t fixed any of them highways out there. You haven’t 
spent a nickel out there fixing them right and doing things. And 
yet you pass legislation just dealing with moving one fund to 
the other fund. 
 
So this particular Bill, on Bill 15, you know that’s what it does, 
transferring some money from one end into general revenue and 
basically not doing anything out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
When are you guys going to take responsibility for out there in 
the province? You want to run this province. Do something out 
there. Run it.  
 
You go to other provinces. Even Manitoba, which is NDP 
government, has better infrastructure than we’ve got out there. 
Alberta, Newfoundland, Nova Scotia — we’re ranked about 
worst when it comes to highways out there for infrastructure at 
that end of it. And you wonder why nobody comes to this 
province. They talk about other provinces. They talk about, you 
know, how jealous they are of Alberta. Well they spend money. 
That’s how you fix your infrastructure. You fix your tax 
system, and you bring people out there. Then maybe you’ve got 
some money, some tax money to try to fix these highways and 
draw businesses out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You know I think of the bus drivers that phone me. He says you 
know, we’ve got to drive up and down these highways. And he 
says, you know, we’re hauling kids, and he says there’s a safety 
issue that’s coming out here at that end of it. 
 
And we’ve talked about numerous you know . . . just calling 
about . . . Last week there we had some calls calling about 
departments. I just had a meeting with the mayor from Watrous 
calling about closing the section shops, six of them here in rural 
Saskatchewan. Now the minister gets up and says no; we’re 
probably not going to close them, or we hope not. But I mean 
that’s going to get us by maybe this year. How about next year 
at that particular end? That document came out so actually you 
know that they’re studying it and you know that they’re going 
to cut. 
 
I can remember when they said they wouldn’t cut any hospitals 
in rural Saskatchewan. They cut 52. I can remember when they 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2006 

cut a SaskPower office just two years in Davidson. Now they 
cut a SaskTel office in Watrous. They cut the rural service 
centres across in rural Saskatchewan. So why would I think that 
they’re not going to close these section shops? What would the 
people out there, what would make them actually think they’re 
not going to close these because you’ve closed just about every 
government thing out there in rural Saskatchewan, and that’s 
one of the things you’ve got left out there is some of these 
section shops. 
 
On Bill 13 this does deal with that because that is part of the 
revolving fund that’s in there. That can help maybe keep them 
section shops open, this particular fund. But where it moved 
into . . . general revenue, are they going to spend any more 
money in general revenue out there at that end of it? 
 
But anyways, Mr. Speaker, dealing with this particular Bill and 
some of the amendments on it . . . But yes I’m not that happy 
with just . . . All it is, is actually deal with the highways out 
there instead of just dealing with some fluff legislation moving 
some money around from one end to the other, from one fund to 
the next, increasing a fine for civil disobedience if you put a 
roadblock out. Well there is nobody left in rural Saskatchewan 
out there to put a roadblock anywhere, so I don’t even know 
why you’re even increasing the fine on that. Maybe you should 
be looking at how we can get some more people out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. Anyways I’d like to adjourn debate on this 
particular Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Arm 
River-Watrous that debate on second reading of Bill No. 15 be 
now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Why is the member for 
Regina Dewdney on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Government 
House Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:10.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Weekes .......................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Cheveldayoff..............................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................673 
  Junor ..........................................................................................................................................................................................674 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................674 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................674 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................674 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................674 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................674 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................674 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................675 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................675 
  McCall .......................................................................................................................................................................................675 
 Holy Cross Crusaders Provincial 6A Basketball Champions 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................676 
 Saskatchewan Team Wins Silver at World Junior Curling Championships 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................676 
 Congratulations to Brier Participants and Volunteers 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................676 
 O’Neill High School Senior Girls’ Curling Team 
  Morin .........................................................................................................................................................................................677 
 Comments by Government Members 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................677 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Recruiting and Retaining Nurses 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................677 
  Taylor.........................................................................................................................................................................................677 
 Commitment to Policing 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................679 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................679 
 Future of Weyerhaeuser Mill in Prince Albert 
  Kirsch.........................................................................................................................................................................................679 
  Lautermilch ...............................................................................................................................................................................679 
 Film’s Portrayal of Former Premier Gardiner 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................680 
  Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................681 
MOTION UNDER RULE 49 
 Film’s Portrayal of Former Premier Gardiner 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................682 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 31 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Accounting Professions) Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................683 
 Bill No. 35 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2006/Loi de 2006 modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................683 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................684 
 Bill No. 36 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment 
   Act, 2006 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (indemnisation et assurance au profit des administrateurs et dirigeants) de 2006 (no2) 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................685 
 



 

 Bill No. 37 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Directors’ and Officers’ Indemnification and Insurance) Amendment 
   Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................685 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................686 
 Bill No. 38 — The Settlement of International Investment Disputes Act/Loi sur le règlement des différends 
   internationaux relatifs aux investissements 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................686 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................687 
 Bill No. 40 — The Income Trust Liability Act 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................687 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................688 
 Bill No. 41 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2006 
  Quennell.....................................................................................................................................................................................688 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................689 
 Bill No. 44 — The Teachers’ Federation Act, 2006 
  Higgins .......................................................................................................................................................................................689 
  McMorris...................................................................................................................................................................................690 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 4 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2005 
  Hermanson ................................................................................................................................................................................691 
 Bill No. 5 —The Cities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Morgan ......................................................................................................................................................................................693 
 Bill No. 6 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................694 
 Bill No. 21 — The Boiler and Pressure Vessel Amendment Act, 2005 
  Harpauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................695 
 Bill No. 22 — The Forestry Professions Act 
  Merriman ..................................................................................................................................................................................696 
 Bill No. 24 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Amendment Act, 2005 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................696 
 Bill No. 19 — The Trustee Amendment Act, 2005 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................697 
 Bill No. 18 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2005 
  Stewart .......................................................................................................................................................................................698 
 Bill No. 15 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2005 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................698 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


