






















































Hansard: April 10, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 38B  MONDAY, APRIL 10, 2006, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1079 
 April 10, 2006 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Members of the 
Assembly will come to order for our evening sitting, and we’ll 
resume debate on the budget. And just before we ended the 
afternoon sitting, the member for Regina Wascana Plains was 
on her feet. So I recognize the hon. member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I 
mentioned this afternoon, it’s indeed a pleasure for me to enter 
into the budget debate on behalf of the constituents of Wascana 
Plains. I’ve had the pleasure of serving that constituency since 
1991. And as I am out and about and going door to door, I think 
most people do refer to me by my first name rather than the 
constituency that I represent, as by respect we have here in the 
Chamber because we become members who would represent 
the constituencies from which they come. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would let you all know that all you would have to do 
is visit the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains to see why 
this is an important budget worthy of support by all members of 
the Assembly. 
 
We’re part of the rapidly growing southeast corner of Regina 
and home to many businesses and persons who run their own 
businesses or people who are part of the executive of many of 
the corporate businesses that operate within the city and the 
province. And of course we’re home to employees of many of 
those businesses and of the business sector. We’re home to 
many, many Crown employees. We’re home to farm folk and to 
the north, Piapot First Nation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are all well aware of the many efforts 
we’ve had over the years to come forward with the type of 
budget we’re able to present this year. It doesn’t seem that long 
ago that we inherited the first year of taking over as 
government, a province with no budget. And when we did find 
out what the books were, they did not reflect what had been said 
would be present for us to be able to work from in our first 
budget. And we found that actually for about nine consecutive 
budgets, people had spent $1 billion more than they had in tax 
income for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So of course in ’91, the decision making before us was very, 
very difficult and a very stressful time to try and decide how we 
would collectively find $1 billion of reductions to the budgets 
placed before us. And it doesn’t happen overnight, and it 

certainly doesn’t happen without a lot of stress and strain on the 
people who are working with our financial advisors and our 
ministers of Finance to try and find those kinds of dollars to 
indeed balance the budgets. 
 
So of course I stand in my place today with great pride in 
saying that we’ve laid the foundation for the type of budget 
that’s here today. It’s not something, as the member from Wood 
River would have you believe, that just happens because there’s 
a war somewhere else or that resources are booming. It takes 
years of planning and tax incentive and targeted tax reductions 
and, in this budget, the business tax reductions to get to the 
place that we are today. It’s a lot of hard work, a lot of difficult 
decision making, and it’s been done by this government. 
 
Now the members of my constituency also believe the 
additional measures in this budget send a strong signal of 
support for future economic growth and a foundation for future 
jobs. But as the member from Wood River isn’t the only one 
who’s out and about in his constituency on these fine spring 
weekends, of course all of us have many events to attend, and 
we like to get out an visit with our neighbours and hear what 
they have to say. 
 
And what they’re telling me is that they shake their heads and 
wonder why. Wonder why what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well 
they wonder why would a Leader of the Opposition in 
Saskatchewan go to Alberta and talk down his home province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know I met earlier this year some Tory members from 
Alberta who attended a fundraising dinner that the Leader of the 
Opposition had in Alberta, in Calgary to be exact. And what 
they said to me, they told me first hand, was that they were 
really appalled when they heard that a person who was in a 
leadership role within an Assembly in their province would go 
to another province and do just that. And people in my 
constituency shake their heads and wonder why. 
 
What they also wonder, they wonder why leaders of any stripe 
in this province would have such a negative attitude, 
particularly when they know that youth look up to them as role 
models and look to them to try and understand and plan for 
their own futures. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder why. I wonder why the 
member from Cannington would stand up on budget day and 
would misquote me in the Assembly about growth in our 
province and in particular about growth anywhere. He has to 
drive through my constituency. He drives through on his way 
home, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and maybe he can’t handle all the 
positive attitude happening in Regina Wascana Plains. Or 
maybe he can’t handle all of the businesses that are popping up 
as he takes his drive home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I wonder why the member from Indian Head-Milestone 
would tell a young Tory MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from Alberta that only 127,000 people are working 
in Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even he 
knows that more people are working in Saskatchewan than ever 
before in our history. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number 
is topping 487,000 people working in the province, and 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

particularly we’re seeing increases in youth employment. 
 
Now the members opposite are saying, where I would get that 
from? And you just have to look at the budget documents. 
Maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they would spend this week 
taking some time to look over the positive measures in this 
budget that’s creating more youth employment than ever before 
in this province. 
 
And of course someone who comes from Irish and Ukrainian 
background and parents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I and everyone 
on this side of the House would welcome a new wave of 
immigration. And we’ve put measures in place, and we’ve put 
dollars in this budget towards a new wave of immigration that’s 
going to come to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the budget before the Assembly, 
we’re building a better future right here. We’re capitalizing on 
our economic successes while reflecting the values of 
Saskatchewan people. We’re working together to make 
Saskatchewan the best place to live, to work, and raise a family. 
And with this budget, we’ve cut business taxes to stimulate the 
economy and create even more jobs. We’re giving young 
people more reasons to stay right here at home in Saskatchewan 
with more training opportunities and of course the 
announcement of the university tuition freeze for another two 
years. 
 
This government is building a better future for our communities 
and our rural residents through revenue sharing and property tax 
relief initiatives and many more items that are within the budget 
— in fact more per capita support for agriculture in this 
province than any other jurisdiction in North America, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government is also supporting our citizens with enhanced 
social programming and assistance to ensure no one is left 
behind on the path to opportunity through enhanced social 
initiatives. 
 
Now just because we haven’t heard it very often, as the budget 
speech over the weekend didn’t get as much coverage I think as 
I’d like . . . I think it’s because it’s just too much positive news 
for the members opposite and perhaps even for some of our 
media outlets to handle. I want to highlight that this is our 13th 
consecutive balanced budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker; that $7.1 
billion is being spent in our operating in this budget; that we’re 
allocating $101.9 million toward permanent debt reduction, 
bringing our debt reduction total to nearly $450 million since 
2004 and ’05. Government debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at March 
31, 2006, will be $7.2 billion covered by Crown asset, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But that $7.2 billion is a far cry from the 
nearly $15 billion we inherited, and it’s now at its lowest point 
in 15 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — In this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Health 
spending of $3.2 billion which is nearly a 10 per cent increase 
and our largest Health budget ever. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was fortunate to be able to be at the 
Midwestern Legislative Conference this summer in Regina 

when a number of the legislators came from all over the 
Midwest to talk about issues of importance to everyone in the 
Midwest, including economic growth, economic development, 
where job creation could occur, education, and health. 
 
There was a speaker . . . our final speaker, keynote speaker was 
asked — because he’s written many books about qualities of 
leadership in government and in politics — what could some of 
the delegates there take back to their homes that would be 
courageous moves of leadership into the future, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. His answer: adopt the Canadian health care system, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s his answer. 
 
Because of course, although it’s an expensive system when you 
look at $3.2 billion of our budget, it covers everyone in this 
province with publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care. And it doesn’t leave employers having to make difficult 
decisions about whether they’ll hire a new employee because 
they can’t afford to pay the premium for that employee and 
their family. So it’s also a very wise business decision, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
In this budget, Education spending is now $1.5 billion which is 
a 5 per cent increase over last year’s budget. 
 
And an economy that’s growing, Saskatchewan’s currently 
experiencing unprecedented economic success. 
 
It’s almost too much, as I mentioned, for the members opposite 
to handle because they certainly don’t come in here or even go 
outside of the province to sell the economic good news for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mining, oil, and gas industries remain strong, and 
Saskatchewan is the second largest producer of oil in Canada. 
We’re also the third-largest natural gas producer in Canada. 
Saskatchewan is the largest potash and uranium producer and 
exporter in the world, supplying approximately 30 per cent of 
the world’s demand. Our province has a wealth of other 
minerals as well. One I’m particularly fond of, it’s our great 
potential for diamonds. And of course there are many rare earth 
minerals that we’re just beginning to know about and to talk 
about and discover, located right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen a 23 per cent rise in employment within the oil and 
gas industry over the last five years, and the mineral industry is 
rapidly expanding, nearly doubling exploration in the past year, 
primarily in the North, in our North. We are one of three have 
provinces in Canada, and we’re capturing opportunities that 
accompany this fortunate status. 
 
And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we always talk to the 
federal government about our fair share when we look at 
equalization and the payments that are due to this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Of course my colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place was here 
to institute one of the major tax reforms in his budget, which 
was the personal income tax review and implementation which 
put many, many of the citizens in our province on par with 
those who would be paying their income taxes in Alberta. And 
was viewed very positively and still has positive reviews within 
the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

But in this budget, in this budget after our commissioning of the 
Vicq committee and their report, we’re going to eliminate the 
general corporate capital tax on existing capital investments by 
July 1, 2008; eliminate the general CCT [corporation capital 
tax] on new capital investments in Saskatchewan on July 1, 
2006; reduce the CCT resource surcharge rates beginning July 
1, 2006; and reduce the corporate income tax, the CIT rate, 
from 17 to 12 per cent by July 1, 2008. 
 
Then for small businesses — the major engine in our economy 
— we’ll increase the small-business threshold from $300,000 to 
$500,000 by July 1, 2008, and immediately convert the 
non-refundable investment tax credit for manufacturing and 
processing into a refundable tax credit and extend the carry 
forward for unused ITCs [investment tax credit] previously 
earned to 10 years . . . Much further than I think even the Vicq 
commission would have contemplated that we could go when 
we’re balancing all of the needs and concerns that we need to 
address within a budget. 
 
I want to thank also my colleague from Regina Northeast. He’s 
been championing for a number of years now; he’s been 
working hard with the government, with the tradespeople. And 
this year and in this budget, we’re able to create the new tax 
credit for employed tradespeople, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 
an important step forward in recognizing people who are 
entrepreneurs, people who are labourers and work hard for the 
economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
[19:15] 
 
There’s much, much more in this budget in the area of other 
initiatives when we’re talking the province’s assisting and 
delving in . . . demonstrating the enhanced oil recovery process 
for heavy oil reserves in Western Canada. And it’s not by 
chance that these kinds of things are happening within the 
resource sector. You lay the groundwork, you work with those 
communities, and you talk about what we need to have projects 
like those go forward. It takes a lot of work from a lot of 
hard-working men and women in this province to accomplish 
those things. 
 
Helping young people to build their futures right here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and in this budget, a total budget of $1.5 
billion for education. There is much, much support provided for 
new training and employment spaces, for the new bursaries and 
student loan program, the centennial merit scholarship program, 
and all of those kinds of things that will help young people 
believe that they can stay here, raise a family, enjoy the quality 
of life that they enjoyed when they were being raised by their 
families right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s dollars for communities and farm families. There’s 
dollars to do TLEs [treaty land entitlement] and other initiatives 
with First Nations and with Métis people. There’s many, many 
initiatives for those who are greatest in need. 
 
As I mentioned, there’s dollars for education, health care, and 
infrastructure. And I could go on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Our government helped make this good news budget while 
maintaining a balanced budget — and I say helped because it’s 
with the help of the taxpayers in the province who contribute 
the money to the funds and want to support this government in 

their 13th consecutive balanced budget. 
 
We’ve provided sound financial management for 
Saskatchewan. The province has received 13 credit rating 
upgrades under our administration. It’s yet another sign that we 
continue to move in the right direction. We’re continuing to pay 
down the debt, lift the burden off the shoulders of the young 
people for future generations. And that’s why I’m on my feet 
tonight with great enthusiasm on behalf of my constituents in 
Regina Wascana Plains to support the motion before us and to 
vote against the amendment as proposed by the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me tonight to stand on my feet and give my 
comments in regard to the budget speech that was just delivered 
here on Thursday. 
 
First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a special thank 
you to all the people in my constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook 
for their support to allow me to be here tonight and speak to 
them regarding the budget. 
 
In regards to the member that just spoke, the member from, I 
believe, Regina Wascana Plains, in her comment she mentioned 
that in 1991 when they were doing the budget, there was $1 
billion that . . . there was a shortfall. And so they had to make 
plans as to how they were going to deal with it. 
 
Well if you look back in 1991, if there was a $1 billion 
shortfall, now in the year 2006 we have a $1 billion surplus. 
What did the NDP [New Democratic Party] administration in 
1991 do with the budget? Well they cut the farmers’ equity. 
They cut the farmers’ money. They cut GRIP [gross revenue 
insurance program]. And now in 2006, what do they do for 
farmers when there’s a $1 billion surplus? Well they cut more 
from the farmers. There’s nothing for the farmers in the budget, 
but they’ve taken away more. 
 
Now you’d think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there’s more money 
in the budget as far as surplus, they would have put more 
money into the backbone of this province which would have 
been agriculture. But it didn’t happen that way. They cut more. 
So to the farmers that are farming in Saskatchewan today, are 
they better off? No they’re not. 
 
On Saturday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of going 
to an auction sale in the Speers area. The farmers that were 
farming in that area have been there for generations and 
generations and generations. When I went to the sale and started 
talking to the farmers, they all came running over to me and 
some of the comments that were made to me was, why does the 
NDP hate farmers? Why does the Minister of Ag hate us? And I 
said, why do you refer to the NDP and the Minister of Ag as 
hating the farmers? Well he said, what is there for the farmers 
in this budget when there’s a $1 billion surplus? Nothing. So 
it’s no wonder in rural Saskatchewan, in the ag sector, they 
make comments like, why does the NDP hate us. 
 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

There was another couple of people that came up to me who are 
small-business from that same area and they also stated, why 
does the NDP hate us? Is it because the small business and the 
farmers are private business? Do they hate private business that 
much that they won’t put any money toward the backbone of 
our province? These farmers have been here for a long, long 
time. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Saltcoats, has stated that 
we need help in the agricultural sector. This is the worst year 
ever in the agricultural sector, and with a $1 billion surplus, 
there’s nothing for ag. In fact they’ve taken away from ag. And 
I say to the members opposite, the NDP, why are you doing 
that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2006 and 2007 budget cuts payments to the 
Department of Agriculture and Food by $166 million over last 
year. 
 
They also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they needed to add 154 million 
just to make CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 
work, just to fully fund CAIS. And did they do that? No they 
didn’t. 
 
To a farmer in rural Saskatchewan, times are so tough that 
when they go to their financial institution, whichever it is — 
credit union or whatever — they need have something backing 
the farmers in order for them to get an operating loan. Well two 
things that the financial institutions are requesting is, first, are 
you in CAIS? The second is, are you in crop insurance? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that . . . how can they take 
a letter that’s saying that they’re in CAIS when the government 
doesn’t fully fund it? How can they take that to the bank? Is that 
any good? The bank managers say no. 
 
The same with crop insurance, they’ve cut from crop insurance. 
They’ve cut from crop insurance $12 billion from this budget; 
$12 billion from last year’s budget, they cut. So how is the 
farmer supposed to operate when they’ve cut from the program? 
 
But this is our farmers. Maybe it’s because the farmers don’t 
vote for the NDP and that’s why they’re punishing the farmers. 
But there is nothing in this budget for the agriculture people of 
the province. 
 
And when I look at my constituency — Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
my constituency hails from Rosthern to North Battleford up to 
Shellbrook over to Spiritwood — it’s basically all agriculture 
and small business. 
 
So when you take a major cut in the operation of that 
constituency, it’s no wonder I’m getting phone calls. I’m 
getting lots of phone calls from farmers that are desperate. They 
don’t know which way to turn. They can’t go to the banks for 
financial help because of the programs that this government has 
instituted does not work. 
 
I’m reminded of the fact that today I believe the Agriculture 
minister has gone to Ottawa. Now up until today he only 
wanted $200 million. Today he comes out, says he needs $500 
million. Yes he needs $500 million. If he can get that money, 
that will definitely help the agricultural system in our province 

because they desperately need it. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to the budget I have 
always been one that says I will give credit where credit is due. 
I’ve always stated that. And so to the Finance minister, when he 
brought in the part about supporting the Vicq commission, we 
all applaud this. Everybody on this side will applaud him for 
doing that. But the member from Silver Springs has stated that 
the government has done the right thing by implementing the 
Vicq commission’s recommendations and the Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan on business tax relief. But the tax reductions are 
only one part of the overall growth agenda. Only one part. 
There needs to be more to rebuilding this province. But they’ve 
started. At least they’ve started and we’ll give them credit for 
that. 
 
They all should have went further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
some of the things that must be included in this growth agenda 
must include creating a competitive labour legislation 
environment. That must be done. And this has to be 
implemented now if we’re going to grow the province. 
 
The second, the second thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is limiting 
government . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — Order. I apologize to 
the hon. member for Rosthern-Shellbrook but the noise in the 
House is . . . The noise level is getting too difficult. I’m having 
trouble hearing the hon. member; I’m sure other members are 
too. And I would ask for order. I recognize the hon. member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
having a hard time listening to myself it was so noisy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — The second part of that growth agenda was 
limiting government intervention in the economy. We need that. 
We can’t just rely on gas and oil to produce the $1 billion 
surplus that we have now just to grow the province. There must 
be more added in order for this to happen. 
 
The third one, a long-term strategic plan for improving 
infrastructure which includes own source revenue sharing for 
municipalities. We’ve heard municipalities over and over from 
the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
conventions complain that they need more money for 
infrastructure — we need more money. And, Mr. Speaker, 
many of the communities, not only in my constituency but all 
over, haven’t got the dollars to do the infrastructure. And with a 
$1 billion surplus, there could have been more money infiltrated 
into the system so that there was more money for infrastructure 
for these communities. 
 
We also need greater economic co-operation with Western 
provinces to reduce interprovincial trade barriers. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, here we are right next to the province that has 
everything, that’s probably the top province in Canada — and 
that’s Alberta — and we stand right next door to them. They 
don’t have any PST [provincial sales tax]. But does 
Saskatchewan? Saskatchewan does. Saskatchewan has 7 per 
cent PST. 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

You’d have thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the budget, with 
the budget that we have in place today, with a $1 billion 
surplus, surely to God, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there could have 
been room for dropping the PST. I mean when the federal 
government is looking at dropping the GST [goods and services 
tax], surely to goodness the provincial government, with the $1 
billion, they could have looked at dropping the PST by one 
point. If they would have cared about Saskatchewan, they 
would have. 
 
I mean when they adopted the Vicq commission, the Vicq 
commission said, we need to raise the PST to go for education. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they raised it by one point, but did it 
go for education? No it didn’t. So now when there’s a surplus, 
let’s give it back to the people. Let’s give it back to them now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another issue that has come to mind in 
regards to the budget and that is — the member from Wascana 
Plains was stating about this — the 13th balanced budget. Well 
in their wisdom they look at it as a balanced budget. But why 
does the Provincial Auditor say there is a $288 million deficit? 
Who’s right, Mr. Deputy Speaker? How many times has this 
happened when the Provincial Auditor said there’s a deficit, but 
yet the government comes out and says, no we have a balanced 
budget? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the people understand now 
just how the NDP operates. And I can guarantee you the next 
time around, when an election is called, things will change. 
Things will change. And members on this side of the House 
will take the seats from that side of the House, and they will 
enjoy — some of them — will enjoy the role of opposition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in one of my communities in my 
constituency known as Shellbrook, I feel they’ve been kicked. 
And it’s ironic that the Minister of Finance’s father actually 
lives in Shellbrook. And I know this gentleman from 
Shellbrook; he’s a good guy. And I do believe that he also 
supports me when it comes to an election. I do believe that; I 
really do. And after the budget that the Finance minister 
delivered reinforces the fact that I know he will be supporting 
me. It’s ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Finance minister 
brought in some steel-toed boots. Is that what he’s using to kick 
his hometown of Shellbrook? 
 
[19:30] 
 
Well let’s look at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s look at the 
highway maintenance shop in Shellbrook. It’s closing down, yet 
the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] stated in this House, it’s 
not closing down today. He said that over and over. It’s not 
closing down today. Well it may not be closing down today but 
what about tomorrow? Mr. Deputy Speaker, Green Lake is the 
same situation. The minister says it’s not closing down today. 
But is it going to close down tomorrow? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the highways just outside Shellbrook are 
major highways. You’re getting the one that comes from 
Saskatoon, Blaine Lake up to Shellbrook and then north — the 
only road north going to the northwest. You’re also getting a 
major highway coming from P.A. over to Glaslyn and on to 
Lloyd. But that maintenance shop is being closed. And I ask 
why. 

You know, there was a few years when the winters were mild. 
We didn’t have a lot of snow. Traffic on the highways was 
immense, but they didn’t have the poor road conditions. The 
highway people at that time could easily keep up. But what 
happens if we return to the winters that we normally get? Not 
like this year when the winters come in the end of March or 
March 1. What about when the winters come in November? 
What’s going to happen to them roads? How can they facilitate 
keeping the roads open when they’re going to bigger and larger 
centres to do the maintenance servicing? 
 
From what I understand, they’re going to close the one in 
Shellbrook, and they’re going to move the operation to Prince 
Albert. How are they going to facilitate that part of the road? 
There’s one in Spiritwood right now. They’ve got enough to do 
as it is. Are they going have more trucks and more men? If that 
happens with the road structure we got, you’re going to have 
more trucks on the road duplicating the same area of travel. So 
is that better? I don’t think so. 
 
Also in the town of Shellbrook, they have been raising funds for 
a health care facility. I don’t know how many years they’ve 
been doing it, but I know for a fact they’ve raised over $1 
million. Richard Porter who’s a fundraiser for that area, who 
has done an immense work of volunteering his time and 
services to see that this project goes through. And there needs to 
be some commitment from the Health minister as to what’s 
going to happen with the Shellbrook hospital. What is going to 
happen with the health care facility to Shellbrook and the 
community around it? They’ve been raising money and raising 
money. They’ve got their money in place as we speak. 
 
But when I look in the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no 
commitment for Shellbrook. There is nothing mentioned about 
Shellbrook. How many years does the town of Shellbrook and 
the community of Shellbrook have to wait to finally get some 
kind of a health care facility in the town? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to bring forth a problem with a lady 
from Spiritwood, and it was brought to my knowledge this 
morning. A lady who I know very, very well, a good friend of 
mine, on Tuesday last week, she fell and broke her leg. She 
went to the Spiritwood hospital, and they shipped her to 
Saskatoon. And that’s what happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the communities around Saskatoon. Everything is funnelled into 
Saskatoon, and Saskatoon can’t take the load. 
 
She went to Saskatoon. As of this morning, she was still sitting 
in RUH [Royal University Hospital] waiting for an operation. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s six days. This lady is 75 years old. 
Her health is fairly good. Six days to wait for an operation, to 
the Health minister, is not suitable. 
 
It’s incredible that you hear these stories over and over and 
over, and one comes to light in my own community. Why did 
this lady have to wait so long to get her leg fixed? I’m sure, I 
am sure if the doctors in Saskatoon or the surgeons couldn’t do 
it, then why wasn’t the doctors in Spiritwood sending her to 
P.A.? 
 
And I bring P.A. up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because what 
happened with me. Now some of the colleagues in the 
Legislative Assembly know that on November 27 I broke my 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

leg. I needed surgery. I went to Spiritwood hospital. They did 
X-rays. They said, you’ve got to go someplace to get your knee 
mended. It’s got to be put together. 
 
So they tried Saskatoon. They couldn’t get in to Saskatoon. 
Hey, it was a Sunday. I don’t expect people to work on Sunday, 
but they couldn’t get into Saskatoon. So the doctor came to me 
and he says, if I can get in North Battleford or P.A., will you 
go? And I said hey, doesn’t matter to me. So he started phoning 
P.A., and it’s a good thing on Sunday that the surgeon was there 
because he said if you can get in here by 5:30 I will fix you up. 
And credit to P.A., the surgeon did a marvellous job. He did. 
 
But added more injury to what I already had because I was 
walking on crutches so long, it was pinching my neck and 
causing me great discomfort. I’ve never had a headache in my 
life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t know what headaches are. But 
I couldn’t even turn my head. 
 
So the doctor in Spiritwood on January 25 decided that I should 
go to a neurologist. He says we can’t get you for an MRI 
[magnetic resonance imaging], but you have to go through a 
neurologist first. So he said we’ll try and get you in. I said okay. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read from a letter that I 
got here two weeks ago, and this is what it states, and I quote, 
“Dear Mr. Allchurch: You have an appointment to see Dr. 
Carol Boyle on Thursday, March 15.” And I said, I missed it. I 
missed it. I missed my own appointment. 
 
But then I looked at the letter, and it was dated March 17. 
That’s when it was sent. But then I looked closer, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I want to repeat what I just quoted because it says, 
I quote, “Mr. Dennis Allchurch: You have an appointment to 
see Dr. Carol Boyle on Thursday, May 15, 2007.” 

 
An Hon. Member: — March 15. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — March 15, 2007. That’s a timely fashion to 
wait; it’s a timely fashion. It’s no wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that many, many people in the province of Saskatchewan are 
saying to the Health minister, do something with the waiting 
list. You’ve got to do something with the waiting list. 
 
Four years ago my son had an aneurism. Twenty-seven years 
old and he had an aneurism. He tried through Lloydminster to 
get help in Saskatchewan, and they said no. The doctors said 
you need an MRI. You need an MRI now, but you can’t get one 
in Saskatchewan. You’ll have to wait four months. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought that was just outrageous. 
So I took what any father would do for his son and I picked him 
up, and we went to Edmonton. He had his operation. It cost 
$455 — which I didn’t care if it cost a million dollars, this was 
his health — and I had to go to Edmonton to get that in order 
for my son to stay alive. 
 
Now is this the health care in Saskatchewan that’s good? 
 
They are pumping a ton of money into the health care system in 
this budget, but are they going to address the waiting lists that 
need it in this province? I don’t think so. 
 
When I look at my son going to Edmonton to get an MRI and 

getting the medication he needed to resolve his problem — and 
he’s healthy today — when I had to pay for that system, is that 
not two-tier health care? Many people in the province have said, 
we have two-tier health care. Well I have perfect examples that 
we do. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to address this. We need to 
address it now. People can’t wait for health care by going to 
Alberta and absorbing the bills themselves. If, if they have to go 
to Alberta for a special needs, like MRIs, will the Minister of 
Health at least fund the money that is paid by the individual to 
go there? Will they fund it? Will they pay it? Because the way it 
is right now, we have two-tier health care. 
 
And the people of the province of Saskatchewan, when the next 
election comes around, will tell the minister that we need health 
care changes and we need them now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting the budget, but I 
will be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Regina Northeast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 
truly a pleasure for me to enter into this debate on behalf of the 
fine people of Regina Northeast. It’s a pleasure and it’s an 
honour to represent the constituency Regina Northeast. I think 
all the members in the House would say that it is truly an 
honour and a special distinction to sit in this House and to be a 
member and represent people in our province. It’s a privilege 
that’s afforded to very few in the whole scheme of things, and 
I’m very proud to have that opportunity. 
 
Now I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of 
ways — and maybe each member uses a different method — to 
measure the value of this budget. I like to use my constituency 
to measure that value. I like to think of people in my 
constituency and then ask them, how does this budget affect 
you? 
 
So naturally I think of the seniors, the very people who have 
lived in our province, worked in our province, spent their life in 
our province, building Saskatchewan to what it is today — the 
people who worked hard, sweated, toiled, sacrificed to give us 
the wonderful province that we enjoy here today. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today those over 65 years of age 
account for about 15 per cent of Saskatchewan’s population. 
Stats Canada estimates that, by the year 2031, one in four 
people in Saskatchewan will be over the age of 65. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I believe that come 2031 you and I might even fall into 
that category. 
 
But this is the importance that seniors have played in our past 
and will continue to play in the future. And to recognize that, 
our government has put $1.5 million into new funding into the 
seniors gold card which was announced in the Throne Speech 
on November 7, 2005. Another $1 million added to the 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

coverage to increase the cost of ambulance services and 
maintain the current $250 per trip cap on ambulance fees 
through the senior citizens ambulance assistance program. 
Continued, existing, direct income support and current 
provincial services that are targeted exclusively at seniors. 
Seniors access over $1 billion worth of health care annually in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget stands up for our seniors. And when I 
talk to our seniors . . . and I ask them, I ask them, how do they 
feel about this budget? They told me, and I quote, “this budget 
is good for me.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also think of the small-business people 
in my constituency. I think of them, and I know that 72 per cent 
of the jobs created in Canada, in Saskatchewan, are created in 
shops that are owned and operated by small-business people. 
Small-business people are the engines that drive our economy. 
And to that end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget improved the 
business climate and promotes economic development and 
diversification, expands employment opportunities for 
Saskatchewan residents, and including the youth. 
 
Economic growth translates into strong provincial revenues that 
achieve social priorities. And effective July 1, 2006, the general 
corporate income tax rate will be reduced from 17 per cent to 14 
per cent, and the small-business threshold increased from 
300,000 to 400,000. Now that’s not it, Mr. Speaker. That’s not 
all of it. There’s more to come. Effective July 1, 2007, the 
income tax rate will be reduced from 14 per cent to 13 per cent, 
and the small-business threshold increased from 400,000 to 
450,000. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re saying that must be 
it. There can’t be more. Well there is. There is more. On July 1, 
2008, the income tax rate will be reduced from 13 per cent to 12 
per cent and the small-business threshold increased from 450 to 
$500,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget stands up for our small-business 
people in our economy, and this is why when I talk to them and 
ask them about this budget they tell me, this budget is good for 
me. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, I think of the low-income families that I 
have in my constituency, and I have a number of them. And I 
wonder how this budget affects them. So when I talk to them 
about the budget and I point out the fact that the 2006-2007 
budget contains new and expanded programming to support 
vulnerable workers, they say this is good. 
 
I point out that there’s $6.5 million added, adds over 2,700 new 
training opportunities, 250 new child care spaces to meet the 
1,200 space commitments of Child Care Saskatchewan, and an 
increase of $200,000 to establish labour standards collection 
unit to assist in recovery of wages owed to workers. Mr. 
Speaker, when I travel my constituency and I ask the 
low-income families, who are working families and working 
hard, and I ask them how does this budget affect them, they tell 
me, this budget’s good for me. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think of our youth, our youth who are going to 
be our leaders of tomorrow. They’re going to be the leaders in 
our business. They’re going to be our community leaders and 
they’re going to be leaders right here in our legislature. I think 
of those youth and I ask them how does this budget affect them. 
 
Well this budget ensures that youth are going to have the 
opportunity to live and work in Saskatchewan as a major part of 
this government’s priorities. The 2006-2007 budget contains 
$17.8 million or a 7 per cent increase in the operating funding 
for universities and federated colleges. The province and the 
universities have reached an agreement to hold the line on 
tuitions for two more years. Over 2,700 new training and skill 
development opportunities have been added. When I talk to the 
youth they say, this budget is good for me. 
 
This budget also contains $466 million to support the 3,400 
training and skill development opportunities and 32,000 
university seats. Mr. Speaker, when I talk to the youth they tell 
me, this budget’s good for me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — The provincial training allowance has been 
increased by $60 per month per student at a cost of $1.8 
million, benefiting approximately 4,900 students in skill 
training and basic education programs. When I talk, Mr. 
Speaker, to the students and the youth of today they tell me, this 
budget’s good for me. 
 
Then I think, Mr. Speaker, of Emma Bradley who’s only 13 
months old and I wonder how’s this budget affecting her. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget through the increase of 10 per 
cent or over increase of 10 per cent spending in health care will 
ensure that if Emma Bradley ever requires health care she will 
receive the best of care in a timely fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also ensures that child care spaces will be 
available for Emma when her parents require them as they go 
back to work and she needs to be looked after in child care. 
There will be the best of child care and those opportunities will 
be there. As she gets older and requires education, those 
education opportunities will be there. Whether the K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] or post-secondary, she will enjoy 
some of the best education anywhere in North America right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And all through that there will be employment opportunities for 
her mom and dad. Her mom and dad can stay here, work here, 
raise her here, and quite frankly allowing her grandpa and 
grandmother the opportunity to visit her quite regularly. And 
when I think about how this budget affects Emma Bradley, it’s 
quite clear that this budget is good for Emma. 
 
Then I think of the working people across Saskatchewan, the 
people who day in and day out through their sweat and their toil 
provide us the goods and the services that we appreciate. Often 
we take those goods and services for granted. We don’t stop to 
think of the human effort, the loyalty, the commitment that goes 
into delivering them for our use on a daily basis. These are the 
people who move our economy ahead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and for that I think of the fact that there’s more people working 
in Saskatchewan today than ever before in our history. New 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

training seats will ensure a well qualified workforce for the 
future and we are continuing to see an increase in youth 
employment. 
 
During the year 2005, 131,000 or 34 per cent of our workforce 
were unionized. Of the 131,000 unionized members in 
Saskatchewan, 44,400 were employed in the private sector 
while the remaining 86,700 were employed in the public sector. 
Mr. Speaker, when I ask the working people of Saskatchewan, 
how’s this budget affect you, they tell me, this budget’s good 
for me. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think of those tradespeople who for many 
years now have virtually experienced an inequity in our taxation 
system. Many of them have to provide tools as a condition of 
employment and yet they had no opportunity to benefit from 
our tax structure as a result of the expenditure of funds for those 
tools. They would buy those tools with after-tax dollars. They 
would buy them because it was required in their occupation. It 
was required that they would provide these tools as a condition 
of employment. And yet they were not able to receive any tax 
benefit for it, while their employer could purchase the same 
tools, spend the same money, and be able to write off every 
dollar of that against their income tax. It simply wasn’t fair. 
 
And I had the opportunity to have this brought to my attention a 
number of years ago by some family members who are 
tradespeople. And it was one of those things that you put in 
your memory bank and you don’t really call on again until 
another experience jogs it. 
 
Well a couple of summers ago when I was out door knocking, 
visiting in my constituency, I had a number of tradespeople 
bring this to my attention. So I started to look at it with some 
greater depth and I found out that according to Stats Canada 
there was approximately 15,000 working men and women in 
Saskatchewan who were in those types of occupations or those 
types of trades who had a tradition of the worker or the 
employee providing his own personal tools as a condition of the 
employment. 
 
So upon a little closer look at Stats Canada numbers I soon 
found out that hairdressers, bricklayers, drywallers, roofers, 
insulators, glazers, painters, floor covering installers, plumbers, 
pipefitters, gas fitters, carpenters, electricians, sheet metal 
workers, boilermakers, ironworkers, autobody repair, 
millwrights, vehicle mechanics, airplane mechanics, motorcycle 
mechanics, and heavy-duty mechanics all had a tradition within 
their trades of providing hand tools, their own personal tools, as 
a condition of employment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hairdressers too. 
 
Mr. Harper: — I started out with hairdressers. It’s interesting 
that . . . And you look at those people who find themselves in 
that situation, that the costs vary. They will vary from a couple 
thousand dollars per person to maybe as high as, some reports 
as high as 15 and $20,000 for heavy-duty mechanics. So I 
thought it was something that I should bring to the attention of 
my colleagues and I did. And I really appreciate the support that 
all of my colleagues gave me on this issue. It was wonderful to 
have the collective group on our side of the House pull together 
and work for a common goal. And if you noticed in this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, there was an introduction of the opportunity to 
provide a tax break to those people. 
 
And I want to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of 
Finance for being bold enough to step forward on this issue. We 
are the first jurisdiction in Canada to go this far. And I think it’s 
something to say that once again Saskatchewan, under the 
leadership of the fine Minister of Finance, that we are once 
again leading the way on a very interesting issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I only have the opportunity 
here to touch on a few of the highlights of the budget. This is a 
wonderful budget of all . . . And I’ve been in the House for a 
number of years now and I had the opportunity to participate in 
a number of budgets, but this one is one of the very, very best 
— there’s no doubt about it. Because this budget is so 
comprehensive, it affects everybody in a very positive way in 
Saskatchewan. And I am so proud to be a part of that. 
 
There are some things though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that just 
simply stand out when you look at this budget. First of all, this 
budget is the 13th consecutive balanced budget in 
Saskatchewan. That is something to be proud of. Paying down 
the debt by a further $102 million is something to be proud of. 
 
And when you look at most recent times, over the last couple of 
years, that’s a total of $446.6 million permanent paydown of the 
debt in the last two years. That is something to be proud of. The 
provincial debt is at 7.2 billion. That’s the lowest it’s been in 15 
years and that’s something to be proud of. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are enjoying prosperous times in 
Saskatchewan. Our economy is performing well. And the 
business taxes that we have introduced in this budget will 
ensure that that continues. We are securing this prosperity and 
providing the benefits to the people of Saskatchewan through 
increased property tax relief, increased revenue sharing with the 
communities, and enhanced social programs. 
 
This budget provides the foundations for the transformation of 
our economy. It is a budget that ensures no one is left behind on 
the path to opportunity. It is a budget that continues on a sound 
financial path. And most importantly it is a budget that ensures 
Saskatchewan will continue to be the best place in Canada to 
live, work, and raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why I have been instructed by the fine 
people of Regina Northeast to vote against the amendment and 
for the budget, a budget which is a road map to prosperity for 
Saskatchewan and its people. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am voting 
for this budget because it is a budget that is good for all of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, or deputy Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise this 
evening to represent the good constituency of Cannington. 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

Cannington is a rural constituency, as everyone in this House 
knows. Its main industries are agriculture and the oil and gas 
industry. And so both sectors are very interested in what 
happens in this Assembly because the decisions made by 
government directly affect their lives. And so for that reason 
they pay attention to what does happen in here. In fact is there 
may even be one or two of them watching on STV [SaskWest 
Television] or on the provincial channel watching the 
legislature. 
 
I know that after the speech of the member previously there 
may not be any left watching, but I know from time to time they 
do mention that in fact they have watched the legislative 
channel. So I was interested in the comments that the previous 
member from Regina northwest was talking about when he 
ended his speech. He talked about debt and how the debt was 
lower than it’s been in 15 years, you know. 
 
But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member opposite and 
some of his colleagues must only be reading parts of the budget 
book, only those parts that they want to use for their arguments. 
Because I look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the book presented by 
the Finance minister to us the other day. It says Saskatchewan 
provincial budget, budget and performance plan summary. And 
on page no. 78 under the summary statements of changes in net 
debt, it shows a change in the net debt for the year 2005-2006 
— so the previous budgetary year — of an increase in the debt 
of $244.7 million. That’s not a decrease. 
 
Now I’m sure I heard the Finance minister and some of his 
colleagues saying it was the 13th straight year of balanced 
budget. Well even the Minister of Finance’s own documents 
don’t agree with that. It says decrease or increase in net debt, 
and it’s got increase $244.7 million for the year 2005-2006 is 
what they estimated. What happened? 
 
Well we had oil that went from $20 to $60 — pretty good return 
there for the government. And they actually did pay down some 
debt. They actually did pay down some debt. $505 million is 
what they paid. So when they say they reduced the debt, 
actually for the year 2005-2006, they did. 
 
[20:00] 
 
But what’s the Minister of Finance forecasting for this year? 
Thirteenth straight year — you’ve got to remember — 
thirteenth straight year of balanced budgets. So a balanced 
budget means no debt increases. You might even have a 
surplus. Well according to the Minister of Finance’s own 
estimates, he’s projecting a 288.5 increase in the provincial debt 
— almost $300 million more debt in a boom where oil is $60 a 
barrel. That’s hardly balancing the budget, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So I think maybe his colleagues and the Minister of Finance 
need to go back and re-read their own documents so that they 
can explain correctly to the people of Saskatchewan what’s 
actually happening to the debt. 
 
Listening to the member from Regina Wascana Plains, Mr. 
Speaker, talking . . . she was talking about getting misquoted. 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, back prior to the 2003 election, 
that member said it was statistically impossible to grow the 

province of Saskatchewan. In fact is, in talking about the Sask 
Party plan, she said it was wishful thinking, that it would be 
impossible over 10 years to grow the province of Saskatchewan 
by 100,000 people. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that that is wrong. I think 
we actually can grow the province. But when I look at the 
population statistic numbers for the province of Saskatchewan, 
starting in 1999, we had a population of 1,014,707 people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 2000, we had 1,007,776, a drop of 
almost 7,000 people. 2001 — 1,000,134. 2002 — 995,886. You 
see the trend, Madam Deputy Speaker? Down, down, down, 
down until 2005 — 994,126. 
 
So you see, Madam Deputy Speaker, we are continually losing 
population under this NDP government. This year we’re down 
to, for January 2006, 990,930 people. So that’s a drop of about 
24,000 people since 1999. 
 
So I can certainly understand the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains saying it’s statistically impossible for the NDP 
to grow the population. And if she said that, I would agree with 
her. It is statistically impossible for the NDP to do that because 
they don’t know how to grow the province, and they don’t 
know how to grow the economy. After 67 years of trying, it’s 
downhill, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But not all of this government’s business is downhill. When you 
take a look at some of the statistics in the budget, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, and you take a look at FTEs, which are 
full-time equivalents of the government, we see an increase 
there of 262.4 people employed by the bureaucracy. That’s an 
increase, Madam Deputy Speaker, of 2.19 per cent, whereas 
from last year to this year, we saw a decrease in population of 
0.8 per cent, but we get an increase in government workers of 
2.19 per cent. 
 
You know, if the population grew at the same rate that the 
bureaucracy grows, we would have 1,012,631 people in 
Saskatchewan. So you know how to grow the bureaucracy, but 
how about growing the population, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
That’s the problem with this government: they’re too busy 
growing government, and they forgot to grow the province. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, they’re busy growing the 
government and busy driving the private enterprise people out 
of this province. And fact is, it was the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana who said the good jobs are in the Crown corporations. 
Well from their point of view, Madam Deputy Speaker, I can 
certainly understand that when the only thing growing is 
government. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in agriculture . . . which we know is in 
a crisis in this province, where you would think that the 
government would recognize the seriousness of this situation 
especially . . . I can remember the first election I really watched 
in this province. Gordon MacMurchy was running — who was 
minister of Agriculture at the time for the NDP under Allan 
Blakeney — running around the province saying, we have to 
defend the family farm, him and Eiling Kramer. Gordon 
MacMurchy. 
 
Well this government doesn’t even know the family farm even 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

exists any more. We’re in the middle of a crisis. The price of 
grain is as low as it’s ever been. And what does this government 
do? Last year’s estimate for expenditures in Agriculture: $265 
million. I remember the first year I got elected, the budget for 
Agriculture was a billion dollars that year, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and now it’s a quarter of that amount. 
 
So the forecast for expenditures for last year by this government 
was actually, because they finally put the money into CAIS to 
pay for the 2004 year, was $423 million. So now that we’re in 
the middle of a crisis, what does the NDP government do? Rolls 
back the agriculture money to 264 million which is less than it 
was initially last year. And that’s their response to farmers in 
this province — is to roll back the support not increase it. 
 
In fact is they took $12 million out of Crop Insurance, and yet 
the minister, all he keeps saying is, it’s Ottawa’s responsibility. 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, those farmers and those families 
live in Saskatchewan, and it’s this government’s responsibility 
to assist them in their time of need — not to ignore them as they 
have been doing but to assist them. 
 
And yes, the minister today, and I’m told the Premier as well 
now, has flown off to Ottawa. 
 
Well I remember another time doing that where Roy Romanow 
and a large retinue went to Ottawa, and you know what we 
came back with? I think it was something that the Premier . . . I 
can quote him from about a year ago, a big fat zero because 
that’s what they got at that point in time. 
 
And the attitude of this Agriculture minister to the federal 
government today is not a very constructive one, not a very 
constructive one at all. And so while I certainly wish him luck 
in Ottawa because the farm families in my constituency and the 
farm families across Saskatchewan need any assistance they can 
get, I have very little faith in our Minister of Agriculture from 
Saskatchewan being able to deliver one red cent because he’s 
certainly not prepared to put up the province’s money. In a time 
when the budget is bursting at the seams, they cut the money to 
agriculture. 
 
They don’t even fund the CAIS program to the full amount. The 
Deputy Premier sitting here tonight was saying that we have to 
expand CAIS. He went to Ottawa and negotiated with them, 
demanded changes to CAIS, and finally the Liberal government 
said yes, we’ll increase it. 
 
So what does the NDP government do? Their initial 
commitment had been $99 million. The new commitment, as 
negotiated by the Deputy Premier, would be 165 — I believe it 
was — million dollars. So the NDP government only puts in 99 
and said, too bad farmers, you don’t get the difference. Even 
though they were the ones who demanded it, they didn’t put 
their money up. And when they did finally put their money up, 
it was a year later. And they’re doing that exact thing again in 
this budget. They’re only partially funding the CAIS program 
while the farmers struggle to just get a crop in the ground. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, we see that this government is 
simply abandoning rural Saskatchewan. You know, you take a 
look at what the oil and gas industry is putting into this 
province, Madam Deputy Speaker. You know, I can think back 

a few years ago and the money coming in from the oil and gas 
sector of this province was somewheres in the neighbourhood 
of 600 to $700 million. The projected estimate of revenues from 
resources in this coming budget is $1.5 billion. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, when you extract that kind of 
resource from the rural areas, there’s a cost to that. There’s a 
cost to the infrastructure. There’s a cost to the roads that link 
our communities and that link those resource sites. But, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, this government returns nothing to those areas 
that are producing that wealth, and those roads simply 
deteriorate. 
 
I would invite the ministers to come down and take a drive on 
some of the roads in my constituency. Drive on No. 8 Highway. 
Drive on No. 47. Drive on No. 48. Drive on 361. Drive on 318. 
Those roads are virtually impassable. And it’s not a new 
phenomena; they have been for a good number of years, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And you take a look across a lot of 
southern Saskatchewan where the resource industries are the 
heaviest, and they get the least amount of attention when it 
comes to roads. 
 
And fact is, the Finance minister, Madam Deputy Speaker, was 
on the health care committee a few years back, and he was 
coming down to Redvers to have a look at the health care 
facilities there, at the group homes. And he phoned and he said, 
how do I get to Redvers? And they said, well the most direct 
route, if you come down No. 1 to Moosomin and you come 
south on No. 8 to Redvers. 
 
Well the current Finance minister found out that those are 
indeed numbered highways, and fact is they’re 
single-digit-numbered highways which supposedly are best. 
And he ripped his muffler off in the middle of the highway. 
That’s the state of the road. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Finance minister did that? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The Finance minister did. And fact is, 
he even mentioned it in the House so it’s in Hansard if the 
members opposite want to check up on it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Only way to get to Redvers is go down 
to the States and come from the south. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — That’s right. My colleague says the best 
way to get to Redvers is go through North Dakota. And that is 
indeed the case because the road from the border to Redvers, 
until you get about 10 miles south of Redvers, is reasonably 
passable. That last stretch is rough. Rough is being kind to it. 
And fact is, that particular piece of road, well it was repaired 
two years ago, and they did such a terrible job that they’ve even 
sued the contractor because it wasn’t done properly. And that’s 
the kind of situations we have to drive on in our constituency. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some serious problems 
with this piece of legislation, this budget. It doesn’t address the 
needs of people. 
 
You know, one of my colleagues was mentioning talking to an 
individual who was saying that when he registered his daughter 
for kindergarten, he should have registered his daughter for 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

post-secondary education as well because then she would only 
have a year or two to wait to actually get in to post-secondary 
education. She would have gone through her one year of 
kindergarten, her 12 years of elementary and high school, and 
still only have a couple of years left to wait. Now what kind of 
an education is that? 
 
The member from Regina Northeast was talking about new 
placements in SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology]. Well those new placements are for 
2008. That’s two years away from now. And how many 
situations are there? How many of those spots are actually 
going to provide the training and the education that is needed 
for the young people of this province? Because the ones we 
have here today are going outside of this province to find their 
employment opportunities, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget fails in many ways. It did 
provide relief on the corporate taxes, on the corporate capital 
taxes, and that was one positive step forward. But when it came 
to actually helping the majority of the people in the province, 
this budget was a failure. 
 
It’s got a few points in it that are a benefit, but overall it fails to 
meet the mark of what’s needed to grow this province, to create 
an atmosphere of positive economic opportunity in this 
province. It fails to provide for a reason for young people to 
stay in Saskatchewan. It fails to provide a reason for new 
people to come into Saskatchewan. 
 
I note that the government is saying that they’re going to have 
5,000 immigrants into Saskatchewan — 5,000 immigrants when 
they didn’t have 400 last year. I guess all those people they’re 
hiring to scatter around the world are going to be able to attract 
those multitudes of people. Actually they’re talking about 100 
people per new employee in the Immigration department. 
 
So they’re going to have to be busy, Madam Deputy Speaker, if 
over the next year they’re going to find and recruit 5,000 new 
people to this province. I guess you have to ask, since people 
have such a hard time getting through our post-secondary 
training because the spaces aren’t available, what are the 
qualifications of the people who are actually going out around 
the world to try and recruit these people? Are they telling them 
what it’s like in Saskatchewan or are they painting bright blue 
skies and utopia here? Maybe they should take a picture of No. 
8 Highway with them when they go to talk to these people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That would make them feel a lot more at 
home. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — My colleague . . . well no. 
 
So I think, Madam Deputy Speaker, this government has failed 
to hit the mark when it comes to what needed to happen in 
Saskatchewan. I’ll be supporting the amendment, and I will not 
be supporting the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin, the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this evening in the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly to speak in support of the budget introduced by my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, a budget that builds a better 
future here, right here in Saskatchewan, Madam Speaker, and a 
budget that — as much as any single budget can, I believe — 
goes to fulfill the vision of our Throne Speech last fall to carve 
out a path of opportunity on which no one is left behind. 
 
Now all budgets, Madam Speaker, are not created in a vacuum; 
they’re created in a context. And they’re created in a context of 
the economy, which is a booming economy in Saskatchewan, 
and they’re created in the context of history. 
 
And there’s been considerable talk in the legislature over the 
last little while, since the budget was introduced, about deficits, 
debt, and taxes. And those are relevant topics, Madam Speaker, 
and so I will address those topics because they are relevant. 
And they’re certainly relevant to this budget because, as you 
know, as the members of the Assembly know, the budget 
includes over a half a billion dollars in interest payments — 
$550 million in interest payments on debt. That’s more than 
three points of the provincial sales tax, Madam Speaker. And 
how we got to the state where we are now, what can be done 
about that, are all relevant topics in addressing the budget, 
Madam Speaker. 
 
In 1982, the 1982-83 budget year, the government debt for the 
province of Saskatchewan as a percentage of the gross domestic 
product was 2.1 per cent. That is the year in which the 
Conservative government of Premier Grant Devine took power. 
And in the winter of that year, December 1982, he said in the 
Grainews, quote: “Deficits are just taxes on future generations.” 

 
Now Premier Devine held himself out as being something of an 
economist. And I don’t know if he taught very much in the way 
of economics, and I’m not sure he understood much in the way 
of economics. But he taught the people of Saskatchewan one 
thing, and he taught it very well: “Deficits are just taxes on 
future generations.” And after making that statement, that 
Conservative administration — in which the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party opposite supported, served in, staffed — 
went on successive years of binges, of borrowing and spending, 
binges of spending and borrowing. And the ultimate result was 
a government debt as a percentage of gross domestic product 
which was 2.1 per cent when they took over, ballooning to 41.6 
per cent of the economy. The total public debt, 69.8 per cent of 
the gross domestic product. That, that was the result of the 
binge of spending and borrowing that the members opposite did 
when they were last in power. 
 
And they haven’t learned their lesson as far as we can tell from 
speeches they make in this House about spending. But there’s 
no question that they were there and, in particular, the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party was certainly there. And as John 
Gormley and my . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
member from Cypress Hills wants to overstate the case. But I’ll 
refer to Mr. John Gormley’s column in The StarPhoenix of 
March 24, 2006. Now Mr. Gormley himself was a supporter of 
and supported by the Devine administration. And he said of the 
Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Party, that he, quote: 
 

. . . worked 17 years ago as an adviser to several cabinet 
ministers in the Tory government of Grant Devine. One 
minister, John Gerich, was among a group of Progressive 
Conservative MLAs and ministers later convicted and 
jailed for fraud. 

 
And to a certain extent, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
was kind of the Forrest Gump of the Devine administration. 
When the minister responsible for Public Participation, Douglas 
Graham Taylor, was trying to privatize SaskEnergy, well guess 
who was in his office? The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. 
And when Minister John Gerich was accepting deliveries of 
taxpayer-paid alcohol, guess who was in the office, Madam 
Speaker? The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. He was, he 
was always there. 
 
And that binge of spending and borrowing and borrowing and 
spending . . . And you know it was quite the party, Madam 
Speaker, but the hangover carries on. And we are paying for the 
hangover today, to take myself back to the half a billion dollars 
in interest payments. But those days remind me of some of the 
words from a song made popular by the Irish Rovers, “Wasn’t 
That A Party.” And the words go as follows, quote: 
 

Could’ve been the whiskey 
Might’ve been the gin 
Could’ve been the three or four six-packs, 
I don’t know, but look at the mess . . . [we’re] in 

 
And we kind of do know, Madam Speaker, because we’ve seen 
the orders for the liquor. And the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party certainly knows because he was there mixing the drinks. 
 
Now I understand, and the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
has been quoted as saying this: I don’t really attend a lot of 
parties anymore. And to take us back to economic lessons, I 
think that’s the economic lesson that the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party understands. But when you’re paying for a 
commodity, demand drops, Madam Speaker. 
 
Now the people of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan 
grew a little tired of this binge of spending and borrowing and 
borrowing and spending which, as I’ve said, took us to a 
situation where the province was near bankruptcy. 
 
And, Madam Speaker, it’s been a long time trying to recover 
from, to recover from the hangover. But today government debt 
as a percentage of the gross domestic product is at the lowest 
level in 20 years. And that’s quite an accomplishment, and that 
took a long time. But yes, Grant Devine was correct: “Deficits 
are . . . taxes on future generations.” And a great deal of tax has 
been paid by the people of Saskatchewan to get us back into the 
situation where we are now, where the province is not bankrupt 
— as it nearly was when the administration in which the 
Saskatchewan Party members served in, supported, and staffed, 
as it was when they were finished with this province in 1991. 
 
And now we are at a situation, Madam Deputy Speaker, where 
the government debt as a percentage of gross domestic product 
is down to 19 per cent, projected in 2006 to drop to 16.7 per 
cent, projected in 2007 to drop to 15.8 per cent, and projected in 

2008 to drop to 15.7 per cent, Madam Speaker. And the 
members opposite, the members who were involved in that 
administration that took us to government debt as a percentage 
of GDP [gross domestic product] of 41.8 per cent have the 
temerity — temerity — to criticize this government which has 
paid down debt successfully over the years, over the last 15 
years, to criticize us on issues of debt. 
 
As this province has turned the corner, as this province has 
turned the corner and as previous speakers have said, the 
province has received 13 credit rating upgrades in the past 10 
years. And this is perhaps the most relevant judgment about the 
management of the finances of this province by this NDP 
administration in attempting to recover from the hangover of 
borrowing and spending that the members opposite, the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party supported under the 
Devine administration. 
 
But it is difficult to actually believe that . . . have learned the 
lesson from those days. Every dollar of revenue that increases, 
the province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s because resource 
revenues go up or because the economy grows — as has also 
been the case in the last year — every dollar, they spend five 
times. They spend it once on health. They’ll spend it once on 
education. They’ll spend it once on highways. They’ll spend it 
once on a tax cut. And now they want to spend it one more 
time, a fifth time — why not? — on debt reduction. And the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party has not yet learned that you 
cannot balance a budget with a swizzle stick, Madam Speaker. 
 
Now we are now in a situation where we have been able to 
reform personal income tax. We have been able to reform oil 
and gas royalties. We have been able to reform the mining 
royalties. And we’re now in a position where we can reform 
business taxes, Madam Speaker, and create investment and 
create opportunity and create jobs in this province. But this has 
been after a long struggle, a long recovery — a long recovery 
from the situation that was left to us by the members opposite 
when they were last in power. 
 
And they are critical of these tax reductions because they would 
do more. There’s something else they would do. And what else 
would they do? Well they’ve been very general about it. But the 
leader of the Saskatchewanist party has said, to the same Mr. 
Gormley I referred to earlier, that he would declare war on 
labour. And the members opposite have said in speech after 
speech after speech that the result of this war on labour would 
be a competitive labour environment. Now I would challenge 
members who have not yet spoken to explain what they think a 
competitive labour environment is. 
 
Businesses have said, when they’ve welcomed the cut to capital 
corporate taxes that we have proposed in this budget, business 
have said this is important to us because we can now raise 
wages. We can compete with other jurisdictions in the country 
for skilled labour so that we don’t lose these people. 
 
[20:30] 
 
The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party has mocked the Premier 
for suggesting that higher wages to those skilled people in 
Saskatchewan would be a good thing for the economy. So we 
know that the opposition doesn’t mean higher wages, so what 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

do they mean by a competitive labour environment? And I 
don’t want to put words in anybody’s mouth, so I just invite the 
members opposite to set out what exactly they mean. 
 
Now, Madam Speaker, the Finance critic for the Saskatchewan 
Party, the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs, said on 
Friday in his response to the budget, and I quote: “. . . the 
failure of this budget to deliver real benefits for families in 
Saskatchewan . . .” Well that’s an interesting sweeping 
statement, Madam Speaker. 
 
This budget funds 32,000 university seats and 34,000 training 
spaces, including new seats at the Saskatchewan Indian Institute 
of Technologies. Now I guess those students are not members 
of families, in the view of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
This budget increases by $3.6 million the child care parent 
subsidy to provide an enhanced subsidy for child care spaces; 
4,300 parents will benefit. I guess in the view of the 
Saskatchewan Party that those aren’t families. Now that’s rather 
ironic since there’s children, and children are usually in 
families. 
 
This budget will add $1.85 million to add 250 new, licensed 
child spaces in 2006-2007 in addition to the 250 spaces already 
added in 2005-2006, but the families that will benefit from that 
aren’t real families by the definition provided by the 
Saskatchewan Party. This budget will support 670 new families 
through KidsFirst program. Now I guess the families supported, 
assisted by the KidsFirst program are not families getting real 
benefits by this budget, according to the definition of the 
Saskatchewan Party of benefits and families. 
 
This budget adds $2 million for literacy initiatives. I guess the 
people who are assisted by those aren’t families, according to 
the Finance critic for the Saskatchewan Party. This budget adds 
$300,000 to expand existing pre-kindergarten programs for 
vulnerable children ages three and four. I guess if you’re a 
vulnerable child, then you don’t belong to a family as defined 
by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
This budget creates a new tax credit for employed tradespeople, 
and I guess they are just not those average working people as 
defined by the Saskatchewan Party. This budget adds . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . the member from Cypress Hills 
handed me a straight line that I think I will not use, Madam 
Speaker. This budget adds $6.2 million to Saskatchewan rental 
housing supplement for affordable, higher quality, rental 
housing for families and people with disabilities. I guess 
families with people with disabilities are not families according 
to the definition of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
This budget adds $4 million to the residential rehabilitation 
assistance program and $5 million to Saskatchewan’s 
EnerGuide program, both of which are aimed at providing 
financial assistance to defray the cost of improving heating, 
systems upgrades, and window replacements in homes. 
Approximately 17,000 low- and moderate-income families will 
benefit from these initiatives. I guess those are 17,000 families 
that are not families benefiting according to the definition of the 
Saskatchewan Party of families and benefits. 
 
This budget will increase the small-business threshold from 

$300,000 to $500,000 by July 1, 2008. And I guess the people 
who own those businesses aren’t families as defined by the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I want to say on this increase to the 
small-business threshold, Madam Speaker, that it is a 
commitment of the New Democratic Party to increase the 
threshold from $300,000 to $400,000. And as with many other 
things, Madam Speaker, you will note commitment made, 
commitment kept, commitment exceeded, Madam Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — And this budget adds $52.8 million to 
increase agriculture education property tax credit from 8 to 38 
per cent for the 2006 property tax year, reducing the amount 
paid by almost $67 million while maintaining the 8 per cent 
credit for all property, helping all families who own their own 
homes — not families as defined by the Saskatchewan Party 
apparently, Madam Speaker. 
 
And after all the crocodile tears cried by the members opposite 
about the poor and vulnerable, when $40 is added to the 
monthly supplement for those on social assistance payments 
and the training employment allowance, Madam Speaker, when 
that’s added then, Madam Deputy Speaker, those people are not 
families as defined by the members opposite, as defined by 
members of the Saskatchewan Party. But, Madam Speaker, the 
fact is that whether one is directly touched by a program in this 
budget or not, everyone in Saskatchewan relies on both the 
economic progress that we have been able to see in the province 
of Saskatchewan since the members opposite left power. And 
everybody in Saskatchewan relies on the social progress that is 
the vision of our Throne Speech and the vision of this budget. 
 
It is easy to say, and even the members opposite will pay lip 
service to it, that you cannot afford the social progress without 
the economic progress. But, Madam Speaker, you can’t have 
economic progress without social progress. 
 
No truly successful society leaves people behind. The only 
successful societies — not just materially rich, but socially and 
culturally rich societies — are those who allow every member 
without discrimination, without discrimination to contribute to 
the full extent of their abilities. And societies that allow people 
to live in poverty and illiteracy are not societies with backward 
individuals; they are backward societies, Madam Speaker. 
 
And this budget — by investing in education, by investing in 
literacy, by investing in training, by investing in the most poor 
and vulnerable in our society — is giving a helping hand up to 
those people who, when they are able to make their full 
contribution, will contribute to economic progress. And that’s 
the true synthesis between the two, Madam Speaker. 
 
And that is why, that is why this is a budget that builds a better 
future right here. That is why this is the budget that carves out a 
path of opportunity on which no one will be left behind. That is 
the budget that I rise to support. And, Madam Speaker, the 
amendment is not just wrong. It is absurd, Madam Speaker, to 
suggest that this budget does nothing for the average person, the 
average family in Saskatchewan. 
 
I support the budget. I’ll be voting against the amendment. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker. 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand in the House and enter into the debate 
regarding the 2006 budget put forward by the government last 
week. 
 
It’s always a privilege to stand and speak on behalf of the 
constituents that we get to represent, and I’m no different than 
anyone else. I think the constituency that I represent happens to 
be probably the best in the province: the constituency of Indian 
Head-Milestone. From the deep south of Briercrest and 
Avonlea, through Milestone up to Vibank and Odessa, that area, 
Balgonie and just south of Regina right up to the Regina limits 
and to the northern part of my constituency, the Qu’Appelle 
Valley — I’ve said many different times that the constituency is 
probably 90 per cent agriculture based, but when you get into 
that Qu’Appelle Valley it’s like you drive into a different kind 
of sphere or realm because tourism is so important. 
 
But I do want to talk about, not just my constituency that I am 
privileged to represent, but talk about the provincial budget as I 
said that was introduced last week — a budget of record amount 
of spending at $7.7 billion, the highest budget that’s ever been 
put forward in this province. And I think if anybody was to look 
5 and 10 and 15 years ago, they would say, do we have to spend 
that much money, up to $7.7 billion? 
 
Well I will say that in a budget of that amount that there is 
going to be positive spending, and certainly I would agree with 
a number of the initiatives that this government has taken. I 
would be crazy to stand here and say I don’t agree with some of 
the initiatives put forward by the provincial government 
because some of the initiatives put forward by this provincial 
government are initiatives that we have talked about for many 
years on this side of the House. In fact I know that we have 
campaigned in 1999 and in 2003 on some of the very initiatives 
that finally the government has put forward. 
 
The government I believe did the right thing by striking the 
Vicq commission and then following along with most of it. But 
it was very interesting in the Vicq commission, some of the 
different recommendations that Jack Vicq and his partners put 
forward that certainly this government has shied away. They’ve 
taken one piece of it, dealing with corporate tax cuts, and I 
would agree with that portion of the provincial budget. 
 
I would agree with a number of other things in the provincial 
budget. I would talk about the spending in health care at 3.2. 
It’s increased by 9.9 per cent. The spending in the health care is 
one thing. I’m going to talk later in my remarks about the whole 
issue of health care and how we can be spending $3.2 billion. 
And I certainly have some questions around the whole issue of 
where we’re going to be in the next couple years, where this 
money is being spent, and I’ll deal with those issues as I get to 
it a little bit further on in my speech. 
 
I think I could not stand here without commenting on the last 
speaker, and I guess it’s just kind of the last thing that I heard 
that has stuck in my mind. And there are other issues that were 

brought up by members opposite that I certainly took exception 
to, but I do have to talk about the last speaker, the Minister of 
Justice, the highest ranking Justice official in our province and 
how he has a budget of $7.7 billion to talk about and for at least 
7 to 10 minutes all he could talk about were the 1980s. 
 
Now, my heavens, if I ever get the opportunity or if this 
opposition when it gets the opportunity to sit on that side of the 
House, let’s hope that after $7.7 billion worth of spending we 
could speak for 15 minutes on the positives of what that budget 
is. But the highest ranking official of Justice has nothing else to 
do but to criticize a 22- or 24-year-old staffer in a minister’s 
office back in the mid-’80s. That’s what half of his speech was 
about. It’s absolutely appalling. 
 
And the other issue that the Minister of Justice had the nerve to 
do is to stand in this House, to stand in this House and recite a 
song from the Irish Rovers. My God, if you don’t have more to 
talk about on a $7.7 billion budget, you’ve got some major 
problems. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. All members will have an 
opportunity to participate in debate. I know some members’ 
voices carry, and they don’t realize how far they go, but I’d like 
to hear from the member who’s been recognized to speak. The 
member for Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I appreciate that because I think, when they’re 
hollering across, they can’t hear what I’m saying, and I think 
they need to hear what I’m saying. 
 
They need to hear the fact that, when all you can do is quote 
from an Irish Rovers song after a $7.7 billion budget, you’ve 
really got some problems. When all you can do is look back 
into the mid-’80s and talk about a staff person in a minister’s 
office, you’ve got some problems because — quote me — in 10 
years or in five years when we’re sitting on that side of the aisle 
talking about a budget that we bring down, I hope I’m not stuck 
at 8 o’clock at night talking about staff people in various 
ministers’ offices. I think it’s absolutely appalling that that’s 
what they would be able to talk about regarding their most 
recently introduced budget. 
 
What I do want to talk about though is the issue of growth. And 
we’ve heard the government talk about this growth agenda that 
now . . . And the budget is supposed to deal with growth, and I 
want to talk a little bit about growth because we hear that, from 
the government side, that everything is wonderful. The 
economy is growing like mad, and they’re really quite happy 
about that. 
 
And I will say that we are growing because we’re spending 
more money than we ever have before. It’s 7.7 billion. But there 
is growth, and the growth is in pure revenue. Let’s not mistake 
real growth of population and jobs with the growth of just 
revenue because that’s certainly what they’re hanging their hats 
on. All they can talk about is the growth of revenue, but they’re 
not looking at the real issue. 
 
Any government that would stand there and pat themselves on 
the back like this government does when they have lost a total 
of 4,583 people in the last year . . . Now to me, if I was to 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

measure growth, I measure growth on population, on jobs, and 
also on revenue. But not just one, because when you increased 
your revenue because of oil and gas, purely a commodity price, 
what are you going to do when the commodity price drops? I’m 
looking forward to what this government’s answers will be if 
oil drops below $63 a barrel because you know what they’re 
going to do? Let’s hypothetically put the situation for this 
government that oil has dropped from $65 a barrel down to 30 
and see how they cope. And they’d be scrambling. They’d be 
scrambling, and they’d be crying the blues. 
 
[20:45] 
 
Well let me put you on a farm anywhere in Saskatchewan that 
was receiving prices comparable to, hypothetically, $65-a-barrel 
oil or in a canaryseed price at 16 to 18 cents, and now dealing 
with that commodity cut in half at 8 cents for a pound of 
canary. If you take the way . . . What farmers are going through 
right now is exactly what this government will do, will be going 
through if the oil price as a commodity price drops. And it’s not 
going to be backfilled or propped up when you’ve got a 
declining population. 
 
When your population is declining and you’re losing jobs, there 
goes your tax base. I said that 4,583 people left in the last year; 
2,500 of those — more than 2,500 of those — were between the 
ages of 19 and 29. You know, and I think every member on this 
side . . . and I don’t know if those members care to share 
stories. Every member, I can guarantee you on this side of the 
House, has a story of a couple that have left just in the last six 
months. And I know it’s no different from the area that I’m 
from. 
 
I was born and raised in the small town of Lewvan. The next 
community down is Colfax. There is a family there who, he 
farmed, his wife . . . they have two young girls. They farmed 
quite a . . . probably about six, seven section of land in that area. 
He, Randy, would probably be in his mid-30s and Tina, his 
wife, is about the same age. She’s gone through school, taken 
dental assisting, so we’ve been able to help her with her 
education through the province by getting her through school. 
 
But unfortunately between agriculture and jobs, they’ve decided 
that they’ve had enough, and they’ve moved to Alberta. They’re 
living just outside of Edmonton. You know, they’ve sold their 
home. They’re renting their land. But when the government 
says no one is left behind, I’ll guarantee you that grandpa and 
grandma, Randy’s parents living in Weyburn, are left behind. 
They have three kids, and none of them are living in the 
province any more. 
 
And continually we lose population. You know and it’s just not 
numbers; it’s people. It’s people and it’s taxpayers, and that’s 
what we need to keep in mind. 
 
You know often we get . . . We look at, for example I’ll say in 
Regina and I’ll talk about the . . . I don’t know if it’s all in the 
constituency of Regina Wascana Plains because I heard the 
member from that area speak earlier talking about the number 
of small businesses that are starting up or the number of 
businesses that are expanding in our province. Well I happen to 
live in that area, and I want to tell the members opposite that, 
don’t be fooled by the fact that because we have a Costco and 

we have a number of big box stores opening up in the southeast 
of Regina that that is growth because when we’re losing people 
it’s not growth. 
 
We have got a boom in the southeast part of Regina that’s 
phenomenal, and there are businesses starting up there like you 
wouldn’t believe, but there are no more people to shop in those 
businesses than were shopping three or four years ago before 
those businesses opened up 
 
An Hon. Member: — Population in Regina is growing. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well the member from North Battleford, 
the population in Regina is growing. Where’s it growing from? 
Is it growing? Are we seeing net growth in our province? 
Because we’re not. 
 
Do you know why Regina is growing and why these big boxes 
and a number of these stores are operating is because . . . go 
outside of Regina and go to Indian Head and go to Qu’Appelle 
and go to Fort Qu’Appelle and see how those businesses are 
doing. We don’t have any more people buying in this province. 
In fact we have less. So just because we have bigger stores 
doesn’t mean we have a growing economy. It means that other 
businesses . . . For example Indian Head had two grocery stores, 
and you look on the east side with Safeway and Costco and a 
Co-op and a Superstore and an IGA. Those people from rural 
Saskatchewan are quite often purchasing in Regina, and it’s 
affecting the small businesses throughout the constituency. 
 
So do not think that by looking at those big boxes that it’s 
growth because it isn’t growth. It isn’t growth. All it is, is 
taking from one part of the province, rural Saskatchewan, and 
moving into urban Saskatchewan. And you know I’ve heard 
over and over again, and I certainly am not going to defend, but 
people in rural Saskatchewan are saying of this government you 
know they absolutely have lost touch, and they don’t care one 
ounce as to what goes on here. Because I just heard the member 
from North Battleford say Regina is growing as if that’s all 
that’s important. 
 
If Humboldt was growing or if North Battleford was growing, 
that’s all that matters at the expense of rural Saskatchewan. 
Because quite frankly they realize they’re not going to run a 
seat in rural Saskatchewan, so they could care less, other than 
maybe Meadow Lake. They have that one. I’m not sure they’re 
going to keep it. But they really don’t care about anywhere in 
rural Saskatchewan if the city that they happen to represent is 
growing. And that’s a very sad state of affairs. 
 
I found it absolutely amazing, I found it absolutely amazing that 
there is so little mention of agriculture in this budget. 
Agriculture was absolutely absent from this budget. And I guess 
it’s reflective on where their representation is and where they 
feel they can hold seats. They feel they can hold seats in urban 
Saskatchewan, and that’s where their focus and priority is. It 
certainly isn’t in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s very obvious that when you hear the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Deputy Premier — and especially the 
Deputy Premier in some of the banter that’s been going back 
and forth in this House — that the government would be talking 
about the current federal minister Chuck Strahl making 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

comments at a conference in Yorkton. And all they’re using out 
of that whole conference is Chuck Strahl said “buck up 
farmers.” And you know, that is so . . . They keep saying it. 
And I know the Deputy Premier spouted from his seat; he said 
we’re going to spread that all across Saskatchewan. And that’s 
what he said last week. 
 
This week, they’ve got the Minister of Agriculture going down 
asking for money. So on one hand they’re saying the Minister 
of Agriculture doesn’t care about agriculture. He’s telling 
farmers to buck up in this House. And then he goes down to 
Ottawa — thinking that message hasn’t got to Chuck Strahl — 
with a cap in hand expecting relief for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
I have one word of advice for the Deputy Premier and 
especially the Minister of Agriculture. If you’re going to be 
going down and if you’re going to be relying on agriculture 
policy, on your total agriculture policy for Ottawa, from 
Ottawa, maybe you shouldn’t spend the first week insulting 
them. You know, it just doesn’t make sense to go around 
insulting and then going and asking for money. And that’s 
exactly what this government has done. 
 
I need to get to health care and talk a little bit about health care 
in the time that I have left because certainly that has been the 
area that I’ve been focusing on more. As I said, $3.2 billion into 
health care, the biggest health care budget that we’ve ever seen 
in this province. 
 
I don’t think asking the deputy minister . . . and I can guarantee 
you, asking this Minister of Health, if I was to ask where are we 
going to be in two and three years . . . is spending on health care 
going to continue at 9.9 per cent? And if it does, can we afford 
it? We’re at 43 or 44 per cent of the provincial budget right now 
on health care spending. Can we go forward at this rate? 
 
I’ve asked the deputy minister and he said, well we really 
haven’t done work on that. We don’t have any projections, 
which quite frankly is scary. I would ask the minister that too, 
and I hope when he stands for his remarks he talks about where 
health care is going to be in two and three and four years at 9.9 
per cent spending. But you know, I realize that the chances of 
getting any response from the minister, as far as where health 
care is going to be in the next three or four years, is pretty much 
a moot point. 
 
He won’t be saying anything about that because we’ve asked 
for weeks now if the Minister of Health would please tell us 
what his projection is for nurses going forward. How many 
more health care professionals, but in particularly registered 
nurses, how many more do we need going forward? SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] has put forward their numbers. 
The minister says that’s wrong. He keeps saying that we have 
done our own work, and we know what the projection is. Well I 
would just again ask the minister to let us know what his 
projection is. He said out in the rotunda that we don’t want to 
set a number because we’re scared that we can’t meet it. 
 
Well that’s really quite interesting, and I would agree with the 
minister because under his watch he probably can’t meet it. And 
it’s interesting when you look at when this government put 
forward job projections from last year. They were projecting 
4,800 jobs going forward. But now they’ve had to reduce that 

because they came nowhere close to that number, and they’ve 
reduced it down to 3,000 jobs, but at least they had the nerve to 
set a target. To set a target that they couldn’t meet, that’s fine. 
They work towards it into the future. 
 
They talked about, they talked about immigration. They had . . . 
I don’t know what their immigration targets were. Well they’re 
5,000 right now, but I know it was around 400 or 200 to 300, 
400 a couple of years ago. So they couldn’t meet the 200 or the 
400; that’s fine. They’ve jacked it up to 5,000, but at least they 
set a target. And so in a year from now if they don’t meet that 
target, they’re going to have to re-evaluate where they went 
wrong to try and meet that target. But it’s absolutely ridiculous 
when you are in a position to set a goal — the Saskatchewan 
registered nurses are asking for it — to set a target, but the 
minister is scared to set it. 
 
You know, it’s like I can kick field goals all day long if I don’t 
have a goalpost to kick through. I will hit them — 10 times out 
of 10 I’ll hit a field goal when there is no posts on the field, you 
know. And so you’re bound and determined to hit whatever 
you’re aiming for, but you don’t have a number set. It’s 
absolutely appalling. 
 
The issue around nursing and the numbers set for RNs 
[registered nurse] going forward, but I also want to talk about 
. . . and the member for Saskatoon Nutana stood in the House a 
number of days ago and talked about how many people that we 
have enrolled in our RN and LPN [licensed practical nurse] and 
surgical courses. She mentioned that we have 1,557 people 
enrolled in the different programs. And she was quite proud of 
that. I admire that she’d even said a number, that’s great. 
 
But you know our province to the east of us, Manitoba, that has 
about the same population. It has about the same budget as what 
we have, have a total of 3,000 seats designated for the same . . . 
comparing apples to apples, for RNs, LPNs, and other nursing 
professional training seats. They’ve doubled the amount that we 
have, Madam Speaker, because we continue to underestimate. 
We continue to hear the Premier talk about the wee province. 
We continue to have professional health care shortages because 
the minister will not say where we need to be going forward. He 
fears that he probably will miss the target. And I guess if you 
don’t ever set one, you never miss it. But it’s an issue that needs 
to be addressed here in the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s your number? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well the member from P.A. Northcote says 
what’s our number? Well you’ve got the health care authorities 
around the province that are under the government’s wing that 
are supposedly doing human resources plans. They’re knowing 
how many retirements there are. We’re not privy to those 
numbers, but I wish the minister would release those numbers 
because then we would set a target. But when we are not privy 
to any of the numbers, I question whether the minister even has 
those numbers. And I don’t believe he does because he’s scared 
to release them. 
 
The other issue, it’s one thing to have a number of seats 
regarding RNs and RPNs [registered psychiatric nurse], but 
when you have the worst nurse retention rate in Canada, that is 
a huge issue and it’s a huge issue . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

Well the minister is saying we don’t have the worst any more. 
It’s kind of like the minister of Economic Development saying 
we’re really doing good; we’re losing not quite as many as we 
used to lose. That’s a positive statement coming from that 
Economic Development minister. I cannot believe that you 
would stand here and say that losing fewer people than we used 
to is positive news. I would stand there and say we have lost 
more people; it’s absolutely unacceptable, and we need to 
change our go-forward plan so that we retain the people we 
have. 
 
Just like the minister is saying, we’re not the worst in Canada 
now . . . because we were the worst in nurse retention. We’re 
not the worst any more. We’re 9 out of 10. We’re the ninth 
province out of 10 provinces, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely 
appalling. 
 
And there are reasons why the health care professionals are 
leaving this province. There are workplace issues. There’s 
morale issues. There’s overtime issues. There are a number of 
issues that cause nurses to leave. 
 
[21:00] 
 
Now the minister, the former minister of Health is shaking his 
head, doesn’t think it’s right. But honestly people leave the 
province for reasons. And it’s about time they start doing exit 
surveys and finding out why we’re losing so many health care 
professionals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are many other issues that I’d love to talk about, but I 
don’t really have a whole lot more time I guess. I’m getting a 
lot of nods. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hooks. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Yes, the hook is coming out. But anyway 
what I would like to say is that the provincial government had a 
opportunity. They took a small window and introduced some of 
the things that needed to be introduced. But they’re falling far 
short on many other areas, in many other areas. 
 
So I’ll be very glad to support the amendment. And I won’t be 
supporting the motion put forward by government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Dewdney, the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. I’m extremely pleased this evening to enter into the 
debate on the budget speech, Ms. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This budget was a budget that moves the province forward, 
building a better future for all the provincial residents right here 
in Saskatchewan. This budget works together with the people of 
Saskatchewan to make Saskatchewan the best place to work, to 
live, and to raise a family. 
 
Now the members opposite, they just don’t seem to get it, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. They continue to complain that this 
budget does nothing for people, does nothing for families — 

just doesn’t get it in their minds. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is the best budget that this 
province has had the opportunity to see in more than 30 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — This budget is about building a future for 
young people in this province. It’s about creating job 
opportunities for young people. It’s about creating training 
opportunities for young people. It’s about keeping our children 
here in this province, raising their families, having their 
children. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget takes a bold step towards a 
new century for this province and a new direction for our 
future. It only could be done through the hard work of the 
people of this province who worked with the government to 
turn around what could only be seen as the worst and most 
dismal situation this province has ever faced. 
 
In 1991, Madam Deputy Speaker, this province was on the 
verge of bankruptcy. It was at a point where it couldn’t borrow 
any more money, where it had to look at drastic program cuts in 
order to balance the budgets, to move the province forward. 
But, Madam Deputy Speaker, this was the first province in 
Canada that balanced its books. Although faced with a great 
deal of difficulty in the early 1990s, this province balanced its 
books first of any province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — That’s what leadership is about. It’s about 
making the tough decisions. It’s not about promising everybody 
everything like the members opposite are doing, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. They are trying to be everything to everybody. 
And that’s not about leadership. It’s not about being 
government. It’s about being irresponsible. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget is building upon a 
foundation that took many years to put in place. You don’t get 
or achieve eight years of economic growth by making mistakes. 
You achieve eight years of economic growth and prosperity 
through planning, through hard work, and through achievement. 
But the members opposite, all they can do is throw stones, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget introduced business tax 
cuts designed to stim economic activity, new capital 
investment, create jobs and wealth for the future so that that 
wealth can be used once again to be reinvested in the people of 
this province. And what’s the opposition say about this, Madam 
Deputy Speaker? No, it’s not good enough. It’s not what they 
want to . . . nothing good enough for them. It’s not what they 
want to see happen. 
 
But what surprises me, Madam Deputy Speaker, is that when 
the Finance critic was speaking to reporters about the budget 
and the PST reduction on April 5, 2004, he said this, and I 
quote: 
 

They have the money to do it now. Saskatchewan families, 
every time they go to the grocery store, are paying an 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

inflated tax that nobody voted for. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the Finance critic of the opposition 
doesn’t understand we don’t pay PST on groceries. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Finance critic from the 
opposition doesn’t understand we don’t pay PST on groceries. 
Now how can that member and how can that opposition be 
credible when they don’t even understand what they pay taxes 
on today? How can they speak about taxes when they don’t 
even know what they pay on today? 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, many of the members opposite were 
very closely linked to the government of 1980s that put this 
province in a crippling debt. Now they like to deny that past. 
They like to hide from what they did in their past. I’d just like 
go through a few of . . . where some of the members opposite 
were during the 1980s and what they did. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition for nearly seven years served as a 
ministerial assistant for various cabinet ministers. And in 1991 
he was the senior ministerial assistant for the minister of 
Economic Diversification and Trade, John Gerich. The member 
from Saskatoon Silver Springs was assistant to Sid Dutchak, 
Grant Devine, and Ray Meiklejohn during the same period of 
time, all ministers in the Devine cabinet. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Finance critic and the 
Leader of the Opposition were both very clearly tied to the 
leadership of the Devine government. And they don’t want to 
talk about it. They don’t want to talk about it at all. And they try 
to say well that’s when they were young or that they didn’t 
understand what was going on. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want read from an article out of the 
Swift Current Sun, March 25, 1991, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Wall, 25, is Chief of Staff to Associate Economic 
Diversification and Trade Minister John Gerich. 

 
So he’s 25 years of age. This is his own article. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to point out, that on June 17, 1991, in a memo 
from Ted Yarnton, executive vice president, operations, 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, there’s an order. And I 
quote: 
 

Please have delivered to our Minister, Honourable John 
Gerich at Room 348, Legislative Building the following 
(attention Mr. Brad Wall): 

 
1 Lemon Hart Dark Rum 1140 ml 
2 Alberta Vodka 1140 ml 
2 Scotch (Ballantines, J. Walker Red) 1140 ml 
1 Beefeater Gin 750 ml 
2 Rye (Windsor and Star) 1140 ml 
3 24 Beer (Cans) - 1 Light, 1 Regular, 1 3.2 per cent alcohol 

 
Attention: Mr. Brad Wall. 
 
I have other memos dated December 18, 1990, when Mr. Wall 
was chief of staff in Mr. Gerich’s office. On April 8, 1991, 
again orders for alcohol. 
 

Now I’d like to quote from an article from StarPhoenix January 
17, 1992. And I quote, Madam Deputy Speaker: 
 

It is unfortunate [for] Saskatchewan’s public accounts 
committee doesn’t have the power to throw people in jail. 
 
That’s where the bureaucrats and politicians responsible 
for the latest trilogy of horror stories to be uncovered by 
the committee belong. 
 
The former premier’s office had 24 employees, most of 
whom were political operatives, paid by other government 
departments and Crown corporations. That’s not 
secondment of personnel; it’s fraud. 
 
The Saskatchewan Property Management Corp. paid 
$133,000, not for its own advertising, but to cover the 
government’s overall advertising bill. That’s not creative 
accounting; it’s fraud. 
 
The Saskatchewan Liquor Board gave $15,000 worth of 
booze to the board’s ministers. That’s not a gift; it’s fraud. 
 
Is it too much to ask that government employees be paid 
by the department in which they work? Or that 
government agencies not pay for advertising services they 
don’t receive. Or that cabinet ministers not be given rivers 
of free liquor when the rest of us are asked to pay? 
 
These cases are despicable, not just for their scale but for 
their intent. They were concocted at great effort to deceive 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That makes them fraud and that’s why the perpetrators, as 
well as those who watched and did nothing, deserve to be 
behind bars. 
 

Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I just read from an article, but 
it’s very clear from what I’ve described over the last few 
minutes that Brad Wall, the current Leader of the Opposition, 
not only knew but participated in these activities. And, Ms. 
Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan need to know this 
because those years were the worst, were the worst in the 
government’s history. They were absolutely the worst in our 
history, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we don’t want to go back to those years. We want to talk 
about a positive budget moving forward. But the opposition say 
they can’t support this budget. But yet members of the 
opposition supported that type of activity during the 1980s and 
early 1990s. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget’s about people, and it’s for 
the people, and it’s for making significant progress for the 
province. This is the 13th consecutive balanced budget — 13th 
consecutive balanced budget. This is the third year that the 
budget is balanced without fiscal stabilization transfers — third 
consecutive year that it’s balanced without any transfers from 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Madam Deputy Speaker, 
government debt declined from 7.25 billion at the end of 
2005-06 to 7.2 billion at the end of 2006-07. Government 
debt-to-GDP ratio declined from 16.7 at the end of 2005-06 to 
15.8 at the end of 2006-07, under 17 per cent for the first time 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

since 1986-87. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a budget that made significant 
progress for the people of Saskatchewan, but it also is a budget 
that made significant investments in the people of this province. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s cutting business taxes to stimulate 
the economy and create jobs. It’s providing 97.3 million in 
revenue sharing to municipalities. It’s reducing education and 
property tax on agriculture land by almost $67 million. It’s 
providing 98.8 million in base funding for CAIS. It’s funding 
$100 million for crop insurance. It’s providing $3.2 billion for 
health. It’s increasing funding for police and crime prevention, 
providing over $340 million in highway improvements. It’s 
cutting business taxes. It’s eliminating the general corporate 
capital tax by July 1, 2008. It’s eliminating the general 
corporate capital tax on new investments in Saskatchewan as of 
July 1 this year. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it’s about stimulating our economy 
now. It’s reducing the corporate capital tax resource surcharge 
rates beginning July 1 of this year. It’s reducing the corporate 
income tax rate from 17 to 12 per cent by July 1, 2008. It’s 
increasing the small-business threshold from 300,000 to 
500,000 by July 1, 2008. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a budget about building for our 
future. But, Madam Deputy Speaker, on top of significant tax 
cuts, it’s also doing a significant amount for young people and 
families in this province. It’s freezing tuition at the universities 
until 2008. It’s funding 32,000 university seats and 34,000 
training spaces including new seats at SIIT [Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technologies]. 
 
It’s encouraging economic growth and opportunity through 
business tax cuts to stimulate the economy and create jobs. It’s 
creating a new tax credit for employed tradespeople. It’s 
providing almost $100 million in student assistance. And it’s 
increasing the graduate tax credit to $850 and further increasing 
it to 1,000 January 1, 2007, encouraging students to establish 
their careers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget is ensuring that no one is 
left behind on the path to opportunity. Expanding access to 
higher quality rental housing for people, it’s increasing 
assistance rates through the Saskatchewan assistance program 
through the TEA [transitional employment allowance] program, 
through the training employment assistance program for a 
majority of clients by $480 a year, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s adding 500 new child care spaces. It’s supporting 670 new 
families through KidsFirst. It’s increasing child care subsidies 
by $3.6 million. It’s providing 18.2 million for Project Hope, 
for treatment, detox beds, and secure care, outreach services, 
and drug programs for young people. It’s funding the largest 
Health budget in history at $3.2 billion. And, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, this is a budget that’s about families and about people 
in this province. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget builds on that strong 
foundation that the people of this province helped put in place 

over the last decade. Now we have the opportunity to turn that 
corner and move forward and this government is doing so. It 
has a plan. It has a vision for the future. It has a vision to move 
forward. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, you can always say you can do more. 
But the members opposite don’t say what they would do 
without in order to do more. They don’t have to make choices. 
They don’t have to make decisions. They don’t have to take 
leadership, and they don’t have to govern. They simply 
criticize. 
 
This is a budget that I would have expected many of the 
members opposite to support. This is a budget that’s good for 
the people of Saskatchewan. It’s about building a future. It’s 
about investing for the young people in our province. It’s what 
they have been saying they’ve wanted. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s what we 
wanted too. But before you can do that, you have to have the 
fiscal capability. You have to have the resources to do that, and 
first you need to build the foundation to move forward. And 
that’s what the last number of years has been about, and this is 
about using that foundation and that base to move forward for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that the members opposite, to have any credibility 
at all, would have to vote in favour of this budget because this 
budget does more for this province than has been achieved in 
many, many years. It cuts business tax to create that 
environment for building a sustained economy. It creates 
training spaces. It creates jobs for young people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t want to vote for it. And then they put forward an 
amendment of non-confidence that just doesn’t make any sense 
at all, Madam Speaker. They say it disagrees with the general 
budgetary policy of the government because the Premier and 
cabinet have not fully implemented a growth agenda. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what is this budget about if it’s not about a 
growth agenda? It cuts taxes to create opportunity and 
economic growth. It creates training spaces to train our young 
people. It’s about the people of this province. It’s about creating 
growth. Now, Mr. Speaker, they don’t say anything. They don’t 
present any viable alternatives. They don’t talk about anything 
positive. They simply complain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, responsibility is something that these members on 
this side take very seriously. They want to build on the future. 
They want to move forward. The members opposite simply 
want to criticize. They see it as their role to oppose everything. 
Well responsible oppositions don’t oppose everything. They’re 
responsible, and they vote in favour of budgets that they believe 
in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Yates: — And this is a budget that the people of 
Saskatchewan believe in. The only people who don’t believe in 
this budget, Mr. Speaker, are the people opposite. The people of 
this province from the chamber of commerces to social activist 
groups across this province have all said this is a good budget. 
It’s a balanced budget that provides for economic growth and 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

money for those who need it most in our society. 
 
It’s a good budget, Mr. Speaker, and for those reasons I’m 
going to be supporting the budget and opposing, and opposing, 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s a pleasure 
for me to speak tonight on behalf of the constituents of Cypress 
Hills with regard to the budget debate. We have covered a lot of 
ground tonight, some of it pretty shaky, some of it pretty sound, 
but we’ve covered a lot of ground nevertheless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And since this is the first time that I’ve been able to speak on 
behalf of my constituents in any significant way, I want to 
recognize the wonderful support I get from the people of 
Cypress Hills. They’ve been particularly generous with me 
personally over the last year. They’ve expressed concern about 
whatever health issues I might have had, and I want to thank 
them publicly and on the record tonight for that concern and 
that support. It’s been gratifying to have that, and if anything, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s encouraged me to do a better job on 
their behalf because there are people in the constituency who 
are counting on me to speak on their behalf in this august place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was actually preparing to be pretty 
generous in my remarks tonight as regards this budget. But you 
know I’ve been dissuaded somewhat by some of the comments 
I’ve heard from several of the speakers, most recently from the 
government side. You know the Minister of Justice took us 
down this tattered trail of revisionist history, and I just can’t be 
generous to that kind of nonsense, frankly. It’s just beyond the 
pale that he would go that far back in history to try and make a 
point. 
 
Now you know if he wants to believe that stuff, that’s fine, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But the point of the matter is that we’ve had a 
whole generation of young people grow up in the intervening 
years from which he was drawing his material. They don’t even 
know who Grant Devine was. And the fact of the matter is that 
the biggest majority of people in this province really don’t care 
who he was. 
 
The people of this province want to know that this province is 
being governed in the best interests of our future. And they’re 
not real sure that that’s happening under the leadership of this 
NDP administration. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last Friday the Regina Leader Post 
headlined its story, following the Saskatchewan budget: 
“Thanks Oil Patch.” The headline writer for this particular story 
had it right because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it hadn’t been for 
the oil patch, if it hadn’t been for the resource revenues 
generated by potash and uranium and other mining institutions 
here in the province, if it hadn’t been for the overwhelming 
financial generation created by those industries, this budget 
wouldn’t have been possible. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s one thing to be a good manager, 

but it’s another to take credit for something that you have 
absolutely no control over. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact is that we have $60-a-barrel 
oil. In fact I believe the government has made its projections 
based on an average price of about $58 a barrel, but it’s been as 
high as 65, pressing 70. And that has nothing to do with this 
government. This government had no say in the value of the 
barrel of oil. It had no mechanism, no means by which to make 
that price part of the reality we’re dealing with. This 
government has been the benefactor of good fortune. 
 
Good management is one thing but recognizing good fortune is 
also important. And being able to make good use of good 
fortune is absolutely critical. 
 
It’s very ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government of the 
day would be the benefactors of an oil price that was impacted 
almost exclusively by a war in a far-off Middle Eastern country, 
a war that this government did not support, in fact spoke 
publicly against it. 
 
And now we have the benefits being reaped by this government, 
and that is an irony beyond which most people can’t get. 
They’re looking at this and saying, it’s simply unbelievable that 
the government of the day would take credit for their successes 
in this area when they had no part in the way it came about — 
and didn’t even support the act of history that brought high oil 
prices to the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heard the last member, the member from 
Dewdney, talk about how this is a people’s budget and the 
people of Saskatchewan support it. Now I will grant you a 
couple of things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will grant you that 
there is a lot of money spread over a lot of different areas to the 
benefit of quite a large number of different groups. The money 
was spent more or less an inch deep and spread over such a 
wide area that it was really hit-and-miss in many respects. It 
benefited some groups very well, and it disenfranchised others 
significantly. 
 
And when I say that, I’m thinking mostly in terms of my own 
constituents. While this particular budget has brought benefit to 
some individuals, I represent the people of Cypress Hills. And 
if I ask them in conversation, had they heard about this budget, 
well you know, frankly they know very little about it. They 
heard, you know, a brief summary of it, maybe on the newscast 
or read a bit in the paper or saw it on TV. But when it comes 
right down to knowing what this budget was about and how it 
might affect them personally, they’re vastly unaware of the 
consequences — with one or two exceptions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And those exceptions are where the rubber meets the 
road for those people in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there’s two areas of particular concern as it relates to this 
budget that I want to talk about right now. Of course the first 
one is the area of agriculture. As you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Cypress Hills is largely an agricultural-based 
constituency. We have a number of other industries, but 
agriculture is still the pre-eminent economic driver in southwest 
Saskatchewan. And to have agriculture as clearly avoided, 
simply ignored in this particular budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
unconscionable. 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

Now I know the Minister of Agriculture would say, well we’re 
going to fund CAIS and, you know, we’re putting money into 
crop insurance, and we’re doing this and that and the other 
thing. Well as my colleague from Cannington pointed out in his 
lengthy list of statistics tonight, the money going into 
agriculture this year is less than it was last year. And it’s 
significantly less than it’s been in years previous. So to talk 
about agriculture as being supported by this government in any 
significant way is just simply wrong. 
 
Now when you talk about the funding going into CAIS, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, CAIS is a flawed program. It is widely 
regarded as the most failed and incomplete farm support 
program ever devised for western Canadian farmers and what 
we’ve seen in my constituency . . . 
 
And some of this information, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
anecdotal; I’ll agree. But I’ve got it from a pretty reliable 
source. I met with all of the credit union managers in the 
constituency of Cypress Hills recently, and I asked them if they 
could tell me how many farmers who are their customers might 
qualify for CAIS payments. The most optimistic number was 25 
per cent. Estimates ranged as low as 5 per cent. 
 
Now the credit union in my constituency is the pre-eminent 
financial institution. They do more farm and ranch banking than 
any other institution. I meet with those individuals on an annual 
basis to find out what they perceive to be the issues relating to 
agriculture and how it’s affecting the economy and how it’s 
affecting their own business and viability. And for them to tell 
me that CAIS is that poorly designed that it would have 
virtually no impact in the vast majority of farmers in dire 
financial situations says to me that it is a program that is not just 
flawed but is doomed to failure. Unfortunately many farmers 
and ranchers in my constituency may be equally doomed to 
failure because of the situation that CAIS has brought about. 
 
And at this point, not only is the program flawed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but so too is the reasoning and the rationale for 
continuing to support it. Now the current government has said 
that they will support it to the tune of $100 million now, with 
the balance coming later. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the money 
is needed today. 
 
There are literally dozens and dozens and dozens of ranchers 
and farmers who will probably not be able to go to the fields 
adequately prepared financially or with the proper seeds or 
chemicals and so forth because of their financial situation. So 
we needed the provincial government to acknowledge the 
severity of the farm financial crisis in this budget, and it didn’t 
happen. And I think that that is a travesty that will not be easily 
forgotten or forgiven, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And here we have crop insurance programs, you know, 
underfunded again — $12 million taken out of the crop 
insurance program. This government has been responsible for 
the diminished impact and effectiveness of crop insurance year 
after year after year. Higher premiums, less coverage — it’s a 
constant feature of the provincial budget. And for the 
government to take pride in the fact that we have a crop 
insurance program that is working effectively is just simply 
whistling in the dark. 
 

[21:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the crop insurance program, if it is to be 
financially self-sustaining or viable in the long run, needs more 
participants not fewer. And if you recall there was a large 
debate in this House a week or 10 days ago about how the 
government was sending out notices to individuals about paying 
up or being shut out of the program. You know, those producers 
aren’t avoiding paying because they’re mean people or evil 
people or not good business people. You’d be surprised, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, how many bins are full of grain in my 
constituency and none of it is moving — no grain movement, 
no money. It appears that if these premiums aren’t paid . . . no 
money, no heart. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just, I can’t believe that a 
government would just brush aside the troubles facing 
agriculture as cavalierly and as casually as this government has 
done in this particular budget. The worst farm financial crisis in 
80 years, in 80 years — it’s not just a bad time. It’s not just a 
difficult time. It is the worst year by every standard in 80 years. 
And this government didn’t come to bat for the rural producers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about highway spending. If 
agriculture is one of the major issues in my constituency, the 
state of our highways is the other. There is an appalling lack of 
regard for the safety and the economic viability on the part of 
this government for the people of southwest Saskatchewan 
given the way they overlook the condition of our highways. 
 
I noticed that highway spending is up in this year’s budget by 
$45 million approximately. But I’m told that actual money 
spent in southwest Saskatchewan will be less this year than 
previous years. And given the condition of our highways, the 
potential for serious accidents, the economic impact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s just unacceptable that the government 
would rule out significant highway construction projects in 
southwest Saskatchewan right now. 
 
And I’ll tell you why it’s particularly galling, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I have with me here three pages of information that 
various RMs [rural municipality] have been able to garner from 
Industry and Resources. They’ve looked very carefully at the 
amount of drilling, the amount of production for both oil and 
gas in the RMs of southwest Saskatchewan. There’s 26 RMs on 
this sheet where all of the natural gas Crown royalty and 
freehold production tax data are detailed. And on this page, 
they’ve got crude oil Crown royalty and freehold production tax 
data for 13 other RMs. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this was an interactive game, I 
would ask you to guess how much money the current 
government takes out of southwest Saskatchewan in oil and gas 
royalties and other revenues. In one year, 2005, we have 
compiled the data amounting to $260,928,392.80 — 200 and 
almost $61 million in royalty and other revenues this year, 
2005. 
 
And do you know what it would take to build the highways in 
southwest Saskatchewan? The estimate is somewhere in the 
range of 45 to $50 million. You know, that would be 20 per 
cent of one year’s revenue. 
 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason this is so galling is that 
that money comes out of the southwest in huge sums. Virtually 
none of it is going to go back into highways this year. The 
pavement is crumbling and yet . . . You know, there isn’t a wise 
business person operating anywhere in this province who 
wouldn’t understand the necessity of reinvesting; it would be 
wise to reinvest in the elements that are making you money. 
Any farmer, any businessman, any other business that does not 
invest in the very elements that help them make money is 
doomed to failure. And this government has chosen to ignore 
that basic principle of wise business decision making. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, given the data here and given what 
they’re going to invest in southwest Saskatchewan in the next 
year, it’s almost criminal. Now you know it’s gotten so bad, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s gotten so bad that the ambulances going to 
the hospital in Swift Current — and hopefully the new hospital 
in Swift Current sometime — they can’t even go directly any 
more. The ambulances are going south from Leader to Maple 
Creek and then all the way down the No. 1 to get to Swift 
Current. That endangers the health of people. 
 
There are individuals in the Lancer and Sceptre and Prelate and 
Leader areas who’d rather do their business in Swift Current, 
but they automatically go to Medicine Hat; not because it’s 
closer, not because it’s cheaper, but because it’s safer. 
 
Now the Highways department says safety is their first priority. 
You would never know that in southwest Saskatchewan. You 
would never know that. Safety is an abrogation of this 
government’s responsibility in southwest Saskatchewan. And 
when somebody dies, when somebody’s killed, when there is a 
serious accident, who’s going to take responsibility for that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, given the fact that wealth of $261 million is 
coming out of southwest Saskatchewan on an annual basis? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had a number of other areas I wanted to 
touch on as it relates to this budget. I want to talk about debt a 
little bit. You know we heard this diatribe from a couple of 
members over there about the Devine debt. Well you know I’d 
just like to ask them if they could tell me the difference between 
good debt and bad debt because I keep hearing this from NDP 
people all the time. I heard it from the former NDP candidate in 
my constituency. It appears, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
definition of good or bad debt depends on who incurred it. If the 
NDP incurred it, it’s good debt. If somebody else incurs it, it’s 
bad debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — You know the only people who think that’s 
funny — and the only people who respond that way — are the 
NDP. The people of the province don’t see that; they don’t see 
that as humorous. They don’t think it’s funny at all. Debt is 
debt. And whether it was incurred by Allan Blakeney to the 
tune of $7 billion, or Grant Devine, another $7 billion, or this 
government to the tune of $288 million in this year’s budget, 
it’s debt. It’s debt. D-e-b-t. People don’t distinguish. The 
general public don’t distinguish. 
 
So it might be political fun to stand in here and make these 
points. But in reality, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t think it’s funny. They want leadership. They want good, 

solid planning. They want foresight. They want vision. And 
they don’t see it happening here. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about the loss of population. 
The government has put up a plan to recruit 5,000 new 
immigrants to the province. I’m going to believe it when I see 
it. Excuse me for being a doubting Thomas. We couldn’t get 
400 here last year, or just barely got 400. How are we going to 
get 5,000 next year? 
 
The most difficult problem I’ve got with this whole thing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that while we’re out recruiting 5,000 new 
immigrants to come to Saskatchewan, we’re chasing young 
people out of my constituency on a daily basis that would 
account for probably a third of the number of people who have 
left in the last year. The population loss in the constituency of 
Cypress Hills is huge. By the time the next boundary redrawing 
happens, my constituency will be substantially larger again. I 
would bet that we have lost 10 per cent of the population in the 
Cypress Hills constituency over the last four or five years. 
 
I mean it’s incredible. I know people on a daily basis leaving 
this province — young people leaving school, high school, not 
even considering Saskatchewan universities and colleges — 
going to Alberta. We chase them out faster than we can bring 
them in. I would suggest to this government that they pay much 
more attention to the young people who are born, raised, 
educated, right here in this province, and do what is absolutely 
necessary to keep them here as opposed to looking at alternative 
methods of growing our population. Immigration is a good idea. 
I’ve got no problem with it. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has to 
be weighed against the best programs and plans that would keep 
our own young people in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have 30 seconds, and I can’t cover all the 
stuff I brought with me tonight. I brought pages and pages of 
things. 
 
One of the questions I’d like to ask is . . . In Murray Mandryk’s 
column a couple days ago, when he talked about Marie 
Broberg, the constituent of mine from Gull Lake who went to 
Calgary because she couldn’t get into SIAST, one of the 
questions I’d like to ask this government is, are they sure that 
the things they put together in this budget will bring Marie 
Broberg back, or will it prevent the next Marie Broberg from 
leaving the province? 
 
If they can say that with assurance and confidence, and if they 
can show me the evidence of that at the end of next year, I 
would be happy to give them the credit for that. But in the 
meantime, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m afraid that I will not be 
supporting the budget. I will be supporting the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Athabasca. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to rise in 
full support of this budget and to basically point out three 
different parts of the presentation I want to make this evening. 
 
First of all I want to say a kind thank you to all the constituents 
of Athabasca. That represents one-quarter of the land mass of 
Saskatchewan and some very fine people spread out throughout 
that one-quarter of the land mass, all the way from the tiny 
northern community of Camsell Portage, Uranium City, of 
course, and the communities of Patuanak, Green Lake, Buffalo 
Narrows, La Loche, and many of the other communities that 
represent the Athabasca. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, when I first became involved 
with provincial politics and watching what provincial politics is, 
and I sit here today after 11 years listening to the Sask Party 
opposition trying to become the mushy middle, and I’m sitting 
here and I’m just shaking my head every day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Every day, because when we began this research of the 
provincial governments and seeing where things were in terms 
of what this government was doing, at the time when this 
government took over in 1991, this province was 15-plus billion 
dollars in debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 15-plus billion, 15-plus 
billion dollars in debt. 
 
Now, now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re under 11 billion thanks 
to this government handling of the Saskatchewan people’s 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the height of the interest payments, we were 
paying something like $860 million each and every year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Each and every year we paid $860 million of 
that Tory debt. Today now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re roughly 
paying $550 million in interest. That interest is coming down. 
 
And one of the most amazing stats that I want to point out, at 
one time interest payments was almost double our Education 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The interest on the debt 
accumulated by that party opposite was almost double our 
whole entire Education budget for Saskatchewan. 
 
And today, now under the new Minister of Finance, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I can say to you today that our Education budget is 
almost triple the interest payments that we pay every year — 
almost triple. And who done that? It wasn’t the Sask Party . . . 
[inaudible] . . . them that put us in the trouble to begin with. It 
was the careful handling of the finances of the people of 
Saskatchewan under this NDP government that we were able to 
achieve that together, Mr. Speaker. One of the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the most important . . . So when 
I hear the members opposite whine and complain every day, 
bring up little cases here and there in terms of talking about 
what they think is important, to the people of Saskatchewan, I 
tell them: . . . [inaudible] . . . when they complain and whine, 
who created this mess to begin with? Right over there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Right over there, that was where the problem 
began, and that’s not where the problem’s going to end, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park, the 

former minister of Finance and the media who dubbed, and I 
quote, “Dirty Harry.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should be pointed 
out when the member from Regina Douglas Park was the 
minister of Finance, he told the entire people of Saskatchewan 
that Saskatchewan must make sure that we live within our 
means, that we make some strategic moves right now to curb 
our spending, watch how we manage things, pay down debt, be 
careful in how we manage our finances. 
 
And that was two or three years ago when that message was 
delivered by the then minister of Finance, the member from 
Regina Douglas Park. And when he started talking about some 
of the things, this entire caucus listened to that advice and today 
that advice is paying dividends because we’re able to do more, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to recognize the former minister of Finance for 
some of his work and some of his vision and some of the fight 
that he had to undertake to make sure that the spending was 
under control and that the good times would roll out if we had 
that fiscal integrity and we had the courage to hold back 
spending then. And today it’s paying off, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 
it’s paying off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[21:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I also want to recognize the former 
minister from Massey Place when he led some of the charges in 
terms of trying to bring back income tax reform, personal 
income tax reform, and looking at a wide variety of measures to 
make sure the people of Saskatchewan were not unduly taxed. 
We have to recognize that early work. The former minister of 
Finance, and I could use his name now because he’s no longer 
with us, is the Hon. Jim Melenchuk, who also had some very 
solid work being undertaken in Finance. 
 
So every time, every time we look at the ministers of finances 
across the history of this government, they have done solid 
work, solid work. And as each of the ministers of Finance has 
done what they had to do to bring this fiscal plan in place, they 
handed off the baton to even greater members, and today now 
we can see the balance of that work and the benefit of that work 
is finally coming to fruition under this NDP government. That 
Sask Party opposition created the problems; we are solving 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — But the new Minister of Finance when 
he spoke on Thursday last, there’s three points that he raised 
that I was just absolutely pleased with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And this shows the content and the direction that this 
government’s going. 
 
The first thing that he said is the plan and the vision that he has 
of making sure that Saskatchewan is deemed a permanent have 
province, so we never have to count on Ottawa again. To me, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that speaks volumes of this government’s 
commitment and the people of Saskatchewan’s commitment to 
make sure that we never have to balance our books or look at 
outside means in which we can meet our needs, that we are an 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

independent and proud province that strives to become a have 
province forever. 
 
And there’s only three provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
have that status, and that is Ontario, Alberta, and Saskatchewan. 
And it makes me proud to hear our Minister of Finance say we 
want to keep that a permanent status and it is our endeavour to 
do so. And this government’s past success and other ministers’ 
past success in Finance have allowed us to do that and we will 
continue that work. 
 
The second thing that he pointed out in that speech was the fact 
that what was really important, really important, the pavement 
doesn’t stop at the reserve line. That was the other important 
argument that the Minister of Finance got up and said on 
Thursday last. And I think that’s so very important. It speaks 
volumes of our commitment to the First Nations and the Métis 
communities. 
 
And on budget day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did we hear anything 
on the Aboriginal front? Like their federal cousins at the 
national level, when it came to the Kelowna accord, nothing. 
Nothing. Silent. The silence was deafening. 
 
Now when we talked about the Aboriginal commitment in this 
budget, whether it’s SIIT or help through the SAP 
[Saskatchewan Assistance Plan] and TEA increases or whether 
they’re talking about pavement not ending on the reserve line, 
what did the folks across the way have to say about that? 
Nothing. There was zero effort, zero recognition on their part. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that speaks volumes of their 
so-called commitment to the Aboriginal people. 
 
The third comment that really interests me in the speech of the 
Minister of Finance was the fact that he spoke of the $1 billion 
in construction commitments that this government has made. 
And across the way, we admit we had a good year. We talked 
about $960 million that we had a surplus. And they keep telling 
everybody, everybody that listened to them, oh these guys are 
sitting on a mountain of cash. A mountain of cash, they say. 
And they say, oh we can help you, but this government’s 
stopping us. 
 
Well they talk about $1 billion surplus, and we’re committing 
$1 billion in construction alone. We’re not stopping there. 
We’re doing more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So when people ask 
me, do you guys have $1 billion, I say, well yes we have about 
$960 million in surplus. And we’re using every bit of that 
money to help pay down debt, for capital construction, to help 
the farmers and continue building this great province. And we 
can show time and time again where that money is spent. 
 
But on the other side, it depends on who’s in the galleries. It 
depends what the media covers that day. They try to be 
everything to everybody. And they cost this province billions in 
the old days, and they’re trying to do it again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So I sit here. I listen to their whining 
and their complaining. And I hear them talk about tired old 
government, they say. Well you know I’ve been around these 

benches now for seven or eight years, and I can tell you there’s 
nobody on this side that is fatigued at all because they’re seeing 
great progress made on the social front, on the economic front. 
 
And we’re going to go for that fifth term, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and we’re going to win. You know why we’re going to win? 
Not because of the work we’ve done and the progress we’ve 
made . . . is that we look across the way, and there’s the tired, 
old group there. There’s old Tories tired of waiting for power, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when you sit up and think about this, 
when you sit up and think about this, you do a difference of age. 
On average, our caucus is much younger than that old Tory 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — People have to turn around and look on 
that side and say, how old are those guys over there? And how 
tired are they over there? I can tell you, they’re pretty tired. 
Those old Tories are tired. 
 
And one of the things, one of the things that I really laugh at 
when I sit here on budget day, and I hear our Minister of 
Finance get up and say with pride, because he had all that 
support in the past, that they’re going to implement some of the 
work on Vicq, and they’re going to help the industry, and 
they’re going to help the corporations make Saskatchewan a 
profitable place to invest. And they get up and they say oh, it 
was our idea. You guys are listening to us, and absolutely 
everybody on this side laughed their heads off. 
 
You know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Those guys haven’t had 
an idea in 14 years, in 14 years. And every bit of advice they 
had, we tell them take your advice, especially if it’s financial, 
take it and stick it because we’re not going to use it. We took 
your advice once before, and it don’t work. So you haven’t had 
an idea in 14 years, and we’re not about to let you have any 
ideas for the next 10, 12 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would point out, if this was a hockey game, one of the 
members likened this game to a hockey game. And I would say 
the last 14 years, NDP 14, Saskatchewan Party zero. I think this 
is a lopsided hockey game, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there 
should be a mercy rule in politics. Because there’s a mercy rule 
in hockey, there should be a mercy rule in politics, and these 
guys should give up and go home because Saskatchewan ain’t 
listening to you. You have no credibility. You never had, and 
you never will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, when you talk about that 
party, that party, and I’ll tell you how they’re a mile deep and 
an inch thick. They try to be everything to everybody, but they 
got nothing underneath. All you have to do according to their 
strategists across the way is . . . You know how you get a cake 
and it says just add water, and you have an instant cake. Well 
what they think is you can become an instant socialist. You can 
become an instant Crown defender. You can become an instant 
public health care defender. As far as they’re concerned, all you 
have to do is add an election. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan say you 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

can’t become an instant defender of public health care because 
an election is on. People see right through those guys. Right 
through them. In the North, they say who are those guys trying 
to fool? Those are old Tories tired of hiding from their past. 
That’s what northern Saskatchewan says, and I support what 
they say 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we, the people, are tired 
of paying down their debt. We, the people, are tired of 
defending health care against a party that has a two tiered 
stealth plan to bring in private health care. We know on this 
side, that that’s their plan. We know they create as much 
confusion and problems with the public health care system in 
Saskatchewan because all of a sudden public confidence will 
erode and the private agenda will come up, right up to bat. And 
guess who’s out there shaking hands with the private sector 
saying right on you guys, come help us out? That will be that 
party across the way. 
 
So today the Minister of Health defends health care. The 
Minister of Finance puts 300 million more dollars towards 
health care, and these guys say, oh it’s not enough; it’s not 
enough. Their direct objective is to create fear and divisions and 
doom and gloom when it comes to the health care system and 
the Crowns because they can bring in their private health care, 
and they can bring in their private plans to take away our 
Crowns — whether it’s SaskTel, SaskPower, or SaskEnergy. 
And on this side of the House and the vast majority of people of 
Saskatchewan are saying, the jig is up. We know what you guys 
are doing. We know exactly what your plan is, and we ain’t 
buying it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we, the people, are also tired of watching 
those crocodile tears from across the way when it comes to 
representing the poor people. We, the people, are tired of your 
constant whining and complaining and really, quite frankly, 
sick and tired of you all over there trying to hide who you are. 
Just come out and admit who you are. To heck with trying to 
compete with the NDP on the mushy middle side of what you 
guys are trying to do because it ain’t working. It ain’t working. 
It ain’t working at all. 
 
Now the government, the NDP government are going over to 
the Sask Party’s so-called territory. We’re saying, hold it you 
guys; we’re not going to give you that territory for nothing. 
We’re going to talk to the corporations and the business people 
to try and bring them on side to build that brave, bold new 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I think happened on budget day with our Minister of 
Finance, those guys got knocked silly because they got a good 
solid right hook, followed up with a left undercut. And you 
know what happened? They’re dazed. They’re bruised. They’re 
battered. And above all else, people are starting to realize who 
they are, and that’s going to catch up to them, and that’s going 
to make them pay come next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to point out, I want to point out, I go back to the 
Kelowna accord. What did we get from those guys? What do 
you get from those guys over there when the federal Tories talk 
about the Aboriginal people? Zero. When the Saskatchewan 

Party talks about Aboriginal people and this budget speech — a 
big fat zero. When they talk about funding for farmers — a big 
fat zero. 
 
You know right today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Minister of 
Agriculture is off to Ottawa to fight for the provincial farmers. 
And where’s their guys? They’re sitting over there or they’re 
sitting having tea somewhere. And you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? The minister that’s heading out to Ottawa to fight for 
Saskatchewan farmers is out there alone, is out there alone — 
very few people out there supporting. And the official 
opposition, what’s their plan? No, we’ll let them go. We’ll let 
them go by themselves. We’re not going to go and help them. 
And it’s surprising. When the federal Liberals were in power, 
they were there. They were there. Now when their cousins . . . 
well no, no, they say it’s not their cousins. But when their 
cousins are there, oh no, we can’t go give our cousins heck. 
 
But you know what’s going to happen? I predict, as many 
people in my caucus will predict, they will go sometime in 
May, maybe June. And they’ll have this meeting with the Prime 
Minister, and they’ll come home. Yes, we have victory; we 
have money for the farmers. And you know what really 
disturbing about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? That’s their strategy 
to try and appear to win for the farmers. But all it is, is cheap 
politics. That’s all it is. 
 
If you’re going to come along and say you’re going to defend 
the farmer, you don’t do it on your political terms. You do it 
together with all Saskatchewan people. But no, for convenience 
and to try and qualify who they are, and who they not are, that’s 
what confuses me. You know, they said, no we’re not Tories, 
but we’re federal Tories. But we’re not going to work with you 
guys because it doesn’t fit our political agenda. And in the mix 
and all that, where are the farmers? Where are the farmers? The 
farmers need help now. 
 
Every day we hear the critics say, we need help now. But where 
are these guys? They’re sitting on their hands and knees right 
here waiting for us to do something, and our guys out there in 
Ottawa fighting. And they’re sitting out here, going to go there 
maybe a month from now, two months from now and come 
back and declare victory. Why? Because they want to make 
sure they get the credit and they’re prepared to wait two or three 
months for a simple game of politics. And I say, shame on you 
and shame on all of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Agriculture is out there 
fighting for Saskatchewan farmers alone, imagine who’s 
fighting for us on Saskatchewan equalization. It’s not them; it’s 
us. Who’s fighting for daycare plans? It’s not them; it’s us. We 
are fighting for Saskatchewan every day, every inch. It is not 
them. The only time that they’re part of the equation of fighting 
Ottawa is when it’s convenient for them or if it’s politically 
expedient for them. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say shame on 
them because you’re not here as federal apologists. You are 
here to represent Saskatchewan people and all Saskatchewan 
people and not do it to your political time frame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really 
important, I’ll point out, is that these guys across the way, they 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

haven’t spoke of the budget in question period. They haven’t 
spoken about that. We don’t want to talk about the good things 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I kind have done a survey. And they talk about population 
loss, and I think my colleague, the Minister of Industry and 
Resources, is on the right track when he says that when they 
say, oh you’re losing people . . . We done a survey and I found 
out, I found out in a survey that every time the Leader of the 
Opposition gets up to speak and calls down Saskatchewan, 
another 50 people leave. I was sitting here on budget day and I 
listened to the Finance critic and the Leader of the Opposition 
speak; well I wanted to leave too. I said, jeez, you guys are so 
bloody depressing. Like where is . . . is there a sun in your 
world? You know, is there birds and trees and happiness and 
growth and opportunity in your world? Because every time 
there’s something happy on this side and something fun 
happening, those guys across the way say, oh yes, whine, 
whine, whine. 
 
[22:00] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out . . . I haven’t even gotten 
to our vision yet. I haven’t even gotten to our vision yet. And 
there’ll be others that’ll speak about the vision, the vision that 
this Saskatchewan government has. When they get up and they 
say, that NDP government, they say it with pride across the 
way. We sat on this side and say, that old Tory opposition 
across the way hasn’t had a good idea in 14 years. They created 
the problem to begin with, and every complaint that they have 
is only meant for their political purposes. And I say shame on 
you. And I expect every one of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
stand up in full support of this budget — which I know they 
won’t. I know they won’t. I know they won’t. 
 
And right now there’s people fighting in Ottawa for all of our 
needs. And where are they? They’re sitting in their chairs here. 
They should be right out there helping out, right up there, right 
next to our Premier, putting all politics aside and saying, this is 
important for Saskatchewan. Let’s put our political differences 
aside. But they won’t. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll say this. I’ll say this, is the 
people of Saskatchewan will not be fooled. We will not be 
undeterred by some of their wrangling of who they are. And I 
say this as well: bring on the next election because we’re ready 
to rock you. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Prebble): — I recognize the hon. 
member for Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Chisholm: — I am pleased to be able to participate in the 
debate on this budget. I am pleased to offer my observations on 
this budget from my perspective and that of the constituents of 
Cut Knife-Turtleford. I don’t expect to be as entertaining as 
some of the speakers have been tonight, but I do wish to offer 
my sincere perspective on the numbers in this budget. 
 
We’ve been presented with a budget that anticipates a reduction 
in revenue for 2006-2007 from 8 billion to 7.7 billion, and yet 
an increase in spending. 

The projections for 2007-2008 indicate a further reduction in 
revenue and a further increase in spending. This indicates to me 
that this government is intent on increases on spending side in 
spite of their inability to generate or forecast increases on the 
revenue side. 
 
In order to show a balanced budget for 2006-2007, a transfer of 
$75 million from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is utilized for 
this year, which is concerning in itself. But looking forward to 
’07-08, a projected transfer of $520 million is forecast to 
supposedly balance that budget. 
 
I have on previous occasions questioned the validity of the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. As a member of the Public Accounts 
Committee, I’ve been made clearly aware of the Provincial 
Auditor’s view on the existence, or lack thereof, and utilization 
of this Fiscal Stabilization Fund for questionable purposes. 
Suffice it to say that the Provincial Auditor has questioned the 
reality of the fund itself and its inclusion in the budget process 
and the presentation of the financial position of the government. 
Its inclusion in the presentation of this budget has the effect of 
restating the surplus in the general revenue of 26.9 million to a 
reported 101.9 million. 
 
Further this document goes on to state that the entire 101 
million will be allocated to permanent debt reduction. So I 
would suggest the general public would interpret this budget as 
a budget that reduces our province’s debt. However on further 
inspection, we find that on a summary basis, the net debt of the 
province of Saskatchewan increases by $288.5 million. 
 
This government claims 13 consecutive balanced budgets. The 
Provincial Auditor does not concur with this claim. Who, Mr. 
Speaker, would you suggest we believe? 
 
To me, Mr. Speaker, at this juncture in our history, we are 
increasing the per capita debt at an unacceptable rate. We are all 
too familiar with the statistics that indicate a decreasing 
population, a decreasing number of net tax contributing 
residents, a dismal record in job creation statistics. In light of 
these trends, increasing spending in a climate of decreasing 
revenues, demographic indications for the future, and dismal 
job creation, one must question the sustainability of this plan. 
 
I, along with my colleagues, commend the government on the 
implementation of the Vicq commission relating to corporate 
tax changes. I would add that it was long overdue, and the 
government’s reluctance to implement changes to put our 
province in a competitive economic climate will continue to 
limit the potential that we do have. We will continue to lag 
behind other provinces until such time that our labour policies 
and government intervention in the economy are addressed. 
Unfortunately these concerns are not addressed, and we will 
continue to be limited in attracting business that will bring 
investment into our province, that will create the jobs we need 
to increase our population, and in particular to be able to offer 
jobs to our young people that are about to enter the labour force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recent Statistics Canada figures show that over the 
past 12 months Saskatchewan has lost 5,200 jobs. In this same 
period of time, we’ve seen 84,000 new jobs created in British 
Columbia, 68,000 jobs created in Alberta, and 4,600 jobs 
created in Manitoba. It appears to be an admission of this 



April 10, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

government’s failure that it has reduced its job creation forecast 
from 4,800 projected last year to 3,200 for the coming year — a 
reduction in their expectations of fully one-third. This dismal 
job creation projection comes even though we are increasing or 
already have increased those working in government by some 
430 full-time equivalents. 
 
This dismal job creation projection comes in a year when the 
government anticipates an increase in immigration of some 800 
to 1,200 persons. Mr. Speaker, although the immigration 
initiative is commendable, I would question that a staff of 60 
people would be required to attempt to attract an additional 800 
immigrants. This is the target for 2006. That would be about 13 
additional placements for each government employee. Could 
this immigration initiative not have provided an opportunity for 
the public sector involvement? 
 
It is interesting to note who is hiring in this province. In the first 
two months of 2006, the public sector grew by 1.4 per cent. The 
private sector fell by 1.2 per cent. In 2005 the public sector 
portion grew by 1.7 per cent. The private sector fell by point 
one per cent. In 2004 the public sector increased by 3.2 per cent 
while the private sector increased by point nine per cent. In 
2003 the public sector increased by 2.7 per cent and the private 
sector by 1.8 per cent. In short, Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
solution to the job creation dilemma has been to increase the 
size of the government in spite of a declining population during 
the same time period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite accuse us of doom and 
gloom and suggest we have no solutions to the situation. Let me 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, some directions that would improve our 
situation — firstly, creating a competitive labour legislation 
environment; secondly, limiting government’s intervention in 
the economy; thirdly, a long-term strategic plan for improving 
infrastructure; fourthly, an innovation agenda which would 
include a plan for long-term predictable funding to advanced 
educational institutions; fifthly, more progressive research and 
development tax incentives to enhance commercialization of 
new technologies and research; and lastly, a new level of 
economic co-operation with our western neighbours to reduce 
interprovincial trade barriers. These are the initiatives, Mr. 
Speaker, that are now needed at this time and in this place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent a constituency that is largely 
agricultural. Over this past weekend, I had the opportunity to 
meet with a number of constituents, and the question that kept 
coming up was, was there anything in this budget for 
agriculture and for our rural communities? Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, I was not able to pass on much positive news. 
 
Yes, the addition to the integrated health facility in Maidstone is 
progressing. We had the announcement just prior to the 2003 
provincial election. We’ve had an official sod turning. And I 
guess that’s about it to date. I anticipate some significant 
problems regarding this project, in that the initial budgeted 
amounts will fall short of the actual cost. This is a significant 
problem, an increasing problem in our regional health 
authorities. As our new facilities that are being built 
accommodate much larger areas, the requirements for funding 
by the immediate local governments and local residents has 
become more and more onerous. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, what was the story on this budget as it relates 
to agriculture? The reduction in the education portion of 
property tax as it relates to agricultural land is met with a 
justified degree of concern by my constituents. The question is: 
will the results of this government’s amalgamation of school 
divisions result in any real savings? And if not, there is 
increasing scepticism that these taxes will continue to spiral 
upwards. The anticipated changes to the taxation base and the 
mill rates yet to be set have many producers concerned that they 
may very well be paying more and not less property tax, if not 
in this first year then in the ensuing years. 
 
What did this budget contain regarding the safety nets that have 
been in place in the past few years for our producers? 
 
Firstly, crop insurance has provided not only a limited level of 
protection but also a guarantee which could be provided to 
financial institutions to enable credit to be provided. This 
government has budgeted a decrease of $12 million regarding 
this program. Coverages have been reduced for 2006-07, and 
the producers’ share of premiums have increased. For some 
who are unable to pay their 2005 premiums prior to March 31, 
their participation in this program has been terminated. They 
are now faced with not only the absence of minimal protection 
from the program but also an inability to access much needed 
credit for their operations. For some it will be the last straw. 
 
There was also no good news for the participants of the CAIS 
program. In the years 2004-2005, $154 million was required 
from this reluctant government to honour the province’s 
commitments to this program. In this budget all that has been 
set aside for 2006 is a base commitment. 
 
Producers know and the financial institutions know that this 
level of support is likely to be inadequate. Once again the 
ability to obtain credit is seriously jeopardized because the full 
commitments to this program are not forthcoming and not 
timely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both of these programs are suffering from the 
underlying formula on which they are based. Because of 
declining commodity prices and reductions in production as a 
result of drought, frost, and excess moisture in the past three 
years in particular, the protection available under the crop 
insurance program has been declining. The CAIS program has 
seen the same factors reduce their margins to even greater 
extent in that rapidly increasing operating costs — seed, 
fertilizer, chemicals, and fuel — come into play to further 
reduce the margins and thereby the level of protection. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I was not able to provide much positive news to the 
agriculture producers of my community. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget and the Speech from the Throne refer 
to no one will be left behind on the path to opportunity. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, there is a group of people in rural Saskatchewan in 
particular that are being left behind. But they are being left 
behind in that they are being shuttled from facility to facility, in 
and out of their province to receive adequate care in their senior 
years. 
 
One senior who spent her entire life in my constituency was not 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2006 

able to maintain her own home any longer, so she was placed in 
not one, not two, not three, not four, not five, but in six different 
facilities. She is presently now in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. For the 
record, she is my aunt. 
 
Another senior, 89 years of age, in failing health, still resides in 
her own home. Over the past two years, she has been admitted 
to hospital as a result of falls. Once admitted she’s been granted 
respite status and allowed to stay in the hospital for 30-day 
intervals. Then she is sent back to her home. She wants to 
remain in her home community, and the lodge is across the 
street from her home. She fell again this past week. However 
the health authority in its assessment continues to determine 
that she should remain in her own home. Her family, her 
friends, and her neighbours are concerned. She is concerned and 
prepared to seek the safety of the home where a number of her 
friends are cared for, a facility her family has supported and 
contributed to since it was built some 50 years ago. Should she 
have to fall again? For the record, Mr. Speaker, she is my mom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget lacks vision for the future of this 
province, for the young and the elderly alike, and I will not be 
supporting this budget, but will be supporting the amendment 
put forward by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Silver 
Springs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand this evening in the House and 
to speak in favour of the government’s plan to make 
Saskatchewan an even better place to live, work, and raise a 
family. Mr. Speaker, I’ve got many comments that I’d like to 
make on my constituency and on this excellent budget that was 
brought down by the Minister of Finance at the end of last 
week. But, Mr. Speaker, seeing the hour is getting late, I will 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow that the debate on this motion be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt that motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. This House stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:19.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1079 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1081 
  Harper .....................................................................................................................................................................................1084 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1086 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1089 
  McMorris.................................................................................................................................................................................1092 
  Yates.........................................................................................................................................................................................1095 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1098 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1101 
  Chisholm..................................................................................................................................................................................1104 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1106 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


