
















































Hansard: April 13, 2006


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-FIFTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable P. Myron Kowalsky 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. XLVIII NO. 41A  THURSDAY, APRIL 13, 2006, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. P. Myron Kowalsky 
Premier — Hon. Lorne Calvert 
Leader of the Opposition — Brad Wall 
 
Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Addley, Hon. Graham NDP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Hon. Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Beatty, Hon. Joan NDP Cumberland 
Belanger, Hon. Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Borgerson, Lon NDP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Calvert, Hon. Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Cline, Hon. Eric NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Crofford, Joanne NDP Regina Rosemont 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Dearborn, Jason SP Kindersley 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, Hon. David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Hagel, Hon. Glenn NDP Moose Jaw North 
Hamilton, Doreen NDP Regina Wascana Plains 
Harpauer, Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Ben SP Martensville 
Hermanson, Elwin SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Higgins, Hon. Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kerpan, Allan SP Carrot River Valley 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Kowalsky, Hon. P. Myron NDP Prince Albert Carlton 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lautermilch, Hon. Eldon NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Ted SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Morgan, Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, Hon. John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Prebble, Peter NDP Saskatoon Greystone 
Quennell, Hon. Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Serby, Hon. Clay  NDP Yorkton 
Sonntag, Hon. Maynard NDP Meadow Lake 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Hon. Len NDP The Battlefords 
Thomson, Hon. Andrew NDP Regina South 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Hon. Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wakefield, Milton SP Lloydminster 
Wall, Brad SP Swift Current 
Wartman, Hon. Mark NDP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Yates, Hon. Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Weyburn-Big Muddy 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1177 
 April 13, 2006 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I present again 
a petition on behalf of constituents from the communities of 
Prelate and Sceptre with regard to the condition of Highway 32. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
32 in order to address safety and economic concerns. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of people who are really concerned about Highway 310: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause this government to 
repair Highway No. 310 in order to address safety 
concerns and to facilitate economic growth and tourism in 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Kuroki, and surrounding areas. 
 

The people that have signed the petition are from Wadena, 
Yorkton, and Foam Lake. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It won’t come as 
any surprise today that again I’m presenting a petition from 
citizens concerned about the safety of Highway No. 5. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to upgrade and widen Highway 5 
from Humboldt to Saskatoon. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are quite spread out. They’re 
from Meacham, Nut Mountain, Saskatoon, Quill Lake, Wadena, 
Preeceville, Englefeld, Humboldt, St. Brieux, Wadena, 
Colonsay. And interesting, Mr. Speaker, there’s a signature 
from Edmonton, Alberta and Acme, Alberta. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise today to 

present a petition from constituents who are opposed to possible 
reductions of health care services in Biggar: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Biggar Hospital, 
long-term care home, ambulance services maintain at the 
very least their current level of services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the council of the village of Perdue. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition with concerned 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to fully fund the cancer drug Avastin. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from St. Louis 
and from Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here for calling 
on the Government of Saskatchewan, pertaining to the 
Department of Highways section shop: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Department of 
Highways section shop in Watrous remain open so as to 
ensure the safety of all motorists and Saskatchewan 
Highways employees who would be affected by such 
possible closure. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by the good citizens from 
Watrous, Martensville, and Young, and Manitou Beach. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
rise in the Assembly today and present a petition regarding 
autism spectrum disorders. And it’s a very lengthy prayer, Mr. 
Speaker, which I will shorten. It states: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon some of the 
following recommendations including, but not limited to, 
encourage and support autism-related research in 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition comes from the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 
petition regarding autism spectrum disorder . . . I will read a 
portion of: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to act upon the 
recommendations made February 2005 by the Government 
of Saskatchewan caucus committee on human services 
dealing with autism. 

 
I will read two of those: 
 

Provide adequate and effective early treatment based on 
intensive behavioural intervention and include speech 
communication and occupational and physical therapy and 
medical attention for ASD-related conditions and to 
encourage and support autism-related research in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. This petition is signed by citizens 
from Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 14(7) are hereby read 
and received as additions to petitions previously tabled being 
addendums to sessional paper nos. 6, 7, 8, 13, 64, and no. 639. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 46 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: in the fiscal year 
2005-2006, did your department provide any money to 
Northwest Community Wood Products? And, if so, how 
much? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also have similar questions for the Minister 
of Industry and Resources, the Minister of Northern Affairs, the 
Minister Responsible for Investment Saskatchewan, and to the 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: is management of the 
department aware of any allegations of fraud or other 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2000-2001, such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of that 
activity? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have the same question for the year 2001-2002 
and 2002-2003. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what did management of the 
department find as a result of its monitoring of any 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risk or 
detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 

 
I have similar question, Mr. Speaker, for the year 2001-2002 
and 2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: does management of the 
department have any knowledge of any actual or suspected 
fraud or illegal activity within the department during the 
year 2000-2001? If so, what is the nature of this activity? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a similar question for the year 
2001-2002 and 2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: did management of the 
department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2000-2001? 
 

I have a similar question, Mr. Speaker, for the year 2001-2002 
and 2002-2003. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my final question. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how did management of the 
department monitor any established programs and controls 
to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2000-2001? 
 

And a similar question for the years 2001-2002 and 2002-2003. 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Humboldt. 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for STC: did management of 
the department have established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect fraud in 
the year 2001? 
 

In addition I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
Minister Responsible for STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company]: 
 

How did management of the department monitor any 
established programs or controls to mitigate fraud risks or 
to help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2001? 
 
To the Minister Responsible for STC: does management of 
the department have any knowledge of any actual or 
suspected fraud or illegal activity within the department 
during the year 2001? If so, what is the nature of this 
activity? 
 

And also, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for STC: what did 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitor of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2001? 

 
And finally: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for STC: is management of 
the department aware of any allegations or fraud or any 
illegal activity within the department or its agencies in the 
year 2001, such as information received from employees, 
former employees, customers, clients, suppliers or others? 
If so, what is the nature of the activity? 
 

And I have that same series of questions, Mr. Speaker, for the 
year 2002. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Sask Crop Insurance 
Corporation: did management of the department have 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
or to help prevent or detect fraud in the year of 
2001-2002? 

 
I have the same question for 2002-2003, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how did management of 
the department monitor any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or detect 
fraud in the year 2001-2002? 

The same for 2002-2003. And I have a number of other written 
questions, Mr. Speaker, to do with the Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 46 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: is management 
or the department aware of any allegations of fraud or 
other illegal activity within the department or its agencies 
in the year 2002-2003, such as information received from 
employees, former employees, customers, clients, 
suppliers, or others? If so, what is the nature of that 
activity? 

 
I also have the same question for the years 2001-2002 and 
2000-2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what did 
management of the department find as a result of its 
monitoring of any established programs and controls to 
mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 
 

The same question for the year 2001-2002 and 2002-2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: does 
management of the department have any knowledge of any 
actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity within the 
department during the year 2002-2003? If so, what is the 
nature of this activity? 
 

I have similar questions for years 2001-2002 and 2000-2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: did 
management of the department have established programs 
and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help prevent or 
detect fraud in the year 2002-2003? 
 

I have similar questions for the years 2001-2002 and 
2000-2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: how did 
management of the department monitor any established 
programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks or to help 
prevent or detect fraud in the year 2002-2003, 2001-2002, 
and 2000-2001? 

 
Thank you. 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Sask Watershed 
Authority: is management of the department aware of any 
allegations of fraud or other illegal activities within the 
department or its agencies in the year 2000-2001, such as 
information received from employees, former employees, 
customers, clients, suppliers, or other? And if so, what is 
the nature of this activity? 
 

I have similar questions for 2001-2002 and ’02 and ’03. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Sask Watershed 
Authority: does the management of the authority have any 
knowledge of actual or suspected fraud or illegal activity 
within the authority during the year 2000-2001? If so, 
what is the nature of this activity? 
 

Similar questions for ’01-02 and ’02-03, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also have a series of other questions. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 46 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Sask Watershed 
Authority: does the management of the authority have 
established programs and controls to mitigate fraud risks 
and help prevent or detect fraud in the year 2000-2001? 
 

I have similar questions for the subsequent two other years, 
2001-2002 and ’02 and ’03. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall ask on day no. 46 
the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Sask Watershed 
Authority: what did management of the authority find as a 
result of its monitoring of any established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risks or detect fraud in the year 
2000-2001? 
 

I have similar questions for the years 2001-2002 and 
2002-2003. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for the Sask Watershed 
Authority: what did management of the department find as 
a result of monitoring any of the established programs and 
controls to mitigate fraud risk or detect fraud in the year 
2001-2002? 
 

And I have similar questions for the two subsequent fiscal 

years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have a notice of written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 46 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: has the Saskatchewan Legal 
Aid Commission negotiated a start date for Jack Hillson to 
return to work? 
 

Thank you. I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you two 
individuals seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are of course 
the Rev. Femi and his wife Remi Ogunrinde. They are the 
parents of Sope who is here doing a great job as a Page of 
course. I’d just like to say a little bit about the family. 
 
They have been very active at the Lighthouse to All Nations 
ministry which is located in Regina Elphinstone-Centre I’m 
happy to say. And I also wanted to say, Mr. Speaker, that Pastor 
Remi gave a very stirring sermon at the occasion of Gerri 
Carroll’s passing and presided over that funeral with a lot of 
vigour and a lot of grace and gave a very inspiring message. So 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming the Ogunrindes to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand today and join with my friend, the member from 
Elphinstone, in welcoming Pastor Femi and Remi to this House. 
Pastor Femi’s become a friend of mine, and we stay in touch 
regularly. I want to commend him not only on the spiritual 
work that he does in this province because he speaks at a 
number of churches around the entire province of 
Saskatchewan, but also has taken leadership roles in a very 
civic manner within the churches, encouraging his flock to be 
involved with their governments, that we need to make changes 
here not just up above. 
 
He’s a wonderful man, and I’m glad to see his wife here today 
too, and would ask all members to welcome them to their 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

Walsh Acres. 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my sincere 
pleasure to rise in the House today and ask the Assembly to 
welcome two guests in the west wing. We have with us today 
Phoebe DeCiman and — west gallery — and Rumali 
Werapitiya. This is a fine example of young people in our 
province who are educated here, who are among the brightest 
students and finest citizens that we have in the province who 
have chosen to stay in the province and are currently working in 
the minister’s office of Culture, Youth and Recreation. And I’d 
like to welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly today, I would like 
to welcome a couple constituents of mine from Hafford — 
Orest and Nadia Proban, and if they would stand and give a 
little wave. 
 
They’re on their way back from Arizona to check on their farm 
in Hafford, but more importantly they’re here to check on their 
son Neil who works in our caucus office. And I would ask all 
members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Easter Wishes 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
weekend Christians around the world will take the time to 
reflect on the message of the Easter season. Millions of people 
will gather with family and friends at Good Friday services 
where they will pause to reflect on the gruesome details of the 
Cross and the message of love extended to mankind by a 
loving, heavenly father through his son, Jesus Christ. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year ago the film director Mel Gibson, through 
his film The Passion, caused people of all faiths to ask 
themselves, who was this man we call the Christ and why 
would a loving God allow such excruciating abuse, pain, and 
humiliation to be inflicted on such a loving, caring, and giving 
person like Jesus Christ? 
 
While we are moved to reflect on the details of the crucifixion, 
there is no doubt that the greatest message of the Easter 
weekend is, “He is not here. He has risen.” Those words are 
truly a message of love and hope which should cause us to ask 
ourselves, how well do we reflect this message to those around 
us? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of your Majesty’s Loyal Opposition the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus and staff, we extend to each and 
every resident of our province our prayer for a safe and blessed 

Easter weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Cumberland. 
 

Accomplished Cumberland House Resident Retires 
 
Hon. Ms. Beatty: — Mr. Speaker, every once in a while 
someone comes along who is so engaged in the life of the 
community, who so intensely and so successfully pursues their 
interests and activities that they stand out from the rest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a constituent of mine from Cumberland House, 
Franklin Carriere, is one of those remarkable individuals. His 
exploits are legendary in the North. In 1966, Mr. Carriere won 
the Ten Dog Sled Championship at the Prince Albert Winter 
Festival. A year later, he and nine other paddlers re-enacted the 
famous Voyageurs Rendezvous, a journey of 300 kilometres 
from Rocky Mountain House to Hudson Bay. 
 
Mr. Carriere began competing in events in 1971 and was 
Saskatchewan Open Champion for ten years. He was declared 
King Trapper World Champion in Le Pas, Manitoba in 1989 
and has been known as the King Trapper ever since. And just 
for good measure, Mr. Speaker, Franklin Carriere still holds the 
Saskatchewan record for portaging — a record he set in 1978 
by carrying 1,250 pounds of flour on his back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carriere recently retired after 30 years of 
competition and from the Department of Northern Affairs. I 
want to acknowledge Franklin Carriere’s many 
accomplishments and thank him for his ongoing work with 
young people and for his contributions to life in the North. I 
wish him a long and happy retirement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. 
 

Kyle Elks Win League Final and  
Provincial Championship 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The headline in 
the Kyle Times read: “Double the glory.” The story is a feature 
of the Kyle Elk Senior Men’s hockey team. The Elks were 
chasing two titles and were successful in reaching both of them. 
The Kyle Senior Men’s team came up against the Outlook Ice 
Hawks in the league final and won the league in three straight 
games. 
 
The other title the Elks won was the highly sought SHA 
[Saskatchewan Hockey Association] C-provincial 
championship. To get there the men won every game they 
played starting with Kerrobert, then Eston, then Leask, and 
finally a 6-3, an 8-4 pair of wins over Milestone to claim the 
2005-2006 provincial banner. 
 
Congratulations to all the players and all the fans who provided 
great support throughout the season. A special mention to 
coaches Dan Leshures and Doug Pittman and their manager, 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Doug Hodgins. Speaking of Hodgins, he and Craig Van Buskirk 
dug up the good luck loonie hidden in at centre ice, and that 
money I’m sure will either ensure the financial stability of the 
team or else they’ll go out and buy coffee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “Double the glory” — yes but I know that all 
members will join me in congratulating the Kyle Senior Elks 
provincial champions on a fine season. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

University of Regina’s 31st Annual Athletic Awards 
 
Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
recently had the pleasure of attending the University of 
Regina’s 31st annual athletic awards, an evening dedicated to 
celebrating the commitment of almost 300 athletes from 16 
varsity teams and honouring the achievements of outstanding U 
of R [University of Regina] athletes both past and present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lara Schmidt received the President’s Award, the 
award presented to a student athlete who best represents a 
combination of superior academic and athletic performance. 
Wrestler Ali Bernard won her second consecutive award as 
Outstanding Female Athlete. And second year track and field 
athlete, Wade Huber is this year’s Outstanding Male Athlete. 
Female Rookie of the Year is volleyball player, Beth Clark. 
And track and field athlete, Ian Jestadt is Male Rookie of the 
Year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year the U of R also gives out two awards for 
Cougar excellence otherwise called ACE [Awards for Cougar 
Excellence] awards, recognizing the achievements of former 
athletes. This year the ACE recipients were Dr. Sue Hilton, who 
coached the women’s basketball team from 1971 to 1980, and 
the 2001 CIAU [Canadian Interuniversity Athletic Union] 
women’s basketball team, winners of the University of Regina’s 
first ever national women’s basketball title. I’m pleased to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that two of our staff members who are currently 
sitting in the gallery, Rumali Werapitiya and Phoebe DeCiman, 
were part of that spectacular team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all the University of 
Regina athletes on their efforts and on their achievements. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 

Melfort’s CJVR Radio Station Wins Awards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to tell 
you about Melfort’s CJVR country radio station’s achievements 
once again this year. CJVR celebrated their 40th year on air by 
winning the Fans’ Choice Radio Station of the Year Award at 
the Saskatchewan Country Music Awards. Melfort’s radio 

station can boast that no other radio station has been able to win 
this prestigious award for 11 straight years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this remarkable achievement was earned against a 
strong field of competitor stations with a much bigger market. 
CJVR’s own David Baker also returned to the awards podium 
this year to receive the On Air Personality and Best Director 
awards. They’ve also hosted CJVR’s show Canadian Coast to 
Coast, repeat winner of the Country Radio Show of the Year. 
This is a program that features and promotes only 
Saskatchewan and Canadian country music artists. 
 
The manager of CJVR, Ken Singer, is very proud of his staff 
for the dedication and passion they show to Canadian country 
music. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the legislature, please join me 
once again in congratulating the CJVR team for their success in 
country music radio entertainment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 

Spring Holiday Season 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — This is a season of renewal, Mr. Speaker, 
especially for Saskatchewan where the winters are so often 
extreme. The fields and streets have emerged from their 
blankets of snow. We see green springing from the earth as it 
thaws. Flowers sprout and trees adorn themselves with leaves, 
and the lakes shed their icy layers after months of winter’s chill. 
 
And this is the Easter season, Mr. Speaker. Christians across the 
globe will share their own understandings of renewal and of 
rebirth. Also, Mr. Speaker, at sunset yesterday began the Jewish 
Passover. For Jews this is a season to celebrate their Exodus. 
It’s a time for the renewal of Jewish faith and for their nation. 
 
Whatever your faith stance in life, Mr. Speaker, this is a time 
every year that we see the land reborn, and we can reflect on the 
themes common to all of us. Suffering, wisdom, sorrow, joy, 
death, and rejuvenation are familiar to everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spring is an exciting time for our great province of 
Saskatchewan. The Easter weekend marks a time to celebrate 
rebirth. It’s a time for hope. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wish you, 
the Assembly, and all of the staff a holiday filled with peace, 
with joy, and with love. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Remarks Regarding Crystal Methamphetamine 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the House I 
apologized unequivocally for using language that was not 
befitting this legislature. Then I waited to hear if the Minister of 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

Finance would have the personal integrity to acknowledge the 
insults and accusations he made about our stand on crystal meth 
were not just true, but certainly not befitting the position of the 
second most powerful man in government. I was not just 
disappointed that he did nothing, but that the Premier did not 
deal with the issue in a morally expeditious manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a statement that I made in House. I quote, 
“So I’m on record, we’re all on record as knowing . . . we’ll do 
whatever we can to eliminate or . . . decrease any chance . . . 
there would be a manufacturing of crystal meth.” 

 
Somehow this is the way the Minister of Finance interpreted 
what I said, quote, “Yesterday the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena stood in this House and said it was more 
important to have cough syrup in grocery stores than to . . . shut 
down the meth labs . . .” 

 
The NDP want to talk about credibility. My question is, how 
credible can this minister be when he’s willing to misquote and 
make statements that are unbelievable and outrageously wrong? 
My grandmother always said you have to earn respect; no one 
has to give it to you. 
 
The minister and his whole government has a long way to go to 
earn the respect of the people of this province on any issue 
when they’re willing to use the procedures of this legislature to 
their benefit, yet ignore their responsibility to the people of this 
province to tell them the truth. Their actions speak louder than 
could any words when describing their own credibility and 
integrity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Batoche. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Forestry Task Force 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 4, 2005, 
the Premier announced the formation of a task force. The 
purpose of the task force was to assist in finding a buyer for the 
Weyerhaeuser mill. Mr. Speaker, what has the task force 
accomplished to date? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say that the task force has been working, 
along with officials within government, very diligently. There 
have been long, long hours put in, and there’s been much 
thought given to the future of the forest in our province. And I 
want to say this morning that I commend the men and women 
on that task force who have given of their time, given of their 

expertise to support their community but more importantly to 
support their province. 
 
The task force is not the entity that is involved in bringing 
players to the table. That’s not its role. That’s not its function. 
That’s the function of the officials who are now housed in the 
Saskatchewan Forestry Secretariat. And I want to say that they 
have been doing a very excellent job on behalf of the province. 
I’ll also say that the people who have come to view 
Weyerhaeuser’s assets, who have come to take out documents 
are there as a result of the work that the government of this 
province has done. That’s what we’ve been doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seven hundred people 
out of work at the mill, 200 people laid off at Big River saw 
mill, hundreds of other local suppliers will suffer. So will 
hundreds of people who run skidders and feller-bunchers that 
get the trees to the mill. These are highly skilled workers who 
are leaving. Many will never return. 
 
All of this could have been avoided if the government had 
heeded the warnings issues by Weyerhaeuser. This NDP 
government could have acted quickly on cogeneration. It could 
have looked at stumpage fees and adjusted other regulations to 
help all forestry operators become more profitable. Mr. 
Speaker, has this government learned its lesson from the 
Weyerhaeuser closure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to that 
member of the Saskatchewan Party, let me say to his leader, and 
let me say to the former leader, if there is a lesson to be learned, 
it should be learned by the Saskatchewan Party who, on the last 
forest initiative in Prince Albert, chose to involve themselves. 
And there is a member sitting in that corner of this legislature as 
a direct result of the inappropriate involvement by that person 
and that person. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the best people in 
Canada engaged to make recommendations for us, to work for 
us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, we have the best 
professional advice that we can find in this country working for 
us. And I want to say if we’re looking for further advice, it 
won’t be from old worn out Tories. We’ll phone Grant Devine 
directly, not Grant Devine lite over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now the minister in 
charge of forestry task force is talking about direct investment 
of taxpayers’ money into the Weyerhaeuser mill. I think when 
the minister responsible for SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company] starts talking about direct 
investment, everybody should get a little nervous. We all 
remember what happened with SPUDCO. It was a complete 
disaster. Millions of dollars were lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that this minister has failed again, what is the 
plan? Will they now find someone new for their task force, 
someone who can talk with the local people about how to make 
the forestry sector viable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that is 
exactly the level of understanding that members on the 
opposition show in this interest. Mr. Speaker, here we have a 
pulp and a paper industry in North America under some severe 
constraints with respect to saturation of market. It’s not just a 
Prince Albert initiative. It’s not just a Saskatchewan initiative. 
Mr. Speaker, this industry is under pressure North 
American-wide. If he took the time to understand what was 
going on, he would also understand that you don’t put a deal of 
this size, of this magnitude, together overnight. He should also 
understand that this is Weyerhaeuser’s process, not the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have acted responsibly as a government, 
bringing potential purchasers to Weyerhaeuser’s table. Mr. 
Speaker, we have marketed this forest, which is one of the best 
forests left in North America. It’s an incredible asset, as are the 
people of our province. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
need any advice from the likes of those folks over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Melfort. 
 

Changes to Education Grants 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the 
minister’s attention the grant cuts of another school division. 
The South East Cornerstone School Division just received its 
budget as a newly created school division. And there’s a 
problem here too, Mr. Speaker; it’s short $5.3 million. That’s a 
cut of 56 per cent. I would like to repeat that, Mr. Speaker — 56 
per cent. Over half of their grant money is gone, and someone’s 
going to have to pay for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why property tax owners 
in Weyburn and area could face property tax hikes to pay for 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] cuts to education grants? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, education financing is really a shared responsibility 
between the province of Saskatchewan and the property tax 
base. We recognize that there is concerns with the education 
property taxes and, Mr. Speaker, we took some very significant 
steps over the last couple of years — $110 million that was paid 
across for an 8 per cent reduction for property tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we made some significant 
steps over the last two years: 110 million that was put towards 
property taxes, greater education portion of property tax in the 
last two years, and then also 53 million that was targeted at 
agricultural farm land. Mr. Speaker, that brings to the total of 
67 million that was put towards agricultural property land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a hidden agenda on 
that side of the House. It’s a hidden tax agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quote from the South East Cornerstone’s School 
Division media release dated April 7, and it says: “This 
substantial financial impact will be felt fully and immediately 
by education property tax payers of the southeast.” 

 
I know that this is something the people of Saskatchewan 
should know. Maybe it’s even worthy enough to make a 
commercial, but I doubt if ever the minister will tell the people 
on TV that they’re going to have a hidden property tax agenda 
in the Southeast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister hiding possible tax hikes from 
the people of Saskatchewan? Are the people of Weyburn 
expected to pay more because the NDP have cut their 
educational grant by over $5.3 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, there is always changes in 
the foundation operating grant, in changes in enrolment in the 
school division, changes in assessment. And this year we’ve 
seen a further shift with the zero-grant boards and the 
amalgamation into the larger school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now this is how the opposition has absolutely no 
credibility in this area. The numbers are posted on the 
Department of Learning website. The school divisions have 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

been spoken to many times. They have been involved in the 
review and restructuring of the foundation operating grant. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite has absolutely no credibility, and 
this line of questioning is ludicrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Prairie South School 
Division received its first provincial budget as a newly 
amalgamated school division. It’s about $16 million, but there’s 
a problem. It’s short $2.6 million in comparison to the grants 
the former seven divisions received — a 14 per cent cut, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This money has to come from somewhere or it means a loss of 
services. Does this cut mean people will be seeing a property 
tax hike to make up the shortfall? Mr. Speaker, can the minister 
explain why Prairie South’s grant was cut so drastically? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, yes we can explain why 
there has been a shift in the foundation operating grant. We will 
see this in a number of divisions. With the larger school 
divisions, the zero-grant boards, being eliminated, have a huge 
impact on the operating grant that goes out to the various school 
divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been very clear. We have been very 
upfront with the school divisions. Mr. Speaker, this is part of 
the initiative to restore equity within the school divisions. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the school divisions were well aware of the 
movement that was happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister took a lot of 
pride telling the people of Saskatchewan how much money this 
government’s spent in the recent budget. We even see him on 
TV telling us how good the budget was. But he’s not telling us 
the whole story, Mr. Speaker. He won’t tell the people, he 
won’t tell the people about school board grants being cut. I 
wonder why that is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Members will come to 
order. Member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I wonder why that is, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure 
the people of Saskatchewan would like to know whether they 
are facing property tax hikes because of this NDP budget. Mr. 
Speaker, this money has to be made up somewhere. Will that 
minister explain why the Prairie South School Division has to 
deal with this massive cut, and who will have to pay to make up 
the difference? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of 
Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
clearly has no credibility when it comes to this issue. Mr. 
Speaker, you can see clearly, we were very clear that there was 
an increased . . . 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Once again I’d ask the members to come to 
order. The Minister of Learning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there clearly has not 
been a reduction in the foundation operating grant but there has 
been shifts in where that funding goes to. The elimination of the 
zero-grant boards, Mr. Speaker, we knew that was going to 
have an effect on the divisions. We were very clear in that, but 
it’s all part of the process of restoring equity to the divisions 
and providing consistent services to the students of 
Saskatchewan right across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is all about improved services and 
opportunities for young people and students in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 

Crime in Saskatoon Riversdale 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Ukrainian Orthodox 
Cathedral of the Holy Trinity is located in the Premier’s 
constituency. On March 30 Ernie Stefanuk, the parish president, 
wrote a letter to the Premier about crime in the area. He writes, 
and I quote: 
 

Our Cathedral and adjacent auditorium has and is 
experiencing acts of vandalism, theft and confrontation 
with prostitutes and gangs. Our parishioners and 
volunteers are harassed and in fear . . . [for] their personal 
safety. Worshippers have had articles stolen and their cars 
vandalized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going to do about this serious 
problem in his own constituency? 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast wants to ask this question twice 
because I have a question for him. But on the issue of inner-city 
neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker, we have added in this budget 
more safer communities and neighbourhoods investigators. 
They are, and they have been over the last two years, shutting 
down buildings in which gang activities are taking place, illegal 
drugs are being sold, there being prostitution. 
 
This is the initiative, this is the legislation that the member from 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Saskatoon Southeast called part of a set of strange and bizarre 
pieces of legislation and which he said was full of flaws and 
inadequacies, Mr. Speaker. He hardly has any credibility on the 
issue of safety and crime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, whatever it is that they’re 
doing, it’s not working so far. Ernie Stefanuk goes on in his 
letter, and I quote: 
 

This situation has existed for a long period of time and is 
getting worse, including personal threats and physical 
harm. In addition, there is a serious potential harm from 
discarded needles and condoms on cathedral property. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this church is right in the Premier’s own 
constituency. What is the Premier going to do to address street 
crime in his own constituency? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this budget also adds, of 
course, 14 police officers, some of whom are stationed in 
Saskatoon, specifically directed at gang suppression; two 
designated prosecutors, operational money for that. We’re 
taking steps, Mr. Speaker. We don’t think organized crime is a 
pesky housefly like the member from Saskatchewan Southeast. 
 
Now the member from Saskatoon Southeast made an accusation 
that there was a political vendetta against another individual in 
this province. Then an hour later he couldn’t remember making 
the accusation. Then he said he misspoke himself, Mr. Speaker, 
a word popularized by Richard Nixon, but which suits the 
member very well. Now where is the member’s apology, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a serious problem with 
crime . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will . . . Order. Order. Members 
will come to order. Member for Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a serious problem with 
crime in our province. We expect this government to do more 
than flail about. We expect positive results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this church, as well as the Pleasant Hill 
Community Association, are doing their part. The community 
association is holding a public meeting tonight at Pleasant Hill 
community school. The church has improved visibility and 
security by installing lighting and alarm systems. They’re hiring 
security officers. The community association deserves the 

presence of the Premier at this event. 
 
Is the Premier going to go tonight, and will he set up a meeting 
with these people to try and deal with the problem that’s in this 
Premier’s constituency? Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, there’ll be two members 
of this government, two members . . . Mr. Speaker, there’ll be 
two members of this government, two members of this cabinet 
at that meeting, and there will be the leader of the safer 
communities and neighbourhoods initiative at this meeting to 
explain what has been done, what we are doing around gangs 
and around SCAN [safer communities and neighbourhoods]. 
There have been eight shutdowns of buildings in Pleasant Hill 
alone since this program was initiated. 
 
Again I say to the member from Saskatoon Southeast, he made 
an accusation which he couldn’t remember which he admitted 
outside was not true, and where is his apology to this 
government and to the members of the Legal Aid Commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Advertising Campaigns 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know in an unprecedented 
fashion the NDP government is going to spend a half million 
dollars advertising its budget, 10 times, 10 times more than the 
former Finance minister spent to promote, provide information 
about his budget. We don’t know if it’s about damage control 
for the budget or if it’s about the minister’s leadership 
campaign that’s clearly under way over there. Or maybe it’s 
both, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But on top of that, we know that this fall, the Minister of 
Industry, not to be outdone, Mr. Speaker, in the leadership race 
over there, has already indicated the government will blow 
another $2.5 million on another version of the Future is Wide 
Open campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now isn’t that interesting? Isn’t that interesting? The last time 
they ran a campaign showing ads promoting Saskatchewan in 
Saskatchewan was just before the last election. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, we see them positioning themselves again to use 
taxpayers’ money for their campaign. 
 
At the very least, can the minister assure this Assembly that he 
won’t personally appear in those advertisements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t spoken to my 
agent about this yet, but I would say to the Leader of the 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

Opposition that we will have a campaign this year to promote 
the province, Mr. Speaker. The bulk of the spending will be 
outside Saskatchewan. It will not be within Saskatchewan. 
Although I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that if we get the story out 
right about Saskatchewan, many of those people outside 
Saskatchewan may come to Saskatchewan, invest in 
Saskatchewan, and live in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that 
is the goal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s what we will try to do because 
people have told us that we have a good story to tell about 
Saskatchewan that we need to get out to the world, and we’re 
going to take that positive message to the world as part of our 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it was so very obvious last time 
around with the Future is Wide Open campaign, with 8 million 
taxpayers’ dollars spent, it wasn’t about promoting the province 
of Saskatchewan. It was about promoting the interests of that 
party over there. That’s what it was about. 
 
Now we see it again with this budget . . . a half million dollars, 
the minister personally appearing in the advertisements because 
the budget, frankly, is going south on them when they thought it 
would be a positive thing, Mr. Speaker. And now they’re going 
to do it again. Now the other leadership candidate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members will come to order. Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know the Minister of Industry is 
upset and a little envious and jealous of the Minister of 
Finance’s financing his leadership campaign with taxpayers’ 
dollars. So the assurance we want from him is this: will he 
simply assure the House, will he assure this Assembly that he 
doesn’t need to appear personally in the advertisements, firstly. 
And secondly, will he ensure the House that these ads — all of 
the advertising, whatever they budget, Mr. Speaker — is going 
to be outside the province of Saskatchewan, because we know 
when they pay for advertising with taxpayers’ dollars in 
Saskatchewan, it’s about NDP politics not about promoting 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I already indicated to 
the Leader of the Opposition and the House that the bulk of the 
spending by far would be outside the province. I already 
indicated that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to make it clear that we will be working with the 
Rotary clubs of Saskatchewan on the Your Future Is Here 
campaign which is aimed at young people, encouraging them to 

consider pursuing job opportunities in Saskatchewan. So I will 
not say that no activities will go on in Saskatchewan, but the 
bulk of it will be outside Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition and the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that one theme that we have heard 
consistently from business people, over and over and over again 
has been the need to market the investment opportunities in 
Saskatchewan to the rest of the world. We are going to do that, 
and we make no apologies for doing that. 
 
And I’m sorry that this is going to disappoint the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, but no, I do not intend to appear in the 
ads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, we want to thank the Minister of Industry for 
showing significantly more good sense than his colleague then, 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here is . . . The NDP government spent $8 
million on the Future is Wide Open campaign that started in 
November 2002. That month when they started the campaign, 
there were 475,000 people working in Saskatchewan. Today, 
after the campaign, $8 million — 472,000 people working in 
Saskatchewan. In the fall of 2002 there were 996,000 people 
living in Saskatchewan. Today we’re down to 991,000 people 
living in Saskatchewan. 
 
The proof is this, Mr. Speaker. More than an advertising 
campaign, we need the product. And right now the NDP simply 
don’t know how to deliver that product — a complete growth 
agenda for the province of Saskatchewan. Will the minister 
commit to this, will he commit to implementing the 
Saskatchewan Party’s growth agenda so in fact there’s 
something to promote, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Minister of Industry 
and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it interesting that 
at a time when there’s record investment in mining exploration 
in Saskatchewan, the Leader of the Opposition says there’s no 
investment growth in Saskatchewan. Isn’t it interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, that when there are record exports in Saskatchewan, 
record manufacturing growth in Saskatchewan, and, Mr. 
Speaker, record increase in private investment in Saskatchewan, 
that the Leader of the Opposition would say that there’s no 
growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is growing. The Saskatchewan 
economy is growing. And there are more people working in 
Saskatchewan this year than there have been two years ago or 
the year before, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question about it. And 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

over time, we’re having more people employed, and we have 
more investment. The only thing not growing in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, is the popularity of that party over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. The Chair recognizes the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member for Swift Current. 
 

Bill No. 205 — The Recognition of First Nations 
and Métis Children Act 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 205, An 
Act to recognize First Nations and Métis Children in 
Saskatchewan be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Swift 
Current, Leader of the Opposition, that Bill No. 205, The 
Recognition of First Nations and Métis Children Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
The Chair recognizes the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[11:00] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, 
I’ll be tabling answers to written questions 856 to 886 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 856 to 886 inclusive 
have been submitted. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Cheveldayoff.] 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the member for 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to enter into the debate on the 
final day of the debate on the budget as presented by the NDP. 
 
Before I get into my brief remarks, because I understand that we 
are under a time constraint this morning, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to just indicate first of all to the residents of Canora-Pelly that 
June 21 of this year marks the 11th year that I have been elected 
as the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 
Canora-Pelly. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, a lot has happened in 
those 11 years, and I’m very grateful to the people of 
Canora-Pelly, especially the so many residents that have come 
forward — whether they supported me or not — to bring 
concerns to my office, to ensure that we develop a solution to 
the problems that we face, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to indicate that I have a tremendous 
staff back in my office. I want to express my appreciation to 
Bob Blahay who is my constituency assistant — who’s been 
with me I think probably nine and a half of those 11 years — 
and to two other individuals who assist whenever needed, and 
that being Renee Parsons and Carol Sleeva. Those people do a 
tremendous amount of work for me, providing me with 
information, and they’re pretty organized as well in the office. 
And as my colleague indicated, I do appreciate that fact very 
much, that we try to be able to inform and help people 
whenever we can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to spend my time on a few issues 
because it’s so difficult to talk about everything that I’d like to 
get on the record. Mr. Speaker, last week I had the privilege of 
being in the town of Canora to help the CIBC [Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce] celebrate its 100th anniversary. 
They opened their first branch in Canora on April 5, 1906, and 
of course that’s 100 years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate for the record that in 1966 the 
CIBC Canadian bank report indicated this about the area served 
by this bank. It says that it covers about 1,100 square miles and 
the population is about 11,000, which means that in Canora was 
about 2,600 people. 
 
And the thing that caught my interest, Mr. Speaker, in this it 
said that the area is a good mixed-farming area devoted chiefly 
to grain growing with livestock operations still being expanded. 
Agriculture products such as milk, butter, eggs and poultry are 
shipped into the mining centres of northern Manitoba. The town 
continues to increase in importance as a shopping centre with 
first-class medical facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s 1966, 40 years ago when the people of 
Canora and area, going all the way out to Preeceville and 
Sturgis and Kamsack, were the hub of providing products for 
northern Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t it be nice if this 
province was moving in a direction that would allow east 
central Saskatchewan to become the hub? The communities of 
Preeceville and Canora would become centres of providing 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

information and products to a growing east central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that it’s possible. We know that very well, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Athabasca oil sands and the oil shale project in 
Canada which includes the Pasquia Hills is a huge project. We 
see the potential development north of Canora and north of 
Preeceville for hundreds and hundreds of square miles of 
potential oil reserves. The other product, Mr. Speaker, is that 
this area is going to be able to probably produce a product 
called benzene, which is going to mean a huge development. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the investors, the people that will make this 
grow are not willing to come to a province that is led by a 
socialist government that in fact inhibits growth. And that’s 
what’s wrong with this province. Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s 
also wrong with this budget. 
 
When we take a look at agriculture . . . and I’m going to begin 
with that topic. You know, in the Canora-Pelly constituency the 
largest industry is of course agriculture. Many farmers have 
expressed their concern about products. And the grains and 
oilseeds market, the return for the product is at an all-time low. 
Mr. Speaker, farmers are thankful that at least the BSE [bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy] crisis has been addressed to a 
degree and in fact a product that they sell is at least returning 
some dollars. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, this provincial government had the 
ability to address a number of concerns. One of the concerns 
that is on the minds of every farmer is of course crop insurance. 
And, you know, to put this into perspective, Mr. Speaker, you 
have to be able to explain it so that people in a business 
community, people who insure their businesses can understand 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, crop insurance is like a business interruption 
insurance. If a business is going to buy business interruption for 
a particular tragedy it purchases that insurance to guarantee that 
its resources, its revenue can be maintained to get it through 
that particular tragedy. Well, Mr. Speaker, in crop insurance, 
the crop insurance that a farmer can purchase, no matter how 
good a farmer is, no matter what farming practices he has, the 
best insurance that that farmer can purchase is one that still 
leaves a 20 per cent deductible because they can only purchase 
80 per cent coverage. Now, Mr. Speaker, if you ask any 
business person to buy a business interruption insurance that 
would have a 20 per cent deductible, I’m sure that they would 
laugh at you because that is something that just will not ensure 
that a business can survive. 
 
So here we have this government, who is not pushing forward 
an agenda with the federal government of the past and the 
current federal government, that says we need to develop a 
better crop insurance program. What this government is doing 
is in fact cutting the actual coverages. And this year the crop 
insurance program has seen a reduction in the amount of money 
that this province is willing to put forward to ensure that 
farmers at least have an opportunity, if everything around them 
is failing, things that they cannot control, whether it be the 
weather or whether it be other related incidents that contribute 
to a loss of revenue . . . This government is not behind them. 
And that’s what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, in the Canora-Pelly 

constituency. 
 
I listened over the last number of days to the many members 
opposite talk about taxation and talk about the fact that this 
government was so proud of the fact that it was addressing the 
60/40 spending of monies from the two sources that support 
education, which is government and property tax. 
 
Now let’s take a real look at what has happened, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. The government has, through its budget, cut 
the amount of money that it in fact is going to be allocating. If 
you look at the total budget increase to education costs, the 
government has increased the foundation grant by $11 million 
for the entire province. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, you can speak to many different 
people involved in the education community. The costs that the 
education system will actually incur this year, the increases are 
probably going to be in that area of 40 to 70 million. Now, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if the government is only adding $11 
million to that pool of resources, how can the Premier stand up 
at a SARM convention — which is the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities — and say we’ve reached 
60/40? That 60/40 split will not be maintained. 
 
As we heard this morning in question period, there are many 
school divisions who are surprised by the fact that their 
transfers from the provincial government through the 
foundation grant formula in fact show reductions based on the 
amount of money that they were receiving before 
amalgamations took place. 
 
Now, Madam Deputy Speaker, I know that a number of 
members opposite don’t also understand that in these urban 
systems, in the public systems, there was a need to address an 
inequity — that in fact the amount of money transferred per 
student was not the same in rural Saskatchewan as it was in 
urban Saskatchewan. And in fact I understand that the Regina 
public board of education will be receiving as much as $10 
million more; the Saskatoon public board of education will be 
receiving a number of millions of dollars more to address that 
concern. 
 
So, Madam Deputy Speaker, if the pot of money has only 
grown by 11 million and you’ve added additional funding to 
larger urban boards because of addressing that inequity, where 
are you going to find the rest of the money? The rest of the 
money, Madam Deputy Speaker, is coming from rural 
Saskatchewan. That’s what this budget is all about. It’s from 
shifting that money from rural Saskatchewan into the NDP’s 
lack of vision, if I might add. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, another item that I wanted to speak 
about in the few minutes that I have left is health care. One of 
the most important issues in Canora-Pelly is of course the 
construction of the integrated health care facility in Preeceville. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this project has been announced by the 
NDP government now for seven consecutive years. And I raised 
this, Madam Deputy Speaker, in question period a week ago 
when I read from a news release of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the Executive Council, dated August 16, 1999, 
and it said that, you know, the project at Preeceville was one 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

step closer to being completed. 
 
And then, Madam Deputy Speaker, there was another press 
release, September 19, 2003, that says, “The government is 
moving ahead with plans for a new integrated health care centre 
in Preeceville . . .” 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting because the 
local papers in the fall of 2003 covered the visit of the then 
minister of Health. And there were a number of photo ops that 
took place. Pictures were taken involving the minister. And it 
was in the Preeceville Progress of September 25, 2003, where 
the minister of Health along with other dignitaries in Preeceville 
— including the NDP candidate in Canora-Pelly at that time — 
posing for a photo, Madam Deputy Speaker. I found that 
interesting in the month of September 2003 that that would take 
place, and then the election would be called in October for an 
election date on November 5. 
 
Isn’t that interesting, Madam Deputy Speaker, that for seven 
years this government has said, you know, the Preeceville 
project is important. Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, to the 
people of Preeceville and Sturgis and Endeavour and all 
surrounding area, you bet it’s important. It’s the most important 
project to them probably for the next 30 years. 
 
But the problem, Madam Deputy Speaker, is this. When that 
project was announced in 1999, the estimated cost of that 
project was $4.5 million dollars. And of course under this 
current government’s plan the local community must fund 35 
per cent. So the local cost was $1.6 million. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, there have been a tremendous amount 
of fundraising projects. People in fact have indicated that, you 
know, for the last seven years they’re almost exhausted by the 
number of projects that have been undertaken. Individuals have 
donated $10,000 to this project to make sure that the 1.6 million 
that was needed was there. 
 
Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, because of this government’s 
procrastination and delay, now there has been a revision of the 
project based on new costs. The new costs now, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, are $10 million. So now the local community has to 
fund $3.5 million. That’s an additional 1.9. 
 
So the people of Saskatchewan . . . And I give the mayor of 
Preeceville, you know, all the credit in the world. Mayor Grant 
See is saying, you know, this is so important; we cannot let the 
fact that this government is unwilling to change the formula 
stop this project. So they’re trying to, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
put together another $1.9 million after working for the last 
seven years to get the first $1.6 million together. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget did not address the fact 
that this government needed to address the percentage of 
funding that is necessary to make sure that health care facilities, 
whether they be in Moosomin or in Outlook or in Maidstone or 
in Swift Current . . . that there is a need for this government to 
step forward and say, we approved you for a specific amount of 
money and now this government is going to pick up that 
additional cost to ensure that the health care facilities can be 
provided. 
 

Madam Deputy Speaker, there are so many things in this budget 
that are lacking. And that is why I will be supporting the motion 
put forward by my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Silver Springs, and I will be not supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton, 
the Deputy Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am 
very pleased today to join in the debate on the budget. I want to 
also say, Madam Deputy Speaker, how pleased I am to have the 
opportunity to represent the constituency of Yorkton, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, that in fact has provided me with an 
opportunity to assist in helping build a strong Saskatchewan 
environment, a strong Yorkton environment. And I want to 
thank the constituents of Yorkton for the opportunity to serve 
them. 
 
I also want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this is the 15th 
occasion that I’ve had an opportunity to be part of the budget 
process. And I want to say that this is one of the proudest 
moments that I have, in standing in this legislature and speaking 
to, in my view, one of the best, strongest budgets that we’ve had 
in Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy Speaker, in decades — not 
only, not only in this term of this administration, but in decades, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
The fact is I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, when we 
arrive in this legislature, all of us who sit here, we always 
attempt to leave this place a little better than how we found it. 
And I would like to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget, 
in my view, provides for me an occasion to be able to say that 
today Saskatchewan people, the people of my constituency of 
Yorkton are far better served because of this administration and 
the work that this Premier, this government, and members on 
this side of the House have been able to do in order to bring 
about a difference in the Saskatchewan climate. And I’m proud, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to be part of this administration that’s 
made such a difference for Saskatchewan people. 
 
I also want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, how proud I am of 
the fact that in Saskatchewan today, our economy is firing on 
all cylinders. We’ve achieved that through a period of time 
where we’ve had low commodity prices, droughts, and frost 
but, Madam Deputy Speaker, very careful planning and 
investment in this province. But most of all, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, for the tremendous support that Saskatchewan people 
have provided to this government in times where things were 
difficult, and today where things are in a far better place to be 
realizing the successes of the toils of their work and ours, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in making a difference and a strong 
appreciation for the people of Saskatchewan for helping us get 
to the point that we are today. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, in the next few minutes we are going 
to have an opportunity to listen to both the Leader of the 
Opposition and, Madam Deputy Speaker, to the Premier. And, 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

Madam Deputy Speaker, it will be clearly visible in the next 
few minutes — when we have an opportunity to listen to the 
two leaders, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Premier and the 
Leader of the Opposition — about what leadership, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, is all about and about how it is that you build a 
Saskatchewan economy, and how you, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
work away at tearing down an economy in Saskatchewan, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. And I think it’ll be important for us to 
pay attention to the differences and the contrasts. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, this Premier and this government and 
this budget has set an agenda, a plan, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
where nobody gets left behind on the path to opportunity and to 
building a better future right here in Saskatchewan, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. And it’s a balanced approach of which the 
Premier will be speaking of and the Minister of Finance and 
those of us on this side of the House have spoken of. 
 
And we said about how it is, Madam Deputy Speaker, how 
we’ve been able to balance the finances of the province over a 
period of 15 years, at a time, Madam Deputy Speaker, when we 
had some difficult experiences here and a huge debt that was 
left to the Saskatchewan people, Madam Deputy Speaker, by an 
opposition and a Conservative Party in this province, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, of which many members and philosophy today 
still exist on the opposite side of the House, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This budget invests in communities. It invests in people, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, and it provides tax relief on a number 
of fronts. And that’s why, Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget 
talks about building a better future right here in Saskatchewan 
— building a better future where we’re cutting the business 
taxes, where we’re in fact freezing university tuitions and 
funding 64,000 students in this province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, and increasing assistance, Madam Deputy Speaker, 
here in this province. 
 
I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that this budget also 
addresses a number of areas as it relates to communities and 
agriculture and areas of which in this province are so important 
in building a stronger Saskatchewan climate, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that in our review of 
what this budget is about — and I’ve been about the province 
now on a number of occasions — I have yet, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to find anybody in Saskatchewan who says that this 
budget has not provided the kind of balance and success of 
which they were looking for. And I’m so proud, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, with, Madam Deputy Speaker, the exception being 
only the members opposite from the Saskatchewan Party who 
go on a regular basis condemning the virtues of the budget. 
 
I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, this budget is presided 
and overseen by the Minister of Finance. But more importantly, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, it is overseen by the leader — a 
leader, Madam Deputy Speaker, who understands the economy 
of Saskatchewan, who is an economist, who understands the 
economic climate, not only in our province but across the 
country. An individual, Madam Deputy Speaker, who’s been a 
public servant in this province on a variety of different levels. 
 

An individual, Madam Deputy Speaker, who understands the 
needs of Saskatchewan families, who pioneered in this province 
the child tax reform, not only for this province, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, but for the country, and leads that campaign today. An 
individual, Madam Deputy Speaker, who has worked within the 
health care field and understands, as the minister of Health, the 
importance of growing and sustaining a strong Saskatchewan 
healthy community. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, who served 
in the cabinet of the years of the ’80s and ’90s, Madam Deputy 
. . . or during the ’90s, Madam Deputy Speaker, where in fact 
the debt needed to be slain, Madam Deputy Speaker, and were 
able to turn that around and today presides over an 
administration, Madam Deputy Speaker, where we have not 
seen the kinds of successes that we enjoy today. 
 
And a leader that goes about the province and a party that goes 
about the province talking about hope and optimism and 
creativity and how we can build a stronger Saskatchewan 
community. 
 
And then, Madam Deputy Speaker, you contrast that with the 
kinds of leadership that we see from the members opposite, 
where we see, Madam Deputy Speaker, members getting up on 
a regular basis, the Finance critic . . . And I expect in a few 
minutes we’re going to hear from the Leader of the Opposition 
who’s going to say that single-handedly somehow he’s 
responsible and their party is responsible for Vicq, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. We’re going to hear him tell us about Vicq. 
 
He’s then going to tell us about how he and his party reformed 
the personal income tax in the province. And he’s going talk 
about the CO2 development. None of which, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, has any factual credibility because those projects, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, were led by the Minister of Industry 
and Resources, were led by the Minister of Highways, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, in this province, making a difference. 
 
We’re going to hear, Madam Deputy Speaker, the member 
opposite talking about how in fact we should grow the 
economy. But I bet you, Madam Deputy Speaker, we won’t 
hear one, one signal about what the Leader of the Opposition 
believes of his own plan, Madam Deputy Speaker, which is his 
document, Enterprise Saskatchewan. I bet you, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, we hear nothing about Enterprise Saskatchewan when 
he stands up and talks about how he would grow the economy, 
Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I bet you that he won’t stand up and talk about how he 
intends, Madam Deputy Speaker, to decertify labour unions in 
this province, Madam Deputy Speaker, and how he intends, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to tear up labour contracts in this 
province. I bet you he doesn’t make any . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Other members have 
had an opportunity to enter in the debate. I would ask that they 
allow the member on his feet to continue. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Speaker, I bet you the Leader of 
the Opposition won’t stand up and talk about how he muzzled 
his critic of Agriculture so he doesn’t go to Ottawa to 
participate in the most significant debate today affecting 
Saskatchewan people, how he muzzled the critic from Saltcoats 
Melville so he doesn’t go to Ottawa. 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

I bet you, Madam Deputy Speaker, he doesn’t talk about 
assisting the government today on its equalization plan which 
he railed on about on a regular basis in the last session in 
November, where it was important for us to take a trek to 
Ottawa and get a better deal for Saskatchewan people and 
Canadian people on equalization. I bet you he doesn’t touch on 
that at all today, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I bet you, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we’ll be watching 
to see whether or not the kinds of apologies he makes, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, for not allowing his member from Saltcoats 
Melville to participate in the debate on agriculture and bring 
home a package for Saskatchewan people. Why, Madam 
Deputy Speaker? Because he didn’t like, the member from 
Saltcoats . . . member didn’t like it. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to say that the member, the 
unelected leader from the Saskatchewan Party, the new 
conservative party, Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m going to say, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, to this end. We’ve watched in this 
House the new strategy of the Leader of the Opposition where 
there is now a new code of ethics. This new code of ethics has 
allowed in this House for us to hear on a regular basis, 
apologies from the members opposite. Every day in this House 
we have an apology on the new code of ethics, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We have an opportunity here now to see the member from 
Weyburn, Ms. Bakken-Lackey who is no longer sitting in their 
caucus, Madam Deputy Speaker. Why? Because we have a new 
. . . today the democratic reform that’s working on that side of 
the House, Madam Deputy Speaker, where politics oversees 
over principle is what the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, talks about. 
 
And I want to say, Madam Deputy, the new democratic process, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, where the member from Canora-Pelly 
says that the most respectful female in the province, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, who provides leadership to the Crown and that 
of Lieutenant Governor is not a team player, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. Can you believe the member from Canora-Pelly 
standing up in his place and saying that the Lieutenant 
Governor of the province is not a team player when they were 
Liberals together, Madam Deputy Speaker. And today he finds 
himself in the corner of the Saskatchewan Party which is a Tory 
party, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the violating of the principles of democracy in the 
Melville-Saltcoats riding, Madam Deputy Speaker, where not 
only do you have the voters of the community selecting a 
different candidate and then having it overturned by the new 
Saskatchewan conservative party . . . That’s the kind of code of 
ethics, Madam Deputy Speaker, of which the new party, the 
new conservative party in Saskatchewan today purports to. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to say that I am proud, I am 
proud, to be a member of this government. I’m proud, Madam 
Deputy Speaker, today. I’m proud, Madam Deputy Speaker, to 
be part of an organization or part of an administration today that 
is doing a number of things: cutting the business taxes, freezing 
university tuitions until 2008, increasing assistance for the most 
vulnerable — Madam Deputy Speaker, a budget that is 
balanced in its priorities and in its bottom line. 

And, Madam Deputy Speaker, I am proud as members on this 
side of the House to be led by a leader, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, who understands community, understands the fabric of 
Saskatchewan people on values and co-operation and 
commitment, and who presides, Madam Deputy Speaker, over a 
budget today that has helped Saskatchewan people get to a 
place, Madam Deputy Speaker, where we now have new 
opportunities. Now we have an opportunity to grow the 
economy in our Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that as long as I 
have a voice in this province, irrespective of where it comes 
from, Madam Deputy Speaker — whether it’s from my 
constituency or this legislature or members of this Assembly — 
we will never, ever, Madam Deputy Speaker, vote for a . . . ever 
want to see in this province again, Madam Deputy Speaker, a 
group of men and women who presided like they did in the 
’80s, which are the Conservatives of the past who are back here 
again, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that not only will I be supporting this budget, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, but will be working, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, to work hard to make sure that Saskatchewan people 
are well benefited by the outcome of this budget. 
 
And I want to say in closing, Madam Deputy Speaker, that I am 
proud to be a New Democrat. I am proud to be serving the 
people of Saskatchewan from the constituency of Yorkton, and 
to be part of an administration that’s led by a leader who 
understands Saskatchewan community and is building an 
economy in our province that is left unheralded in many fronts. 
Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker, and I look 
forward to voting for the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift 
Current, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to enter the budget debate today 
on the day of the budget vote, and what I’m sure will be a 
successful vote on the amendment to the budget that have been 
put forward by my colleague, the member for Silver Springs. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, I haven’t been able to be in the 
Assembly for as many of the budget debate speech efforts as I 
would like to have been, but certainly I’ve been trying to keep 
track of them in Hansard. And I have noted, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, I have noted the speeches made by members on this 
side of the House. I have noted, Madam Deputy Speaker, that 
they have been quite appropriately about the budget. They’ve 
been about the things that were done right in the budget, the one 
thing that appears to have been done right in the budget. And 
our speeches from this side of the House have been also about 
the unfortunate long list of things that represent failures in this 
most recent NDP budget, but to be sure the speeches were on 
point and they’re about the budget. 
 
[11:30] 
 
What have we heard from that side of the House? I also, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, if you can believe it, well I looked at 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

some of the speeches in the Hansard from members opposite. 
And I’ve had other members tell me about them. And what 
have they been talking about? 
 
This is a budget that they’re all very proud of, or so they say. 
They say, some at least in the early part of their speech . . . For 
one sentence, I think the former minister of SaskWater — the 
one that presided over SPUDCO — said this was one of the 
proudest moments of his time in the Legislative Assembly. And 
then he went on to talk about anything but the budget, talked 
about 20 years ago and 15 years ago. They simply weren’t 
talking about the budget. 
 
I think my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Northwest, 
pointed out that the minister for Community Resources and 
Employment, the minister responsible for a very important file 
in terms of social services in the province of Saskatchewan 
entered the debate. He was given 15 or 20 minutes, as all 
members were to debate. What did he talk about? Did he talk 
about those in need? How much time did he spend on his file 
with respect to people that are vulnerable in our society, people 
who need a government to lead in their efforts to become 
independent and off the cycle of dependency? How much time 
did he spend on his file? Twenty words. Twenty words in 15 or 
20 minutes from the minister responsible for Social Services. 
 
And you know what the rest of it was, Madam Deputy Speaker? 
It was politics. That’s all it was. It was 20-year-old politics. 
Because you see, as we saw in question period with respect to 
the Future is Wide Open campaign, they’re planning again . . . 
Heaven help us all. We saw it in question period. For this party 
opposite it has been for decades about politics and not about 
what’s good for the province of Saskatchewan, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And interestingly enough, Madam Deputy Speaker, while the 
Deputy Premier was just speaking . . . And I don’t know why so 
many of his colleagues weren’t really interested in what he had 
to say, but I noted particularly — I noted particularly — the 
Minister of Agriculture spent his time, when he should have 
been listening to the words of the Deputy Premier, he wasn’t. 
He was heckling over here to this side of the House. And I kind 
of caught a little bit about what he said, but I had to have it 
confirmed to me by my colleagues who hear it. 
 
And do you know what he said during this budget debate from 
his seat, Madam Deputy Speaker? He said the reason that that 
imaginary Belle Plaine ethanol plant that was announced by the 
minister for SPUDCO — you remember that — the reason that 
it failed was because of the Saskatchewan Party member for 
Thunder Creek. That’s what he was . . . And he believed it. 
Because when the member for Thunder Creek said no, that’s 
not the case, he got all animated and said absolutely it is. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, here’s the reason why the imaginary, 
why the imaginary Belle Plaine ethanol plant didn’t work. It’s 
the same reason that this budget is a failure, Madam Deputy 
Speaker. The reason is that the author of that deal and this 
budget is that NDP government on the other side of the House. 
That’s the problem. That’s the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — Madam Deputy Speaker, we’re at a pivotal point 
in the history of our province. We are on the brink of 
unprecedented opportunity for this province, both within 
Confederation and within what is becoming an emerging new 
West inside of Canada. 
 
And I would give you — and I admit this is anecdotal evidence 
— but I’d give this to the members of the House, Madam 
Deputy Speaker. Not long ago, shortly after I released that 
economic vision that the Deputy Premier was so generously 
pointing out here moments ago — the Enterprise Saskatchewan 
plan — moments after I released it . . . and so there for days 
after, the former Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, said, boy 
this is a step in the right direction. She said she really liked the 
direction of that plan. 
 
A couple of days after that we went to Calgary. And there was a 
meeting that had been organized there by a young entrepreneur 
in Calgary who was born and raised in Calgary but has a love 
for Saskatchewan. His name is Andy McCreath. 
 
He’s the same young gentleman that actually brought to our 
province former President Bill Clinton, and he brought here 
Lance Armstrong. And not long before that, Bill Rancik was 
here from The Apprentice show. And I was grateful to have the 
opportunity to speak on that panel with the winner of the first 
season of The Apprentice. 
 
But anyway, young Mr. McCreath had organized, through his 
company, this luncheon. And at this luncheon was exclusively 
ex-patriots from the province of Saskatchewan. They were all 
under 30 years old. They all had moved to Calgary. So before I 
spoke, I went around the room and I asked each person that was 
there, I said, you know, if there was opportunity for you to 
come back to Saskatchewan, would you come back? And do 
you know, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was surprised at the 
numbers because I was hopeful that maybe half, maybe half of 
those young men and women I asked that question to — the 
hundred or so that were there — would say yes, we would come 
back to Saskatchewan. 
 
I assumed well they were, you know, recently graduated, 
having fun in the, quote, “big city,” in Calgary and enjoying 
themselves, and I wasn’t sure that more than half would say it. 
And do you know what? This is a modest estimate based on 
going around the room, Madam Deputy Speaker. I tell you, I 
would say two-thirds to three-quarters of these young people, 
they didn’t even hesitate. They did not even hesitate to say were 
there an opportunity to come back to Saskatchewan, they would 
come back. 
 
What were the opportunities they were looking for, Madam 
Deputy Speaker? Well many of them were involved in the 
corporate sector in Calgary. Yes, yes they were involved in that 
sector that the NDP’s political bedfellows call greedy corporate 
hucksters, you see, because, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is a 
critical mass of private sector companies and co-operatives, 
frankly, in that city. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, there is 
opportunities then for the graduates from all over Canada who 
graduate commerce, who are marketing graduates, who have 
accounting designations, for lawyers, for engineers, you name 
it. And that’s why they’re there. But the good news is this, 
Madam Deputy Speaker, they want to come back. They want to 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

come back would there but only be the opportunity to do so. 
 
So therefore, Madam Deputy Speaker, that’s why we look at 
this budget through the following lens, through the following 
filter if you will, and that is this: does this budget implement a 
complete growth agenda, a government-wide growth agenda 
that can provide the leadership that will lead to the 
opportunities so the people in that room in Calgary, those young 
people, can come home, Madam Deputy Speaker? And the 
answer, Madam Deputy Speaker, is absolutely not. Absolutely 
not. 
 
The NDP government in this budget has made the mistake of 
picking from one of the Saskatchewan Party’s planks for a 
growing economy — and there are many, many planks; there’s 
many, many elements. They’ve taken one step, and they think 
that’s a growth agenda. 
 
Madam Deputy Speaker, the analogy is like . . . You know what 
the analogy is? The analogy is a football team that needs . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . They do. It’s like a football team 
that needs a quarterback, a wide receiver, a middle linebacker, a 
new strong safety, a place-kicker, and a new offensive 
coordinator. And that team goes out and gets a wide receiver — 
a good wide receiver mind you — but it gets out only a good 
wide receiver and that’s all. And, Madam Deputy Speaker, the 
chances then of that team turning things around and winning 
aren’t very good because they missed the complete picture. 
 
And that’s why, continuing with the analogy — as I know the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone would want me to do as 
he’s paying attention very carefully to these words today — to 
continue with the analogy, you remember, Madam Deputy 
Speaker, when we raised with this Minister of Industry in the 
budget, in what followed after the budget debate, we asked him 
how in the world could we have lost 5,200 jobs in the last year 
in the middle of a boom? We asked him that. And you know 
what the minister said? Well the minister said he took comfort 
from the fact that his government wasn’t doing as bad as it 
usually does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s that same team, that’s that same team I just talked about 
that went out and got a wide receiver when they needed all 
those players. Can you imagine what would happen if Danny 
Barrett had a press conference midway through the season and 
said, well we haven’t won a game yet, but we’re not losing by 
as many touchdowns as we used to lose. You know what would 
happen, Madam Deputy Speaker? You know what would 
happen? That kind of leadership would be replaced and 
replaced with a different kind of leadership that could win some 
games, Madam Deputy Speaker. 
 
But if you listen to the budget, if you listened to the budget 
debate efforts across the floor, you will have heard a good old 
NDP-style fearmongering. They’ve started for the next 
campaign already. We know, Madam Deputy Speaker, that the 
favourite fellow campaigners of the NDP are fear and loathing, 
both of them. Sometimes they bring along envy for the 
campaign, but really they like to campaign with fear and 
loathing. And so they go back as far as they think they need to 
go back and they talk about 20 years ago. 
 
And amazingly yesterday in this Legislative Assembly, the 

Minister of Industry, the Minister of Industry of all people, 
offered these little nuggets for everyone to consider. He was 
talking about, he was talking about what might happen if the 
Saskatchewan Party . . . Actually what he was talking about was 
the situation that will happen when the Saskatchewan Party 
wins the election . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — But he was making stuff up. He was absolutely 
making stuff up. He was fearmongering. What he was doing 
was similar to what we saw in the last campaign. I don’t know 
if my colleagues remember those billboards that the NDP put 
up in the campaign that said that the member, the current 
member for Rosetown — the then leader — had a plan to wipe 
out the minimum wage. Unbelievable. Not a shred of evidence, 
not a shred of evidence. It was about fearmongering, Mr. 
Speaker. It was about fearmongering. 
 
So that Minister of Industry got up yesterday and tried to 
portray our growth agenda in the following terms. Here’s what 
he said. He said the Saskatchewan Party would gut the 
occupational health and safety standards of this province. You 
know, making stuff up, just pulling it right out of the air, Mr. 
Speaker, pulling it right out of the air. Starting their ridiculous 
campaign of fear and loathing 18 months ahead of the next 
election. 
 
And then believe it or not, you know what? He went on. He 
drew the analogy then between the future of this province and 
the Virginia coal mine disaster. Can you believe that, Mr. 
Speaker? I guess he was intimating that if you elect the 
Saskatchewan Party, that that’s what could happen in 
Saskatchewan. It was the most ridiculous thing I’ve ever heard. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? There’s a bit of a 
miscalculation going on here politically because their little fear 
and loathing tactics have worked to some extent obviously in 
Saskatchewan politics for 60 years. 
 
Oh they’ve said that anybody opposing them will shut down 
hospitals. I remember the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election 
because I was working in this building, and I was following 
politics then. And you know what the NDP said during that 
by-election? They said if you elect these . . . if you re-elect a 
member other than an NDP member, the government will close 
all five hospitals in that constituency. That’s the kind of fear 
and loathing that that Deputy Premier is now engaged in today. 
 
And do you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? Do you know 
what happened? Those hospitals did close. And do you know 
who closed them, Mr. Speaker? That socialist government right 
across the way. That’s who closed those hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well we’re seeing it now. We’re seeing the fear 
campaign start already. Can you believe it? The West Virginia 
coal mine disaster. The spectre of that great human tragedy that 
took the lives of miners in that state now raised for political 
purposes, but disgracefully, by the Minister of Industry. And I 
don’t know about my colleagues, but I’m waiting for the day 
when he stands up and apologizes for that ridiculous remark, 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the budget fails the test because like 
other budgets previous, the authors haven’t changed. The 
authors of this budget are still the NDP, the NDP government 
that has presided over the loss of 5,200 jobs in the last year; 
2,065 people left Saskatchewan just in the last quarter. They’ve 
already passed judgment on that government. They passed 
judgment on their fear and loathing tactics and on their 
backwards policies and their lack of an economic plan, and 
unfortunately they have left. 
 
Since the Premier took office in 2001, 12,758 people have left 
Saskatchewan. Over the last five years, Saskatchewan recorded 
the highest youth out-migration levels in the Dominion of 
Canada — 8,701 people between the ages of 20 and 29, like 
those young men and women I met in Calgary, Mr. Speaker, 
have left under this Premier’s watch. 
 
And the changes in the budget — notwithstanding the fact that 
they’re positive — they don’t change the fact that this is still the 
NDP government in power. And they don’t change the fact that 
yesterday we were able to raise, unfortunately in this Assembly, 
from the Resource Investor website who were writing about the 
oil sands in Saskatchewan, we raised this quote. And listen 
very, very carefully because here’s the problem. Here’s why, 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP budget is not the answer for the province 
of Saskatchewan. Here’s the quote: 
 

. . . Saskatchewan hosts rich oil sands . . . [perhaps] even 
richer than Alberta’s. The problem is politics. The 
Saskatchewan government has been . . . [all but] closed to 
development . . . 
 

That’s their reputation. That’s the reputation you get from a 
government’s attempt to shove most available hours down the 
throats of our economy, only backed off by a municipal sector 
and universities and businesses who stood up to this 
government. 
 
That’s the kind of approach, that’s the kind of indictment you’ll 
get from places like the Resource Investor, of a government 
who likes to compete with the private sector with their own 
money. A government who decides to be ubiquitous in the 
economy. I don’t know how many investments in companies 
that they have, Mr. Speaker, competing with the private sector 
and sending a negative message to venture capitalists from 
within and outside our province who could create jobs and help 
to grow our province. 
 
And I’m going to return to that in a moment, Mr. Speaker, but if 
you’ll permit me to address some very specific concerns I have 
that affect my riding, constituency of Swift Current, to be sure 
but really the whole province — some gross inadequacies of 
this NDP budget. 
 
Agriculture, we’re in the middle of maybe the worst and most 
significant crisis in agriculture in the grains and oilseeds sector 
certainly that we have seen in Saskatchewan. Over this week 
we’ve had a chance, yesterday in Moose Jaw and earlier on 
southeast Saskatchewan, talk to a number of producers. And 

you know, here we are in mid-April, in mid-April and the 
producers that I’m talking to, that many of our members are 
talking to, when you ask the question what are you planting, 
what are you seeding, they don’t know. They almost 
unanimously have said — and the member for Thunder Creek 
was there last night — they don’t even know. Middle of April, 
we don’t know what we’re seeding. 
 
[11:45] 
 
That’s how serious the situation is. They’ve looked at all the 
commodity options. They’ve looked at their planting options 
and the prices, and they can’t square the circle. That’s the 
situation we’re in today in agriculture in grains and oilseeds 
sector. 
 
So what does this government do in the budget? You would 
think then that an NDP government that says they care about all 
parts of the province, you would think, Mr. Speaker, when 
they’re sitting on 1 billion more dollars than they had last year, 
that they would show a little compassion, that they would back 
up words with actions, Mr. Speaker. Right? 
 
What was in the budget, Mr. Speaker? They are again refusing 
to fully fund CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization]. 
As imperfect a program as it is, they’ve yanked that money 
back from farmers. They’ve yanked it back again, Mr. Speaker. 
They cut $12 million from crop insurance, never mind the fact 
that they showed no flexibility with respect to the deadline for 
crop insurance. That’s what came in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what we got from this government, and that’s why they 
will never elect an NDP member in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s why. Because when they needed this 
government most, when they needed that Deputy Premier most 
. . . He’s the Minister of Rural Economic Development, and 
when they needed him to stand up at the cabinet table and fight 
for farmers in the middle of a crisis, when they had 1 billion 
extra dollars, he wasn’t there, Mr. Speaker. He let them down. 
And he will pay a price for that in Yorkton constituency in the 
next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s why the numbers in Yorkton aren’t 
looking so good for the Deputy Premier anymore because they 
understand there that this government — and he is in leadership 
— has lost their way, that in the middle of a crisis they would 
cut the agriculture budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about health care? We have the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses saying you know, we need some targets. We desperately 
need this government to set some targets for recruitment and 
retention of nurses. Here’s a budget, good chance to do it. 
Billion extra dollars, good chance to do it. Wasn’t there. No 
targets. Minister said he doesn’t like to set targets because the 
chances are they won’t hit them. And unfortunately the people 
of the province believe them. But you know what, we still need 
leadership that’s prepared to set targets and be held accountable 
to those targets. 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

The Manitoba budget will increase nursing students to 3,000, 
double Saskatchewan’s 1,557. We have the worst retention rate 
of RNs [registered nurse] in the country at 66.8 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What about Avastin? Was there a commitment to fund it? Was 
there a commitment for copayment for this cancer-fighting drug 
that can extend life? No, not a dime. Not a thin dime, Mr. 
Speaker. The minister says, well it’s expensive. Well I don’t 
know. How much are 150 Saskatchewan sunsets worth? I don’t 
know. How much is it worth to perhaps have life extended long 
enough for some other drug or some other treatment to come 
along that can save life or extend life? But not here in NDP 
Saskatchewan. They’re sitting on $1 billion extra and what did 
they say? If you can afford Avastin, if you can afford it, you go 
ahead and buy it. If you can’t, I guess you’re out of luck. 
 
Do you know there was a movie on not long ago — I forget the 
name of it — about a man who fought against that very, very 
notion. That if you could afford health care, you could have it, 
and if you couldn’t afford it, you’d have to do without. And 
here this NDP government, unable to plead poverty with $1 
billion more, and they say no. If you can afford it, you’re on 
one tier, and if you’re not, you’re on the lower tier. 
 
And we’ve seen that in NDP Saskatchewan because, Mr. 
Speaker, two tier is not just about ability to pay. Two tier is also 
about where you live, Mr. Speaker. This government has 
presided over the greatest separation in the tiers of health care 
people can expect in this province of any government in history. 
And they better not be claiming the legacy of Tommy Douglas. 
 
Consider, Mr. Speaker, whether, consider whether someone in 
Consul, Saskatchewan today because of where they live has the 
same health care as someone that lives in Swift Current or lives 
in Regina, especially when we know that medical travel is 
borne, for the most part, by who? By the patient or by the 
patient’s family. That’s also two-tier medicine. If you live in 
one spot, you get this quality of health care. And if you live 
somewhere else, you get this quality of health care. That’s their 
record, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record of this NDP government, 
and the budget doesn’t address it. 
 
We raised yesterday the issue of autistic children, families 
forced to leave the province to get diagnosis and treatment for 
kids. That’s another different tier. The budget fails to address it. 
 
In health care they re-announced — how many? — 1, 2, 3, 6 
facilities. They re-announced them. I mean, the government 
isn’t so good at doing anything, but they’re pretty good at 
re-announcing projects. 
 
Do you know what, Mr. Speaker? The Swift Current Hospital 
which I think’s been announced five times was announced 
again, and it’s half built, Mr. Speaker. In Swift Current the 
hospital’s half built. Meantime the communities of Moosomin 
and the communities of Preeceville and the communities of 
Humboldt and Ile-a-la-Crosse, they wait and they wait and they 
wait. And guess what? The community share — that NDP rural 
tax of 35 per cent — it grows and it grows and it grows because 
the cost of construction increases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then this government is, this government is surprised. Well 

why don’t more people like this budget? Well maybe because 
of actions like this of cynical announcements about health care 
that actually cost the region, the communities, the localities 
more money, and don’t deliver on the promises that this 
government made. Maybe that’s why they have no use for this 
NDP budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Long-term care, was there a target? Was there a 
plan for long-term care in the budget? No, there was not a plan 
for long-term care. 
 
And so in my constituency women like Hilda Krohn who 
helped build this province, a 93-year-old lady who was 
suffering from cranial shingles, if you can imagine, turned away 
from the hospital in Swift Current and sent by ambulance to an 
inappropriate bed — at that point at least certainly the medical 
community felt that — and waited and waited and waited 
because there was no long-term care bed. 
 
She now . . . Because her case I believe was raised in this 
Legislative Assembly, magically a long-term care bed has 
appeared. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s long-term care bed issues 
across this province, and they’re unaddressed with respect to a 
target. 
 
What about DCRE [Department of Community Resources and 
Employment]? That minister — I hope he’s still here — that 
minister who stood on his feet and had a chance to talk about 
his budget that does social services and important work, his 
staff do important work across the province, spent 20 words on 
the issues that matter to his department and the rest on politics. 
 
Well maybe this is why, Mr. Speaker. With respect to drug 
treatment beds, Project Hope, short-term beds and interim 
measures are still the order of the day for the government. 
There’s no long-term plan. There’s no commitment to work 
with people like Teen Challenge in this province who are 
already out there, unwilling to wait for this government . . . 
slow to act. They’re already out there putting together plans, 
building long-term care facilities, providing drug treatment, 
treatment for young people, while the NDP provide news 
releases and politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We shouldn’t be surprised though. Right? We 
shouldn’t be surprised that this is what the government would 
do with this important issue because it is about politics. The 
Premier, the Premier after refusing to acknowledge the 
importance of meth as an issue, suddenly put his name all over 
the Project Hope, which a lot of people by the way on the front 
lines of this issue are calling project hype because it is more 
about talk and not a lot about walk. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did the Premier do when he was the 
minister responsible for SADAC [Saskatchewan Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission], that separate commission that 
everyone on the front line tells us we need again in the province 
of Saskatchewan for alcohol and drug programs? Shut it down, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what he did. 
 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

What did he do with our youth treatment facility that we already 
had in the Deputy Premier’s riding, Mr. Speaker — White 
Spruce treatment facility — this Premier who says that he cares 
about treatment issues? He shut it down, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what he did. And in this budget we get more politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the Learning element of the budget? 
You know the other shoe is dropping from this budget. And the 
people in southeast Saskatchewan, people in Moose Jaw area, 
people in my home area of southwest Saskatchewan are waking 
up to a brand new NDP tax, a brand new education tax from the 
NDP. School boards will be facing millions in shortfalls. 
 
The South East Cornerstone School Division that encompasses 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker, lost 5.3 million in 
operational funding, 56 per cent cut from that Premier and that 
Minister of Finance. Chinook School Division in the southwest, 
our division for myself and so many members from southwest 
Saskatchewan — the NDP doesn’t seem to get elected down 
there very often — lost $3.35 million in operational funding, 47 
per cent cut. Prairie South School Division in that Moose Jaw 
area, 14 per cent cut. 
 
Where is the money going to come from, Mr. Speaker, under 
this NDP education tax? I’ll tell you what it’ll come from. It’ll 
come from property tax hikes. It’ll come from . . . or cuts. They 
will preside over the closure of schools, and teachers will be 
laid off under this NDP plan, Mr. Speaker. That is what’s going 
to happen. That’s what’s in this budget. And were there nothing 
else wrong with it, I’d vote against it on that grounds, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we see, we see debt increasing in 
this budget. In this ’80s-style budget we see debt increasing. 
And I remember . . . Now the member for Nutana wants to enter 
the debate from her seat, and that’s fine. I think she sat over in 
these benches and decried ’80s-style budgets that were all about 
sort of a . . . no plan increases. There doesn’t seem to be a plan 
for any of the increases, no targets. And the debt would go up, 
and the debt would go up in those. And that’s what’s happening 
here. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has said if you want to find out about 
the net debt of the province, you want to look at the summary 
financial statements and net debt. And what do you do when 
you find that in this NDP budget? An increase in the debt of 
288 million for our young people. Their debt went up. There 
was no PST [provincial sales tax] decrease or relief. There was 
no benefit. But the NDP added to the debt of the people of this 
province, to the children of this province. Another reason to 
vote against the budget. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the number one reason, although there are 
many, to vote against this budget is that at this pivotal time in 
our history when we need a government with a clear vision for 
a growing province — a clear vision that we would stay, remain 
a have province; a clear vision that we’re not the wee province 
as the Premier likes to call us; a clear vision that says no, we 
don’t have to be in and out of equalization, we ought to be a 
permanent member of the have province club; a clear vision that 
rejects the words of the member for Wascana when she says it’s 

statistically impossible for this province to grow at even 1 per 
cent — when we need that vision, when we need a whole 
growth agenda, we don’t have it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because after the budget was delivered, what was the same in 
the province of Saskatchewan? This NDP government was the 
same. And the negative brand, the negative business climate, 
the negative aura that they give our province as a place to do 
business and create jobs because notwithstanding the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, we still have the NDP. We still have a governing 
party who on their website have the Regina Manifesto that calls 
for the eradication of capitalism. We still have the NDP 
government that chased out the oil and gas sector in the ’50s. 
We still have an NDP government that nationalized the potash 
mines, Mr. Speaker. And I hear about it still as I travel around 
the country. People can’t believe anything that comes out of 
their mouth about a proper business community, based on that 
act. 
 
We still have the NDP that presided over SPUDCO; the NDP 
that poured $800 million into the Meadow Lake pulp mill, Mr. 
Speaker; the NDP that have presided over the loss of our most 
precious resource — young people who have left in the 
thousands. They’ve presided over the worst job creation record 
in the Dominion of Canada in the middle of a boom. This 
budget doesn’t change it, and that’s why I’ll support the 
amendment and vote against the budget today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I have listened with some interest to the Leader of the 
Opposition for the last half hour or thereabouts. I note that 
when he began his remarks, he was observing from his point of 
view that members of government during their presentations to 
the budget had engaged in some politics. Mr. Speaker, we have 
just listened to a half an hour of nothing but politic, nothing but 
politic from the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
We did not in that one half an hour hear any specific concerns 
about the budget that’s before this legislature. We heard nothing 
about any alternative that might be recommended by that leader 
or that party to the budget. We’ve heard nothing but a tirade of 
politics, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m not here to engage in that. I’m 
here to talk about one of the most substantive budgets that’s 
ever been tabled in this legislature to build a better future for 
the people of Saskatchewan and do it right here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, before I begin my 
more formal remarks, I want to extend a very deep thanks to 
every member of this government caucus for the work that we 
have put in, in preparing and putting before the people of 
Saskatchewan and this legislature the 2006-7 budget. I 
particularly want to thank the member for Regina South, the 
Minister of Finance, for having put together, fashioned a budget 
which, in my experience in this legislature, is unprecedented in 
both its acceptance and its support among the people of 
Saskatchewan. I want to thank him, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as it has been noted, the 
budget that the Minister of Finance presented and delivered to 
this House and to the people of Saskatchewan seven days ago is 
an historic budget. It is the first budget in Saskatchewan’s 
second century, and a budget that sets this century in the right 
direction, building a future right here for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, when this House 
began its sitting in the fall, we opened with the Throne Speech. 
And at that time, Mr. Speaker, this government identified our 
vision for the province of Saskatchewan and its great people. 
And we said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Today, my government dreams of a province where no one 
is left behind on the path to opportunity, a province with 
an unbreakable social fabric, built on the foundation of 
diverse and growing communities, in a green and a 
prosperous economy. 
 

That’s the vision of this government for the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, this budget, this 
budget takes us considerably along the road to that path of 
opportunity where no one is being left behind, to a province of 
diverse and growing communities with a green and a 
prosperous economy. That’s what this budget is doing, Mr. 
Speaker, for this province and for its people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, it is founded on a 
fundamental conviction of mine and of my party and of this 
government that you will not enjoy social progress in this 
province without economic progress. You will not. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there should not be economic progress that does not 
result in progress for the people of our province. That’s the 
fundamental principle, Mr. Speaker, on which this budget is 
built. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And so, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, 
through this budget, we are building a better future for our 
young people right here in Saskatchewan with a record $1.5 
billion investment in education, by funding 32,000 university 
seats, and 34,000 training spaces, by increasing the graduate tax 
credit, and by freezing tuition fees for two years until the year 
2008. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are laying the 
foundations for even greater prosperity for all by increasing the 

small-business tax threshold, by implementing a comprehensive 
business tax cut to further stimulate our economy to provide 
greater opportunities to create even more jobs for our young 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to pause here and extend my personal 
and our government’s deep thanks to Jack Vicq and the 
commission who worked on the business tax review. I want to 
thank them again for their work and their report. 
 
You’ll know, Mr. Speaker, that we called upon Professor Vicq 
and the commission as a follow to the centennial summit that 
was held last year to open our centennial year. The first ever 
Saskatchewan economic summit where we brought together 
business people, small and large, the resource sector. We 
brought together working people, the trade unions, First 
Nations, young people, citizens at large came together. 
 
And from that discussion about Saskatchewan’s great potential 
and economic future it was pointed out by almost everyone in 
the place that we needed to sharpen our competitive edge. As a 
result of that discussion, Mr. Speaker, we appointed the Jack 
Vicq commission. We have his work. We’ve implemented his 
work even before the timetable he set out. We are building a 
Saskatchewan competitive edge, and we are building a future 
right here in Saskatchewan for our people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And just in passing, Mr. Speaker, just in 
passing, there was only one group of citizens who boycotted the 
Saskatchewan economic summit. And which group was it? 
Members of the Saskatchewan Party elected across the way. 
There were members of their party there, but not one elected 
member of the Saskatchewan Party came to the economic 
summit and joined in the people of Saskatchewan to build the 
future. 
 
Fact, Mr. Speaker, this budget, this budget goes to building 
prosperity and it goes to our young people. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget provides for the first time a head start to young people 
entering the trades with a trade entry tax credit for employees 
required to purchase their own tools. And, Mr. Speaker, it goes 
beyond that. We’re providing an annual incentive, an annual 
maintenance tax credit to offset the costs of maintaining and 
replacing those tools. And I want to join with the Minister of 
Finance and this caucus and the people of Saskatchewan in 
thanking the member for Regina Northeast for his work in 
putting this provision into this budget and into reality for the 
young tradespeople of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with this budget we are 
literally building, we are literally building the province with the 
largest capital program ever announced in Saskatchewan’s 
history — $407 million capital in this budget for the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s schools, that’s hospitals, and it’s 
highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re supporting our communities. We’re supporting the 
communities of Saskatchewan in building the diverse and 
growing communities of which we vision. And we’re 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

strengthening our neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker, with increased 
funding for police and crime prevention. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, we are providing $97.3 million in 
revenue sharing to our municipalities. Mr. Speaker, we are 
supporting our farm families with a reduction of the education 
property tax on agricultural land by a total this year of $67 
million. We’re supporting our farm families. We’re supporting 
our farm families with the base funding to CAIS of $98.8 
million in base funding to CAIS and $100 million for crop 
insurance, Mr. Speaker. And led by the Minister of Agriculture 
and the farm leaders of Saskatchewan — with the exception of 
course of the critic from across the way — we’re working with 
the national government to ensure even greater support for the 
farm families of Saskatchewan particularly this year, 
particularly this year in this spring season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, in the course of this 
. . . Since we have returned to this House, there has been an 
historic occasion. And that was the presentation of this mace 
runner that now sits on the table, a reminder to each elected 
member, a reminder to each citizen of the province of 
Saskatchewan the significance of the treaties signed with our 
First Nations peoples. It is a reminder and a symbol that we are 
all treaty people in this province. It is a reminder and a symbol 
of all of our Aboriginal peoples and all of our Aboriginal First 
Nation and Métis and Dene communities, Mr. Speaker. This has 
been a historic presentation. And it was on a historic day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will argue that this budget too is historic in its 
relationship with First Nations and Aboriginal peoples because, 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in the province’s history, a 
Minister of Finance has stood in this legislature and said, and I 
quote: the pavement does not end at the boundary of the 
reserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, this budget is historic 
in its relationship with First Nation and Métis peoples in this 
province because for the first time in the history of 
Saskatchewan, this provincial government is directly investing 
in training spaces in the Saskatchewan Institute of Indian 
Technologies. Mr. Speaker, we are proud of this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the future prosperity of 
Saskatchewan, in the future of an unbreakable social fabric, 
First Nations and Métis peoples will play a very, very 
significant role. And we are proud of the partnerships that we 
are building with our Aboriginal peoples in Saskatchewan and 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re equally in this budget ramping up 
immigration in our province. We are opening the borders of 
Saskatchewan again to those who will come from other parts of 
this great country, who will come from across the continent, 
who will come from across the globe. We are ramping up our 
ability to bring newcomers to our province, to bring the 
immigrant, to give them a future and a prosperity here that we 

will share with them. And they will build our future with us, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very balanced budget, balanced in its 
priorities, balanced in its approach. And, Mr. Speaker, I remind 
you and I remind all members and I remind the general public, 
balanced again at the bottom line. This is the 13th consecutive 
balanced budget in the province of Saskatchewan and that is a 
Canadian record in modern times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, this budget is also 
paying down debt — continuing to pay down the debt racked up 
by that party opposite when they occupied the Treasury Board 
benches, continuing to pay down the debt so that today we have 
a debt that is now lower than at any time in the last 15 years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is responsible fiscal 
management that has made this budget possible. We’ve not just 
balanced 13 straight budgets, Mr. Speaker; this government has 
now earned 13 straight credit rating upgrades, Mr. Speaker — 
13 straight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And so the work, Mr. Speaker, that 
began in 1991 has come to fruition with a debt-to-GDP [gross 
domestic product] ratio that is now lower than at any time since 
the early 1980s. And we are proud of this record, and we are 
proud of the history of this government and this party in 
government, Mr. Speaker, which if I may say, Mr. Speaker, 
contrasts — if I may just pause here and say it contrasts, the 
pride that we have in our record in government — contrasts 
significantly with what goes on across the way. 
 
You know, I turned up the other day the Sask Party website to 
check out the biography of the Leader of the Opposition. What 
did I find? Seven years missing, Mr. Speaker, in his life history. 
Seven years missing in his biography. Which seven years, I 
wonder, have they decided they do not want to display to the 
people of Saskatchewan? The seven years that he worked for 
the Devine government, Mr. Speaker, that’s the seven years that 
are hiding. 
 
Well I tell you we’re not hiding. We’re not hiding from any 
year that we’ve spent in government or in opposition. We’re 
proud of our history. We’re proud of our record. And we’re 
proud of this budget, just as we are proud of the people and the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a little time 
in this debate because all we hear from across the way is the 
negative. Nothing surprising. This has been the case of that 
party since it was founded. It’s even more the case since the 
member from Swift Current took over the leadership. All we 
hear is the negative. He leaves the province. He is doom and 
gloom on the province. He is doom and gloom within the 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

province. That’s all we hear is the negativity. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want the public of Saskatchewan and all 
members to listen to the voice not of the Leader of the 
Opposition or the Saskatchewan Party cranky caucus over there, 
I want the people of Saskatchewan to listen to the voices of 
people of this province, both in leadership and beyond 
leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to share with you and with this legislature, 
response to the budget which is now under debate in this 
legislature, response that has come from Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Well Mr. Ted Hillstead, Mr. Ted Hillstead is from the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Hillstead said: 
 

Overall, we are very positive, and as a small business 
owner, as a large corporate owner, and as an employer in 
this province, you have got to be quite happy. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Craig Gates, the Regina 
Regional Economic Development Authority future leaders 
program. Mr. Craig Gates said: 
 

I think that what we have seen today [He said this on 
budget day. I think that what we have seen today] on 
behalf of the government is a positive step forward . . . [to] 
creating more opportunities for young people. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Building a future right here, Mr. 
Speaker, right here in Saskatchewan for our young people. 
Marilyn Braun-Pollon, Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business said, and I quote: 
 

Business owners will be smiling. Saskatchewan business 
owners were looking for decisive action on corporate tax 
relief and this budget delivered that. 

 
Quote, “. . . business owners will be giving this budget the 
thumbs up.” 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is thumbs-up, Mr. Speaker. It is 
thumbs-up from the business community on this budget. It is 
thumbs-down on the negativity of the Saskatchewan Party and 
its leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Nola Joorisity, Nola Joorisity from the 
Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan, a group of men and 
women who have real insight, insight into economy and into the 
business future of this province, Nola Joorisity said: 
 

[It is good.] It is good to see that we are looking to the 
future and trying to stimulate the economy and I think that 
is a win for everybody whether you are [in] business or not 
business. It just helps . . . grow Saskatchewan. 

That’s Nola Joorisity, Mr. Speaker. And from the academic 
world, Eric Howe, economics professor at the University of 
Saskatchewan, what does Professor Howe say? 
 

If business grabs the bull by the horns, we’ll see 
investment projects ramping up. We’ll see further 
investment in the uranium industry, further investment in 
the potash industry, further investment in the province in 
general. 

 
That’s Eric Howe, professor of economics, University of 
Saskatchewan. That’s his view, Mr. Speaker. Contrast that view 
from what you’ve heard from the leader or the critic or any 
member over there in this debate. 
 
Paul Martin, chairman of the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority, Regina REDA, Paul Martin. Paul 
Martin says, and quote . . . And members opposite should listen 
to this. They should just listen to this. Mr. Martin says, “We’ve 
got this new tax regime so that we can go out and crow about it 
to the rest of the country.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And you know what, Mr. Speaker? You 
know what? Well that is exactly what we are going to do. We 
are going to take this message of the future that’s being built 
right here in Saskatchewan and we are going to take it to the 
nation as we have done before. We’re going to do it again. 
 
And I don’t care frankly, Mr. Speaker, how much complaint I 
get from the Leader of the Opposition, how much negativity he 
wants to bring to this debate, Mr. Speaker. I’m not going to be 
prevented from telling the Saskatchewan success story to 
Canadians coast to coast, to North Americans, and to the world. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to be telling this 
success story to our own people, to our own young people right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And they can complain. They can moan 
just as they did and do when we went with the Wide Open 
Future campaign. I tell you when I and the Minister of Industry 
and every member of this government is out and about in 
Saskatchewan, we’re going to be on the air waves. We’re going 
to be on the journals. We’re going to be across the nation telling 
the Saskatchewan success story and telling our young people 
and telling the world that this is a place to build your future 
right here, right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the large 
corporate sector. It’s not just the large-business people. It’s not 
just the academics and the REDA [regional economic 
development authority] people that are talking about this 
budget. Don Richardson, restaurant owner, small-restaurant 
owner — Don’s Place in Stoughton — who is Chair of the 
Canadian Restaurant and Foodservices Association, what does 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

Mr. Richardson have to say? He says, quote, about this budget: 
 

As a small business owner, I am very happy. As 
representative of the industry [the restaurant industry], I 
represent 1800 restaurants in the community of 
Saskatchewan. They too will be very happy with the 
taxation relief that they are going to experience from this 
budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, small-business people are praising this budget, 
supporting this budget. What in the world is wrong with the 
party opposite who will not support this budget? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the business community. It’s not 
just the business community. It’s not just the academic 
community. It’s not just the corporate community or 
small-business community. Educators in our province have 
looked at this budget. And what are the educators of 
Saskatchewan saying about this budget? Well, Richard 
Florizone, vice-president of finance and resources, University 
of Saskatchewan, what does Mr. Florizone say about it? He 
says, quote, “This is a good news budget for the University of 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s what he says. It’s a good news 
budget for the University of Saskatchewan. He goes on to say, 
Mr. Speaker, quote, “. . . the province has been a great partner 
here, in helping us to build a strong college of medicine at the 
University of Saskatchewan.” He says, quote, “. . . it is a good 
budget.” 
 
Bob McCulloch, president of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] where so many of our young 
people today are learning the skills and the trades and the 
training they’ll need for their future and for the future of our 
province, what does Bob McCulloch say about this budget? He 
says, quote, “All the training system partners and the folks in 
the construction trades saw good things and good directions in 
the budget.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a good budget according to 
educators. He went on to say, Mr. McCulloch went on to say: 
 

The equipment that our skilled workers are using now isn’t 
things that you pick up on the $1.49 sales rack. It is all 
very expensive. 

 
He’s speaking to the tool tax credit that we’ve put in place, Mr. 
Speaker. But you know it’s not just the leaders of our academic 
institutions. It’s not just the leadership of the universities that 
praised this budget. It’s not just the leadership of SIAST and the 
regional colleges and the trades training. No, it’s students 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, the students who will build this 
future, the students who are choosing Saskatchewan to do their 
education and choosing to build their future right here. It’s the 
students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Victor Thomas, president of the University of Regina Students’ 
Union, what did Victor Thomas have to say? He says, quote, “It 

is a huge step in the right direction.” A huge step in the right 
direction; that’s his . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And Mr. Gavin Gardiner, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Gavin Gardiner, president of the student union, president of 
the student body, representative of all of those students today in 
attendance at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Gavin 
Gardiner said, quote, “This is a tremendous victory for 
students.” We believe that too, Mr. Speaker. We believe that 
too. This budget is a tremendous victory for students. He goes 
on to say, “Students across the province have to be happy today 
because this is going to help a lot of them out.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s not just, it’s not just the students. It’s not 
just the students, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just the students. It’s 
their families. It’s their parents who want access for their young 
people to our universities, professional training, academic 
training, to the arts, Mr. Speaker. Families are supportive of this 
budget. Families are supportive of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just, it’s not just small-business leaders, 
It’s not just large corporate leaders. It’s not just those who 
assess our economy from beyond. It’s not just educators. It’s 
not just students. 
 
Representatives of organized labour in our province, Larry 
Hubich says, “We are encouraged by this government’s social 
reinvestment.” Mr. Speaker, social reinvestment, you cannot 
build, Mr. Speaker, social progress without economic progress. 
But there should not ought to be economic progress that doesn’t 
result in social progress. Mr. Hubich has hit the nail right on the 
head — encouraged by our social investment in the people and 
communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We share governments. We share 
governments in this province. We share it with our First 
Nations. We share it with our municipal leaders. What, Mr. 
Speaker, have our municipal leaders had to say about this 
budget? Well Dave Marit, president of SARM, quote: 
 

We were very pleased with the Highways budget going up 
by $45 million. It’s vital for the [real] economic . . . 
[diversification] of rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And what does Don Schlosser say, president of SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and a mayor, 
a serving mayor, the mayor of Weyburn? He commented on the 
government’s, the government’s commitment through the 
budget to provide an extra $52 million to local governments this 
year for that total of 97, Mr. Speaker. You know what he said? 
Two words. Two words. He said, “We’re happy.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The mayor of Regina, His Worship 
Mayor Pat Fiacco, mayor of Regina — what did he have to say 
about this budget? He says, “. . . it is a good looking budget.” 
That’s what the mayor of Regina said, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But you know what, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
not just, it’s not just municipal leaders. It’s not just students and 
their families. It’s not just leaders in the educational world. It’s 
not just the academic world, and it’s not just the financial 
institutions. It’s not just the small-business people. It’s not just 
the corporate sector. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, a very important assessment of this 
budget that comes from Mr. Peter Gilmer, Regina Anti-Poverty 
Ministry. Mr. Peter Gilmer says, and I quote, “Overall, it will 
significantly improve the quality of life for low income people 
in Saskatchewan.” Mr. Speaker, this budget . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This budget will significantly . . . I want 
to say those words again, Mr. Speaker, because I believe them, 
Mr. Speaker. I accept the assessment of Peter Gilmer of the 
Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry who says overall this budget will 
significantly improve the quality of life for low-income people 
in our province. 
 
And our former colleague, Bob Pringle, now executive director 
of the Saskatoon Food Bank, Bob Pringle says, “It appeared 
that the government was listening to low-income people 
because a lot of thought was put into this budget.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the assessment of those who are 
working on a daily basis, on a daily basis, with our neighbours 
in need. That assessment joins the assessment of so many in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and get this. Get this, Mr. Speaker. Even a noted 
political columnist, who should be in the gallery at this 
moment, even a noted political columnist in this province — 
what did he say? What did he say? It’s “a really, really good 
budget.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — “A really, really good budget.” And, Mr. 
Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, even — get this — even the Finance 
critic across the way, when he was out here in the media, when 
he wasn’t going the other way from the media, when he was out 
there and actually subjected to a few questions, after he got it 
straight, after he got it straight that we don’t charge sales tax on 
groceries, after they straightened that matter out with him, then 
at all of this accolade about the budget coming from every 
corner and quarter of the province, then finally we get even the 
Finance critic admitting it’s a good news budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, no, no, no. No, no. No, no. Let’s not 
get carried away. Mr. Speaker, I could go on. I’ve got piles and 
pages of comment from Saskatchewan people, from leadership 
of every sector of our economy, accepting and supporting and 

endorsing the budget decisions that this government has made. 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. 
 
But let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, all of these important voices 
are perhaps not as important as the voices you meet when you 
visit a coffee shop or when you walk into a shopping centre or 
the drugstore or just happen to be encountering people here or 
there. And, Mr. Speaker since the day of that budget, I’ve done 
nothing but meet people, meet people in their circumstance, in 
the circumstance of their business or in the circumstance where 
they’re just out and about, whether we’re at a skating event or 
whether we’re in the drugstore, Mr. Speaker. And I tell you, I 
tell you the people of Saskatchewan recognize this budget as 
significantly contributing to their lives, significantly 
contributing to the future of Saskatchewan, and significantly 
building a future for our young people, our communities, our 
business people right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I don’t want to spend an extended period 
of time, Mr. Speaker, on what the opposition has put in their 
amendment. I tell you it speaks to the lack of credibility. It 
speaks to the incredible nature of this opposition. The best they 
could put into an amendment to criticize this budget was 
something that indicates, well there’s nothing in this budget for 
Saskatchewan families. That’s about what they could come up 
with. 
 
Well I don’t know where they live, Mr. Speaker, but you go ask 
the student, second-year student in education at the University 
of Regina or the first-year student in engineering or their 
parents, if there’s nothing in this budget when we’ve frozen 
tuition fees. 
 
You just go ask, you just go ask the people who are receiving 
social assistance in our province today when they see those new 
resources coming into their family household, you ask them if 
there’s nothing in this budget. 
 
You ask the parents of Saskatchewan, the grandparents of 
Saskatchewan who want to see a future for their young people 
in Saskatchewan, who want to see opportunities — when they 
see the kind of sharpening of the competitive edge, the 
investment that will follow — you ask those families if there’s 
nothing in here. 
 
You ask the people who are paying property taxes on the farm 
land this spring if there’s nothing in this budget for them, when 
we’ve cut that to the fair 60/40 ratio. 
 
You ask the people of the municipalities of Saskatchewan, the 
cities and the towns — with new capital dollars flowing as a 
result of this budget into their communities to build 
playgrounds, to build senior citizens programs, to build 
highways and roads right past and through their communities — 
you ask them if there’s nothing in this budget. 
 
The only thing this group can come up with is a phony-baloney, 
incredible kind of criticism, and a heap of politic, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the Saskatchewan people are 
looking for either from their government or, if I may say, from 
their opposition. They look for better than that, Mr. Speaker. 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

They look for better than that. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I come to some conclusion. I come to 
some conclusion. And what I want to do today, what I want to 
do today is try — just in a very, very few minutes that are left to 
me — put this budget in some context, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the context is this. I was privileged to be elected to this 
House in 1986 in the midst of that government, which nearly 
brought this province to its knees. Nearly brought this province 
to the verge of bankruptcy that government did, Mr. Speaker. 
They sold off our resources. They destroyed our social 
programs, and they left us with a debt, Mr. Speaker, that’s still 
costing us 500-and-some million dollars in interest payments a 
year. That’s the legislature I entered, Mr. Speaker. And we 
fought hard against that government, and we defeated that 
government. The people of Saskatchewan defeated that 
government. 
 
And all the time I was sitting here in this Chamber in that 
opposition chair, where was the Leader of the Opposition? 
Right upstairs, right upstairs in the same building even though 
he takes it off his website today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we inherited government in 1991, given that 
privilege by the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, not 
unlike the Douglas government of the 1940s, it took us nearly a 
decade and more perhaps, Mr. Speaker, to put the finances of 
this province right again. We too had to go to the bankers and 
bond dealers. We too had to put right the finances of the people 
of Saskatchewan, and we did it with the people of 
Saskatchewan. They sacrificed, Mr. Speaker. They sacrificed, 
and we bore a high taxation regime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ten years it took us to put . . . Well it’s not done yet. The 
work’s not done yet. We’re still paying down their debt, but ten 
years it took us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I assumed the office of Premier — and I was privileged 
to assume the office of Premier and be re-elected by the people 
of Saskatchewan — I took it as my mission that my objective 
was to see this economy revitalized because there can be no 
social progress without economic progress. I took it as my 
mission that we’re going to revitalize the oil and gas sector. 
We’re going to revitalize the mining sector. We’re going to 
invest in training and education and research and development. 
And we’re going to invest in quality of life. We’re going to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve done it, Mr. Speaker. And out of that work, out of that 
15 years of work today, today, Mr. Speaker, we can build a 
budget that is building to our vision of no one being left behind, 
no one being left behind in the path of opportunity. 
 
We’re building a community that reflects what Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt said so many years ago, I believe in the 1930s. 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt said . . . And I repeated those words 
in this legislature when I was first elected, Mr. Speaker. 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt said . . . And we in the New 
Democratic Party share this conviction: 
 

The test [Mr. Speaker] of our progress is not whether we 
add more to the abundance of those who have much; it is 

whether we provide enough for those who have little. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am voting against the amendment, the 
phony-baloney amendment proposed by the Leader of the 
Opposition. I am voting for this budget because, Mr. Speaker, 
this budget takes us a huge step forward in ensuring that no one 
in Saskatchewan will be left behind on the path of opportunity 
we are building together. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:30] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Pursuant to rule 17(3), I 
now interrupt proceedings to allow the mover of the main 
motion to exercise his right to close debate. The Chair 
recognizes the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say again what a pleasure it is today to rise to close this 
debate on our provincial budget. It is a budget that I had the 
pleasure to introduce on behalf of this government and this 
caucus after many months of consultation by my predecessor, 
the member for Regina Douglas Park, by the members of this 
caucus, and by this Premier as they went and talked to 
Saskatchewan people about what it is that they wanted us to do 
in this budget. 
 
And what it was, Mr. Speaker, that we heard and what we 
reflect in this budget is a budget that will build a better future 
by securing our prosperity today for a generation to come. It 
will reinvest in our social programs to ensure that no one is left 
behind on the path to opportunity. And it is a budget that will 
build a better future by ensuring that Saskatchewan remains the 
best place in Canada to live, work, and to raise a family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the 13th 
consecutive balanced budget of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It is a budget that is our largest ever at 
$7.7 billion. It provides an 8.4 per cent increase in spending 
that’ll allow us to provide $7.1 billion in program support this 
year. It contributes more than half a billion dollars to service the 
debt built up by the previous administration, and it establishes a 
$102 million surplus to be used for debt reduction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This budget builds on our debt 
reduction approach which has seen us pay off nearly $450 
million in the last three years alone. Mr. Speaker, this budget 
includes a record $3.2 billion in health care spending. It 
provides a record 1.5 billion in education and training. It 
includes the largest increases in social assistance rates in a 
generation, and it provides the single largest business tax cuts in 
this province’s history. 
 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides 
$67 million in property tax cuts for farmers. It provides $100 
million for crop insurance, 98.8 million for the base payments 
under CAIS. And it will allow us to be able to top up the 
payments under CAIS as we look at what the final costs are 
when the third quarter comes. 
 
This is a budget that provides $180 million in grants to 
Saskatchewan municipalities in terms of capital support, in 
terms of revenue sharing. It provides a record $400 million for 
infrastructure. It increases tax credits for students who are 
starting their careers here, and it freezes tuition for all 
undergraduate programs at the 2004 level until the year 2008. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget provides for a 
new tax credit for people who are employed in the trades. It 
provides for us to exceed our election commitment by creating 
more than 5,400 new training spaces. This is an increase of 
more than 20 per cent during this term of office alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is balanced in its priorities, and it is 
balanced on its bottom line. It reflects the commitment that 
Saskatchewan people have made to pay down the debt, and 
today that debt is at its lowest point in 15 years. It is the third 
lowest in terms of the debt-to-GDP ratio anywhere in Canada 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget can afford to invest in tax cuts, in 
labour force development, in debt reduction, and in social 
programs because our economy is performing well. This year 
we expect to see economic growth of approximately 2.5 per 
cent. 
 
As this Assembly knows, we have adjusted our GDP and job 
forecasts downward as a result of the impact of Weyerhaeuser’s 
decision to close the pulp and paper mill in Prince Albert. 
Today is a tough day for my hometown of Prince Albert. It’s a 
tough day for our province. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate 
today what I said in the budget speech a week ago. The people 
of Prince Albert and the communities that are involved in our 
forest sector know that we can build a better future in forestry, 
because the jobs that come from our forests come from the 
forests and those forests belong to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to tell this Assembly that this 
caucus is fully onside with the members from Prince Albert and 
area and the minister who’s working today to encourage 
Weyerhaeuser to sell their mill and assets, rather than simply 
dismantle them. We will continue to support that work that he’s 
done and is doing today to help bring new buyers to the table 
and the work that he is doing to help secure a better future for 
our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, forestry, like agriculture, is going though a tough 
time, but I remain confident that a better day for forestry and 
agriculture is near. I remain confident that we will not only be 
able to expand production but the type of products that our 

forests and farms generate as a result of the changes that we 
have made in this budget to attract new investment and new 
jobs and to provide a better environment for business to come 
and create those jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget builds a better investment climate, a 
better business climate, a better workforce and job climate. It 
provides a comprehensive plan to attract new investment, new 
jobs, and new opportunities in communities all across this 
province. 
 
In spite of the trouble some sectors are seeing today, the general 
outlook for this province will see us securing the prosperity we 
enjoy today for generations to come. This budget puts us on the 
path to being a permanent have province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this budget is the time 
that we believe that we should be making the investment in our 
economy through business tax cuts. We believe that the tax cuts 
that are contained in this budget will encourage new investment 
and job growth across the province, and that is why this budget 
contains the most ambitious program of business tax cuts in 
Saskatchewan history. 
 
We are implementing the changes recommended by the 
business tax review committee to phase out the general 
corporate capital tax, to cut the general corporate income tax, to 
cut the resource surcharge rates, to make all new investment tax 
credits on manufacturing and processing fully refundable 
immediately, to increase the threshold for small business, and to 
make sure that all new capital investment in this province is 
without any application of the general corporate capital tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this has been 
characterized as a leap of faith. We believe strongly that these 
measures will build a better future for Saskatchewan 
communities, for Saskatchewan people, and for Saskatchewan 
business. In the next four years, these cuts will represent a $620 
million tax benefit to businesses to stimulate our economy. 
With these changes, Saskatchewan will have one of the most 
competitive business regimes in North America and certainly 
within western North America. 
 
We believe that business will take advantage of these changes 
to strengthen their position in Saskatchewan through increased 
investments, through new ventures, and new jobs. I want to say 
that, along with providing one of the most competitive business 
environments in Canada, we know our future depends on strong 
well-skilled workforce. 
 
This budget gives access to more than 65,000 students to 
post-secondary education and training opportunities in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — And so doing, this budget will provide 
$196 million for the training system and $300 million for our 
universities. More than $100 million will be provided in student 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

financial assistance this year. About 70 million of that will be in 
the form of non-repayable grants, bursaries, scholarships, and 
income support. This will help students get access to our 
institutions. 
 
And for the first time, Mr. Speaker, for the first time, this 
budget provides funding to the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — And it gives young Aboriginal people 
more options on how they can gain the skills that they need to 
be more active participants in our communities, in our labour 
force, and to take their rightful place in our provincial economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this builds 
on the partnerships we already have in place with the First 
Nations University of Canada, with Gabriel Dumont Institute, 
the Dumont Technical Institute, with SIAST, with the regional 
colleges, and our universities. 
 
This budget also provides a 260 per cent increase in the 
immigration program. It will be providing the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Employment with nearly $6 million 
dollars — slightly more than $6 million — to help attract up to 
5,000 new immigrants annually to the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This budget contains a tax credit to 
help out ordinary working people who are employed in the 
trades. That tax credit will help make sure that people who are 
employed in the trades for the first time have a credit that puts 
them on par with the ability of those employed independently 
and work in the trades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has so eloquently articulated just 
moments ago, we know that a strong economy and a strong 
labour force also require strong communities. We believe that 
all Saskatchewan people have a right to share in the prosperity 
of this province. As such, this budget provides significant new 
investments in our social programs. 
 
In particular there’s a $300 million increase in this budget for 
medicare and its related programs which amounts to a record 
3.2 billion for health care. It is a large budget that will allow us 
to provide for millions of visits to doctors and specialists, more 
than 100,000 MRI [magnetic resonance imaging], CT 
[computerized tomography], and other advanced diagnostic 
procedures, and more than 94,000 surgeries this year alone. It is 
a budget that will help us ensure that we can reduce the wait 
times. This budget provides new support for a renal dialysis 
unit, and it will provide planning money for a new diabetes 
centre at the Muskeg Lake Cree Nation. Our social spending, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Our social spending, Mr. Speaker, also 
includes 4.9 million for new child care and pre-kindergarten 

support that will continue. It will continue despite the decision 
of the federal government to break faith with us on the 
agreements. This new funding deepens the subsidies available 
to low-income families. It fully implements our plan to add 
1,600 new child care spaces, and it expands the 
pre-kindergarten programming for the children in our most 
vulnerable neighbourhoods and communities. This budget 
provides $2 million in support for literacy initiatives. 
 
This budget also makes the single largest increases to social 
assistance payments in a generation to help those most in need 
in our communities. 
 
These programs together, these programs together are important 
to ensuring that no one is left behind on the path to opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the response from the 
public has been positive. I would say it has been remarkable. 
We have seen this budget described by anti-poverty groups as 
being the best in a generation. We’ve seen the chambers of 
commerce and business leaders who have told us that this 
budget will help them attract investment and create jobs. SIAST 
students say the new tool tax credit will help them get a career 
started right here at home. University students have said the 
tuition freeze will help them get their education here. Parents 
and child care providers have said that our plan to create new 
spaces and deepen subsidies is the right way to support families. 
 
What has the opposition said, Mr. Speaker? They’ve said very 
little except, not enough. In fact in their rebuttal to the budget 
I’d argue that it has been simply predictable. The single most 
common question they ask is, what’s in it for me? 
 
Today they’ve argued, as we’ve heard many times before, we 
should be cutting the PST by a point. They have said this. But 
what I find very interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that when we last 
cut the PST by a point, the then-leader of the party described it 
as simply, quote, “pathetic.” 
 
Today they call for us to undertake a plan that when they were 
criticizing the last time, the member for Melfort stood up and 
said, it will do nothing to keep young people in the province, it 
will do nothing to create jobs and investment. But today they 
call on this because that is what they are left to criticize. 
 
They are saying today that in order for us to stimulate growth 
and jobs we need to go further by going to war with working 
people. They have presented in each of their speeches a 
common theme that says we need to dumb down the labour 
laws in this province and take away the hard-won rights of 
working people. 
 
They have found it passing very strange in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, as I listened to the member for Saskatoon Southeast 
speak the other night. And he said what is it we should do, we 
shouldn’t have done all these increases. We shouldn’t have cut 
taxes. We should have put all the money against the debt. Well 
I’ve got to say this about the debt, Mr. Speaker. Not only is our 
government committed to retiring the provincial debt, we are 
committed to retiring all those over there who helped create that 
debt. 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I felt a little sorry 
for the response the member for Saskatoon Southeast got from 
his colleagues, calling for us to pay down the debt. He did 
however, I want to just remind members, he did redeem himself 
— or perhaps forgot what he had said the last time he stood up 
— but he redeemed himself by immediately listing off at least a 
dozen new initiatives that we should then spend money on. 
 
Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite have 
gone back to the kind of old-time religion that was so common 
during the Grant Devine government. It is in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
an old Tory recipe that they are trying to put forward. It is the 
same recipe that brought us the budgets that the Leader of the 
Opposition supported to spend a $1.25 a year for every dollar 
we were bringing in. It’s the same old recipe that spared no 
expense in dealing with whatever the political whim of the day 
was, but could find no political will to actually constrain their 
spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that it was a recipe that they would use 
in making the budget today. Certainly it is tried and true. We 
saw it during the Devine days. Sure it’s been repackaged or, as 
the Leader of the Opposition likes to call it, rebranding. 
They’ve got a brand new brand, there’s no doubt. But make no 
mistake about this, Mr. Speaker, regardless of the pretty 
packaging and the glitzy marketing, the contents are still 100 
per cent Grant Devine lite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
[12:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the response of the 
members opposite was predictable. The critique by each 
member was very typical. And the critique by each of their 
members said the same thing — that the path forward required 
us to go to war with working people. It required us to make 
unsustainable tax cuts. It required us to ramp up spending. It 
required us to go beyond what would allow us to have a 
balanced budget. 
 
It was the usual long list of demands: more tax cuts, more 
spending, more debt retirement, more capital spending, more, 
more, more. And always ending with the question, what’s in it 
for me? That is exactly what we’d expect from the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I know this, Mr. Speaker. This budget is not very good for the 
Saskatchewan Party. But it is extremely good for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I say to the members opposite who 
say, what’s in it for me, Mr. Speaker, I say to them that this 
budget benefits each of us as citizens, as members of 
communities, and beneficiaries of one of the strongest 
economies in Canada. It benefits us by building a better future 
for growth and investment, by building a better future for young 
people, by building a better future for our communities through 
our social programs like medicare, like programs that will 

develop infrastructure, that will cut property taxes for farmers. 
 
It’s a budget that is balanced. It is balanced on its bottom line 
and it is balanced in its priorities. It is a budget that pays our 
bills and it reduces our debt. It is a budget that builds a better 
future for youth, for students, for seniors, for business people, 
for farmers, for our communities, for our families. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is a budget that builds a better future right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a good budget. It 
builds a better future for all of us and it helps us make sure 
Saskatchewan remains the best place in Canada to live, to work, 
and to raise a family. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why I ask all members, why I ask all 
members to join me in supporting this budget and working 
together to build a better future for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. It is now my duty to put the 
questions before this Assembly. The questions before the 
Assembly . . . Order please, order please. Order please. I thank 
the members. The questions before the Assembly is the main 
motion moved by the Minister of Finance, the member for 
Regina South, seconded by the Minister of Advanced Education 
and Employment, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, which 
reads: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 
 

and the amendment to the main motion which is . . . that has 
been moved by the member for Saskatoon Silver Springs, 
seconded by the member for Humboldt, which says: 
 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following be added: 
 

“disagrees with the general budgetary policy of the 
government because the Premier and cabinet have not 
fully implemented a growth agenda and Saskatchewan 
continues to fall further behind other provinces, losing 
population during an economic boom, and because this 
budget does nothing to help . . .” 

 
Order. Members ought not to heckle the Speaker please. 
 

“. . . because this budget does nothing to help the 
average working family when the government has $1 
billion in extra revenue; and further, because there is no 
comprehensive plan or accountability for health care in 
the province when health care expenditures are almost 
half the provincial budget, and this budget reflects an 
’80s style of record expenditures with a $288.5 million 
increase in debt.” 

 
First we will dispose of the amendment to the main motion. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the amendment? 
 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who favour the amendment, say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those who are opposed to the amendment, 
say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:50 to 12:51.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. The question before the 
Assembly is the amendment as just read momentarily. Members 
will take it as read. Those who favour the amendment please 
rise. 
 

[Yeas — 27] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kirsch 
Brkich Dearborn Merriman 
Morgan Kerpan Heppner 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 
 

[Nays — 29] 
 
Calvert Hamilton Lautermilch 
Van Mulligen Hagel Serby 
Atkinson   
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Cline Sonntag Wartman 
Forbes Prebble Crofford 
Belanger Higgins Thomson 
Nilson Beatty Taylor 
Junor Harper Iwanchuk 
McCall Quennell Trew 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Yates Addley Morin 
Borgerson   
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, those in 
favour of the motion, 27; those opposed, 29. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment defeated. Order 
please. Order. 
 
The question before the Assembly is the main motion moved by 

the Minister of Finance, the member for Regina South, 
seconded by the Minister of Advanced Education and 
Employment, the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. Call in the members 
for a standing vote. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:54 to 12:55.] 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 
moved by the member for Regina South, seconded by the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Those who favour the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 29] 
 
Calvert Hamilton  
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Lautermilch Van Mulligen Hagel 
Serby Atkinson Cline 
Sonntag Wartman Forbes 
Prebble Crofford Belanger 
Higgins Thomson Nilson 
Beatty Taylor Junor 
Harper Iwanchuk McCall 
Quennell Trew Yates 
Addley Morin Borgerson 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the main motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 27] 
 
Wall Toth Elhard 
McMorris D’Autremont Krawetz 
Draude Hermanson Bjornerud 
Stewart Wakefield Chisholm 
Hart Harpauer Gantefoer 
Eagles Weekes Cheveldayoff 
Huyghebaert Allchurch Kirsch 
Brkich Dearborn Merriman 
Morgan Kerpan  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. 
 
Heppner   
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
29; those opposed, 27. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the main motion carried. 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2006 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Chair recognizes the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
five motions related to the assignment of estimates 
consideration. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to make several motions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 12, 18, 175, 176 to 177 Finance; 
vote 23, Industry and Resources; 
vote 20, Labour; 
vote 43, 144, Regional Economic and Co-operative 
Development; 
vote 35, Saskatchewan Research Council; 
vote 71, Fiscal Stabilization Fund; 
vote 159, Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan; 
vote 151, Municipal Financing Corporation of 
Saskatchewan; 
vote 154, Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation; 
vote 152, Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 
vote 153, Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 
Corporation; 
vote 140, Saskatchewan Water Corporation; 
vote 150, SaskEnergy Incorporated; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the Opposition House Leader, that the 
following estimates and supplementary estimates being . . . Will 
the members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Members will take it as read. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 

[13:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move, seconded 
by the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 37 and 169, Advanced Education and Employment; 
vote 36, Community Resources; 
vote 73, Corrections and Public Safety; 
vote 27, Culture, Youth and Recreation; 
vote 3, Justice; 

be withdrawn to the Committee of Finance and referred to 
the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion just moved by the member 
from Moose Jaw North, the Government House Leader, and 
seconded by the Opposition House Leader, will the members 
take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion is carried. The Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move, seconded 
by the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 25, First Nations and Métis Relations; 
vote 30, Government Relations; 
vote 16, 17, and 145, Highways and Transportation; 
vote 75 and 163, Northern Affairs; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Infrastructure. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the Opposition House Leader, on that 
motion, will members take it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. Chair recognizes the 



April 13, 2006 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move, seconded 
by Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the following estimates and the supplementary 
estimates being: 

vote 74, Information Technology Office; 
vote 13, Property Management; 
vote 33, Public Service Commission; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the members take the motion by the 
Government House Leader, and seconded by the member for 
the Opposition House Leader as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion’s carried. Chair recognizes the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, finally I move with leave, 
seconded by the Opposition House Leader: 
 

That the following estimates and supplementary estimates 
being: 

vote 34, Chief Electoral Officer; 
vote 76, Children’s Advocate; 
vote 57, Conflict of Interest Commissioner; 
vote 55, Information and Privacy Commissioner; 
vote 21, Legislative Assembly; 
vote 56, Ombudsman; and, 
vote 28, the Provincial Auditor; 

be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on House Services. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the members take the motion just read by 
the House Leader, seconded by the Opposition House Leader as 
read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. The Chair recognizes 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with wishes for a happy 
Christmas — sorry, could be, could be a big break, Mr. 

Speaker, could be a big break — for a very, very happy Easter 
weekend to all the members and those connected to the 
Assembly. I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to thank all the members for their 
dedication, perseverance, and passion balanced with restraint, 
and wish all members a pleasant, restful, blessed Easter holiday. 
 
By order of the Assembly of this House, it stands adjourned 
until Wednesday, April 19 at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:03.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Elhard ......................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Weekes .....................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Brkich ......................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1178 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1178 
  Harpauer .................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
  Hart ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McCall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
  Dearborn..................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
  Allchurch .................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Easter Wishes 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
 Accomplished Cumberland House Resident Retires 
  Beatty .......................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
 Kyle Elks Win League Final and Provincial Championship 
  Hermanson ..............................................................................................................................................................................1181 
 University of Regina’s 31st Annual Athletic Awards 
  Morin .......................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
 Melfort’s CJVR Radio Station Wins Awards 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
 Spring Holiday Season 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
 Remarks Regarding Crystal Methamphetamine 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Forestry Task Force 
  Kirsch.......................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1183 
 Changes to Education Grants 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Higgins .....................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
  Stewart .....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
 Crime in Saskatoon Riversdale 
  Morgan ....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
  Quennell...................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
 Advertising Campaigns 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 205 — The Recognition of First Nations and Métis Children Act 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Iwanchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
  The Speaker.............................................................................................................................................................................1188 
 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1188 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1192 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1197 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ...............................................................................................................................................1207 
 Recorded Division (motion) .......................................................................................................................................................1207 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of Estimates to Committees 
  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1208 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

 
Hon. Lorne Calvert 

Premier 
 

Hon. Graham Addley 
Minister of Healthy Living Services 

Minister Responsible for Seniors 
 

Hon. Pat Atkinson 
Minister of Advanced Education and Employment 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 
Minister Responsible for the Public 

Service Commission 
 

Hon. Joan Beatty 
Minister of Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Buckley Belanger 
Minister of Community Resources 

Minister Responsible for Disability Issues 
 

Hon. Eric Cline 
Minister of Industry and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Investment 
Saskatchewan Inc. 

Minister Responsible for Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Forbes 

Minister of Labour 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 
 

Hon. Glenn Hagel 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Provincial Secretary 
Minister Responsible for Gaming 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Government Insurance 

 
Hon. Deb Higgins 
Minister of Learning 

Minister Responsible for Literacy 
Minister Responsible for Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

Hon. Eldon Lautermilch 
Minister of Highways and Transportation 

Minister of Property Management 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
Minister Responsible for the 

Forestry Secretariat 
 

Hon. John Nilson 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for the Office of 
Energy Conservation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Frank Quennell 
Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General 
 

Hon. Clay Serby 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Regional Economic and 
Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Maynard Sonntag 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Len Taylor 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Andrew Thomson 

Minister of Finance 
Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Minister Responsible for  
SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 
Hon. Harry Van Mulligen 

Minister of Government Relations 
 

Hon. Mark Wartman 
Minister of Agriculture and Food 

 
Hon. Kevin Yates 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety 


